---
Date Generated: April 14, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 3474s
Video Keywords: []
Video Views: 230175
Video Rating: None
---

# Christof Koch: Consciousness | Lex Fridman Podcast #2
**Lex Fridman:** [May 29, 2018](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=piHkfmeU7Wo)
*  As part of MIT course 6S099 on artificial general intelligence,
*  I got a chance to sit down with Christoph Koch, who is one of the seminal figures in neurobiology,
*  neuroscience, and generally in the study of consciousness. He is the president,
*  the chief scientific officer of the Allen Institute for Brain Science in Seattle.
*  From 1986 to 2013, he was the professor at Caltech. Before that, he was at MIT.
*  He is extremely well cited, over 100,000 citations. His research, his writing, his ideas have had
*  big impact on the scientific community and the general public in the way we think about
*  consciousness, in the way we see ourselves as human beings. He's the author of several books,
*  The Quest for Consciousness and Neurobiological Approach, and a more recent book, Consciousness,
*  Confessions of a Romantic Reductionist. If you enjoy this conversation, this course,
*  subscribe, click the little bell icon to make sure you never miss a video, and in the comments,
*  leave suggestions for any people you'd like to see, be part of the course, or any ideas that
*  you would like us to explore. Thanks very much, and I hope you enjoy.
*  Okay, before we delve into the beautiful mysteries of consciousness, let's zoom out a little bit.
*  And let me ask, do you think there's intelligent life out there in the universe?
*  Yes, I do believe so. We have no evidence of it, but I think the probabilities are overwhelming
*  in favor of it. Given the universe, well, we have 10 to the 11 galaxies, and each galaxy has between
*  10 to the 11, 10 to the 12 stars, and we know more stars have one or more planets.
*  So how does that make you feel? It still makes me feel special, because I have experiences.
*  I feel the world, I experience the world, and independent of whether there are other creatures
*  out there, I still feel the world, and I have access to this world in this very strange,
*  compelling way, and that's the core of human existence.
*  Now, you said human. Do you think if those intelligent creatures are out there,
*  do you think they experience their world? Yes, they are evolved, if they are a product
*  of natural evolution, as they would have to be, they will also experience their own world.
*  The consciousness isn't just human, you're right, it's much wider. It's probably,
*  it may be spread across all of biology. We have, the only thing that we have special is we can
*  talk about it. Of course, not all people can talk about it. Babies and little children can talk
*  about it, patients who have a stroke in the left inferior frontal gyrus can talk about it,
*  but most normal adult people can talk about it, and so we think that makes us special compared
*  to little monkeys, or dogs, or cats, or mice, or all the other creatures that we share the planet
*  with. But all the evidence seems to suggest that they too experience the world, and so it's
*  overwhelmingly likely that aliens would also experience their world. Of course, differently,
*  because they have a different sensorium, they have different sensors, they have a very different
*  environment. But the fact that I would strongly suppose that they also have experiences. They feel
*  pain and pleasure and see in some sort of spectrum and hear and have all the other senses.
*  Of course, their language, if they have one, would be different, so we might not be able to
*  understand their poetry about the experiences that they have. That's correct. Right. So,
*  in a talk, in a video, I've heard you mention Saputzl, a Daxhound that you came up with,
*  that you grew up with, who was part of your family when you were young. First of all, you're
*  a technically a Midwestern boy. You just- Technically.
*  Yes. But after that, you traveled around a bit, hence a little bit of the accent. You talked about
*  Saputzl, the Daxhound, having these elements of humanness, of consciousness that you discovered.
*  So, I just wanted to ask, can you look back in your childhood and remember when was the first
*  time you realized you yourself, from a third-person perspective, or a conscious being,
*  this idea of stepping outside yourself and seeing, there's something special going on here in my brain?
*  I can't really, actually, it's a good question. I'm not sure I recall a discrete moment. I mean,
*  you take it for granted because that's the only world you know. The only world I know
*  you know is the world of seeing and hearing voices and touching and all the other things.
*  So, it's only much later, at early in my underguided days when I became- when I enrolled
*  in physics and in philosophy, that I really thought about it and thought, well, this is really
*  fundamentally very, very mysterious. And there's nothing really in physics right now that explains
*  this transition from the physics of the brain to feelings. Where do the feelings come in?
*  So, you can look at the foundational equation of quantum mechanics, general relativity. You
*  can look at the period table of the elements. You can look at the endless ATG seat chat in our genes
*  and no way is consciousness. Yet, I wake up every morning to a world where I have experiences.
*  And so, that's the heart of the ancient mind-body problem. How do experiences get into the world?
*  So, what is consciousness?
*  Experience. Consciousness is any experience. Some people call it subjective feeling. Some people
*  call it phenomenology. Some people call it qualia of the philosopher. But they all denote the same
*  thing. It feels like something in the famous word of the philosopher Thomas Nagel. It feels like
*  something to be a bat or to be an American or to be angry or to be sad or to be in love or to have
*  pain. And that is what experience is. Any possible experience. Could be as mundane as just sitting in
*  a chair. Could be as exalted as having a mystical moment in deep meditation. Those are just different
*  forms of experiences. Experience. So, if you were to sit down with maybe the next skip a couple
*  generations of IBM Watson, something that won Jeopardy. What is the gap, I guess the question
*  is between Watson that might be much smarter than you, than us, than all any human alive,
*  but may not have experience. What is the gap? Well, so that's a big, big question. That's occupied
*  people for the last, certainly last 50 years since we, you know, since the advent of birth of
*  computers. That's a question Alan Turing tried to answer. And of course, he did it in this
*  indirect way by proposing a test, an operational test. But that's not really, that's, you know,
*  he tried to get at what does it mean for a person to think. And then he had this test, right? You
*  lock them away and then you have a communication with them and then you try to guess after a while
*  whether that is a person or whether it's a computer system. There's no question that now or very soon,
*  you know, Alexa or Siri or Google Now will pass this test, right? And you can game it, but,
*  you know, ultimately, certainly in your generation, there will be machines that will speak
*  with complete poise that will remember everything you ever said. They'll remember every email you
*  ever had like, like Samantha, remember in the movie Her? There's no question it's going to happen.
*  But of course, the key question is, does it feel like anything to be Samantha in the movie Her?
*  Does it feel like anything to be Watson? And there one has to very, very strongly
*  think there are two different concepts here that we co-mingle. There is a concept of intelligence,
*  natural or artificial, and there is a concept of consciousness, of experience, natural or
*  artificial. Those are very, very different things. Now, historically, we associate consciousness with
*  intelligence. Why? Because we live in a world, leaving aside computers, of natural selection,
*  where we are surrounded by creatures, either our own kin that are less or more intelligent,
*  or we go across species. Some are more adapted to a particular environment, others are less
*  adapted, whether it's a whale or dog, or you go talk about a paramecium or a little worm, right?
*  And we see the complexity of the nervous system goes from one cell to specialized cells, to a
*  worm that has three nets that have 30% of its cells are nerve cells, to creature like us or like a blue
*  whale that has 100 billion, even more nerve cells. And so based on behavioral evidence and based on
*  the underlying neuroscience, we believe that as these creatures become more complex, they are
*  better adapted to their particular ecological niche, and they become more conscious, partly
*  because their brain grows, and we believe consciousness, unlike the ancient, ancient people
*  thought most, almost every culture thought that consciousness with intelligence has to do with
*  your heart. And you still see that today. You see, honey, I love you with all my heart. But what you
*  should actually say is, no, honey, I love you with all my lateral hypothalamus. And for Valentine's
*  Day, you should give your sweetheart, you know, hypothalamic piece of chocolate, not a heart shaped
*  chocolate, right? And so we still have this language, but now we believe it's a brain. And so we see
*  brains of different complexity. And we think, well, they have different levels of consciousness,
*  they're capable of different experiences. But now we confront a world where we know where we're
*  beginning to engineer intelligence. And it's radical unclear whether the intelligence we're
*  engineering has anything to do with consciousness and whether it can experience anything. Because
*  fundamentally, what's the difference? Intelligence is about function. Intelligence, no matter exactly
*  how you define it, sort of adaptation to new environments, being able to learn and quickly
*  understand, you know, the setup of this and what's going on and who are the actors and what's going
*  to happen next. That's all about function. Consciousness is not about function. Consciousness
*  is about being. It's in some sense, much fundamental. You can see folks, you can see this
*  in several cases. You can see it, for instance, in the case of the clinic, when you're dealing
*  with patients who are, let's say, had a stroke or had were in traffic accident, etc. They're pretty
*  much immobile. Terri Schiavo, you may have heard historically, she was a person here in the 90s in
*  Florida. Her heart stood still. She was reanimated. Then for the next 14 years, she was what's called
*  in a vegetative state. There are thousands of people in a vegetative state. So they're like this.
*  Occasionally, they open their eyes for two, three, four, five, six, eight hours and then close their
*  eyes. They have sleep-wake cycle. Occasionally, they have behavior. They do like, you know,
*  but there's no way that you can establish a lawful relationship between what you say or the doctor
*  says or the mom says and what the patient does. So there isn't any behavior. Yet in some of these
*  people, there is still experience. You can design and build brain machine interfaces where you can
*  see they still experience something. Of course, there are these cases of locked in state. There's
*  this famous book called The Diving Bell and the Butterfly where you had an editor, a French editor,
*  he had a stroke in the brain stem, unable to move except his vertical eye movement. He could just
*  move his eyes up and down. He dictated an entire book. Some people even lose this at the end.
*  All the evidence seems to suggest that they're still in there. In this case, you have no behavior.
*  You have consciousness. Second case is tonight, like all of us, you're going to go to sleep,
*  close your eyes, you go to sleep. You will wake up inside your sleeping body and you will have
*  conscious experiences. They are different from everyday experience. You might fly. You might not
*  be surprised that you're flying. You might meet a long dead pet childhood dog and you're not
*  surprised that you're meeting them, you know, but you have conscious experience of love, of hate.
*  You know, they can be very emotional. Your body during this state, typically to them,
*  state sends an active signal to your motor neurons to paralyze you. It's called atonia,
*  because if you don't have that, like some patients, what do you do? You act out your dreams.
*  You get, for example, REM behavioral disorder, which is a bad juju to get. Third case is pure
*  experience. I recently had this, what some people call a mystical experience. I went to Singapore
*  and went into a flotation tank. So this is a big tub filled with water. That's body temperature
*  and absent salt. You strip completely naked. You lie inside of it. You close the lid.
*  Darkness.
*  Complete darkness, soundproof. So very quickly you become bodiless because you're floating and
*  you're naked. You have no rings, no watch, no nothing. You don't feel your body anymore.
*  It's no sound, soundless. There's no photon, sightless, timeless, because after a while,
*  early on you actually hear your heart, but then you sort of adapt to that and then sort of the
*  passage of time ceases. And if you train yourself, like in a meditation, not to think early on,
*  you think a lot. It's a little bit spooky. You feel somewhat uncomfortable or you think,
*  well, I'm going to get bored. But if you try to not to think actively, you become mindless.
*  There you are. Bodiless, timeless, soundless, sightless, mindless, but you're in a conscious
*  experience. You're not asleep. You're not asleep. You are being a pure being. There isn't any
*  function. You aren't doing any computation. You're not remembering. You're not projecting.
*  You're not planning. Yet you are fully conscious.
*  You're fully conscious. There's something going on there. It could be just a side effect.
*  You mean epiphenomena?
*  So what's the function of you being able to lay in this sensory-free deprivation tank
*  and still have a conscious experience? Evolutionary?
*  Evolutionary. Obviously, we didn't evolve with
*  flotation tanks in our environment. I mean, so biology is notoriously bad at asking why question,
*  telonomical question. Why do we have two eyes? Why don't we have four eyes, like sun pictures,
*  or three eyes, or something? Well, no, there's probably a function to that,
*  but we're not very good at answering those questions. We can speculate endlessly.
*  Biology or science is very good about mechanistic questions. Why is there charge in the universe?
*  We find a certain universe where there are positive and negative charges. Why?
*  Why does quantum mechanics hold? Why doesn't some other theory hold? Quantum mechanics hold.
*  In our universe, it's very unclear why. So telonomical questions, why questions,
*  are difficult to answer. Clearly, there's some relationship between complexity,
*  brain processing power, and consciousness. But however, in these cases, in the three examples
*  I gave, one is an everyday experience at night, the other one is trauma, and the third one
*  is in principle everybody can have these sort of mystical experiences. You have a dissociation of
*  function, of intelligence, from consciousness. You caught me asking a why question. Let me ask
*  a question that's not a why question. You're giving a talk later today on the Turing test
*  for intelligence and consciousness drawing lines between the two. So is there a scientific way
*  to say there's consciousness present in this entity or not? And to anticipate your answer,
*  because there's a neurobiological answer. So we can test the human brain, but if you take a
*  machine brain that you don't know tests for yet, how would you even begin to approach a test
*  if there's consciousness present in this thing? Okay, that's a really good question. So let me
*  take it in two steps. So as you point out, for humans, let's just stick with humans, there's now
*  a test called the zap and zip. It's a procedure where you ping the brain using transcranial
*  magnetic stimulation. You look at the electrical reverberations essentially using EEG. And then
*  you can measure the complexity of this brain response. And you can do this in awake people,
*  in asleep, normal people, you can do it in awake people and then anesthetize them. You can do it
*  in patients. And it has 100% accuracy that in all those cases, when you're clear, the patient or
*  the person is either conscious or unconscious, the complexity is either high or low. And then you can
*  adopt these techniques to similar creatures like monkeys and dogs and mice that have very similar
*  brains. Now, of course, you point out that may not help you because we don't have a cortex. And if I
*  send a magnetic pulse into my iPhone or my computer, it's probably going to break something. So we don't
*  have that. So what we need ultimately, we need a theory of consciousness. We can't just rely on
*  our intuition. Our intuition is, well, yeah, if somebody talks, they're conscious. However,
*  then there are all these children, babies don't talk. But we believe that babies also have
*  conscious experiences. And then there are all these patients I mentioned, and they don't talk.
*  When you dream, you can't talk because you're paralyzed. So what we ultimately need, we can't
*  just rely on our intuition. We need a theory of consciousness that tells us what is it about a
*  piece of matter? What is it about a piece of highly excitable matter like the brain or like a computer
*  that gives rise to conscious experience? We all believe, none of us believe anymore in the
*  old story, it's a soul. That used to be the most common explanation that most people accepted.
*  And still a lot of people today believe, well, there's God and doubt, only us with a special
*  thing that animals don't have. Rene Descartes famously said, a dog, if you hit it with your
*  carriage, it may yell, it may cry, but it doesn't have this special thing. It doesn't have the magic
*  sauce. It doesn't have res cogitan. Now we believe that isn't the case anymore. So what is the
*  difference between brains and these guys, silicon? And in particular, once their behavior matches.
*  So if you have Siri or Alexa in 20 years from now that she can talk just as good as any possible
*  human, what grounds do you have to say she's not conscious? In particular, if she says, of course
*  she will. Well, of course I'm conscious. You ask, how are you doing? And she'll say, well,
*  you know, they'll generate some way to, of course she'll behave like a person. Now there are several
*  differences. One is, so this relates to the problem, why is consciousness a hard problem?
*  It's because it's subjective, right? Only I have it, which only I know I have direct experience of
*  my own consciousness. I don't have experience your consciousness. Now I assume as a sort of
*  Bayesian personal belief in probability theory and all of that, you know, I can do an abduction to
*  the best available facts. I deduce your brain is very similar to mine. If I put you in a scanner,
*  your brain is roughly going to behave the same way as I do. If I gave you this muesli and asked
*  you how does it taste, you tell me things that I would also say more or less, right? So I infer
*  based on all of that, that you're conscious. Now with theory, I can't do that. So there,
*  I really need a theory that tells me what is it about any system, this or this that makes it
*  conscious. We have such a theory. Yes. So the integrated information theory, but let me first,
*  maybe as an introduction for people who are not familiar, Descartes, can you, you talk a lot about
*  panpsychism. Can you describe what physicalism versus dualism, this, you mentioned the soul,
*  what is the history of that idea? What is the idea of panpsychism?
*  No, the debate really, out of which panpsychism can emerge of dualism versus physicalism.
*  Or do you not see panpsychism as fitting into that?
*  No, you can argue there's some, well, okay, so let's step back. So panpsychism is a very
*  ancient belief that's been around. I mean, Plato and Aristotle talks about it. Modern
*  philosophers talk about it. Of course, in Buddhism, the idea is very prevalent that,
*  I mean, there are different versions of it. One version says everything is in soul, everything,
*  rocks and stones and dogs and people and forests and iPhones, all of us all, right? All matter
*  is in soul. That's sort of one version. Another version is that all biology, all creatures,
*  small or large, from a single cell to a giant sequoia tree, feel like something. That's one,
*  I think, is somewhat more realistic. So the different versions of-
*  What do you mean by feel like something? Have feelings, have some kind of experience?
*  It may well be possible that it feels like something to be a paramecium.
*  I think it's pretty likely it feels like something to be a bee or a mouse or a dog.
*  Sure. Okay.
*  So you can see that's also, so panpsychism is very broad, right? And you can, so some people,
*  for example, Bertrand Russell, try to advocate this idea, it's called Rasselian monism,
*  that panpsychism is really physics viewed from the inside. So the idea is that physics is very
*  good at describing relationship among objects like charges or like gravity, right? Describe the
*  relationship between curvature and mass distribution, okay? That's the relationship among things.
*  Physics doesn't really describe the ultimate reality itself. It's just relationship among
*  quarks or all these other stuff. Almost from like a third person observer.
*  Yes, yes, yes. And consciousness is what physics feels from the inside. So my conscious experience,
*  it's the way the physics of my brain, particularly my cortex, feels from the inside.
*  And so if you are paramecium, you got to remember, you say paramecium, well, that's a pretty dumb
*  creature. It is, but it has already a billion different molecules, probably, you know,
*  5,000 different proteins assembled in a highly, highly complex system that no
*  single person, no computer system so far on this planet has ever managed to accurately simulate.
*  Its complexity vastly escapes us. Yes, and it may well be that that little thing
*  feels like a tiny bit. Now, it doesn't have a voice in the head like me, it doesn't have
*  expectations, you know, it doesn't have all that complex things, but it may well feel like something.
*  Yep. So this is really interesting. Can we draw some lines and maybe try to understand the
*  difference between life, intelligence and consciousness? How do you see all of those?
*  If you have to define what is a living thing, what is a conscious thing and what is an
*  intelligent thing, do those intermix for you or are they totally separate?
*  Okay, so A, that's a question that we don't have a full answer.
*  Right. A lot of the stuff we're talking about today is full of mysteries and fascinating ones,
*  right? Well, for example, you can go to Aristotle,
*  who's probably the most important scientist and philosopher who's ever lived in certainly
*  in Western culture. He had this idea, it's called hylomorphism, it's quite popular these days,
*  that there are different forms of soul. The soul is really the form of something. He says,
*  all biological creature have a vegetative soul. That's life principle. Today, we think we
*  understand something more than it is biochemistry and nonlinear thermodynamics, right? Then he said,
*  they have a sensitive soul. Only animals and humans have also a sensitive soul or a petative
*  soul. They can see, they can smell and they have drives. They want to reproduce, they want to eat,
*  et cetera. Then only humans have what he called a rational soul. Okay?
*  That idea then made it into Christendom and then the rational soul is the one that lives forever.
*  He was very unclear. He wasn't really, I mean, different readings of Aristotle give different,
*  did he believe that rational soul was immortal or not? I probably think he didn't. But then,
*  of course, it made it into through Plato into Christianity and then this soul became immortal
*  and then became the connection to God. Now, so you asked me essentially, what is our modern
*  conception of these three, Aristotle would have called them different forms? Life, we think we
*  know something about it, at least life on this planet, right? Although we don't understand how
*  to originate it, but it's been difficult to rigorously pin down. You see this in modern
*  definitions of death. In fact, right now, there's a conference ongoing again that tries to define
*  legally and medically what is death. It used to be very simple. Death is you stop breathing,
*  your heart stops beating, you're dead. Totally unconversal. If you're unsure, you wait another
*  10 minutes. If the patient doesn't breathe, he's dead. Well, now we have ventilators, we have heart
*  pacemaker. So it's much more difficult to define what death is. Typically, death is defined as the
*  end of life and life is defined before death. So we don't have really very good definitions.
*  Intelligence, we don't have a rigorous definition. We know something how to measure. It's called IQ
*  or G factors, right? And we're beginning to build it in a narrow sense, right? Like Go, AlphaGo,
*  and Watson, and Google cars, and Uber cars, and all of that. That's still narrow AI. And some people
*  are thinking about artificial general intelligence. But roughly, as we said before, it's something to
*  do with the ability to learn and to adapt to new environments. But that is, as I said, also,
*  it's radical difference from experience. And it's very unclear. If you build a machine that has AGI,
*  it's not at all a priori. It's not at all clear that this machine will have consciousness. It
*  may or may not. So let's ask it the other way. Do you think if you were to try to build an
*  artificial general intelligence system, do you think figuring out how to build artificial
*  consciousness would help you get to an AGI? Or put another way, do you think intelligent requires
*  consciousness? In human, it goes hand in hand. In human, or I think in biology, consciousness
*  intelligence goes hand in hand. Quay is illusion because the brain evolved to be highly complex.
*  Complexity via the theory integrated information theory is sort of ultimately is what is closely
*  tied to consciousness. Ultimately, it's causal power upon itself. And so in evolved systems,
*  they go together. In artificial systems, particularly in digital machines, they do not
*  go together. And if you ask me point blank, is Alexa 20.0 in the year 2041, she can easily pass
*  every Turing test. Is she conscious? No. Even if she claims she's conscious. In fact, you could
*  even do a more radical version of this thought experiment. We can build a computer simulation
*  of the human brain. You know what Henry Markham in the Blue Brain Project or the Human Brain
*  Project in Switzerland is trying to do. Let's grant them all the success. So in 10 years,
*  we have this perfect simulation of the human brain. Every neuron is simulated. And it has
*  a larynx and it has motor neurons. It has a Broca's area. And of course, it'll talk and it'll say,
*  Hi, I just woken up. I feel great. Okay. Even that computer simulation that can in principle map
*  onto your brain will not be conscious. Why? Because it simulates. It's a difference between
*  the simulated and the real. So it simulates the behavior associated with consciousness. It might
*  be. It will, if it's done properly, will have all the intelligence that that particular person
*  that's simulating has. But simulating intelligence is not the same as having conscious experiences.
*  And I give you a really nice metaphor that engineers and physicists typically get.
*  I can write down Einstein's field equation, nine or 10 equations that describe the link
*  in general relativity between curvature and mass. I can do that. I can run this on my laptop
*  to predict that the central, the black hole at the center of our galaxy will be so massive
*  that it'll twist space time around it. So no light can escape. It's a black hole. Right.
*  But funny, have you ever wondered why doesn't this computer simulation suck me in? Right. It
*  simulates gravity, but it doesn't have the causal power of gravity. That's a huge difference.
*  So it's a difference between the real and the simulated, just like it doesn't get wet inside
*  a computer when the computer runs cold. That simulates a weather storm. And so in order to
*  have artificial conscience, you have to give it the same causal power as the human brain. Yes.
*  You have to build so-called a neuromorphic machine that has hardware that is very similar to the
*  human brain, not a digital clocked for Norman computer. So that's just to clarify though.
*  You think that consciousness is not required to create human level intelligence. It seems
*  to accompany in the human brain, but for machine not. That's correct.
*  So maybe just because this is AGI, let's dig in a little bit about what we mean by intelligence.
*  So one thing is the G factor of these kind of IQ tests of intelligence. But I think if you,
*  the, maybe another way to say, so in 2040, 2050, people will have Siri that is just really
*  impressive. Do you think people will say Siri is intelligent? Yes. Intelligence is this
*  amorphous thing. So to be intelligent, it seems like you have to have some kind of connections
*  with other human beings in a sense that you have to impress them with your intelligence.
*  And there feels you have to somehow operate in this world full of humans. And for that,
*  there feels like there has to be something like consciousness. So you think you can have just the
*  world's best natural LP system, natural understanding and generation. And that will be,
*  that will get us happy and say, you know what we've created an AGI.
*  I don't know happy. Yes, I do believe we can get what we call high level functional intelligence,
*  particular sort of the G, you know, this fluid like intelligence that we cherish,
*  particularly the place like MIT, right? In machines, I see a priori no reasons. And I see
*  a lot of reason to believe it's going to happen very, you know, over the next 50 years or 30 years.
*  So for beneficial AI for creating an AI system that's, so you mentioned ethics,
*  that is exceptionally intelligent, but also does not do, does, you know, aligns its values with our
*  values as humanity. Do you think then it needs consciousness? Yes, I think that that is a very
*  good argument that if we're concerned about AI and the threat of AI, I like Nick Bostrom,
*  existentialist threat, I think having an intelligence that has empathy, right? Why do
*  we find abusing a dog? Why do most of us find that abhorrent or abusing any animal? Why do we find
*  that abhorrent? Because we have this thing called empathy, which if you look at the Greek really
*  means feeling with, I feel a path of empathy. I have feeling with you. I see somebody else suffer
*  that isn't even my conspecific. It's not a person. It's not a love. It's not my wife or my kids. It's
*  a dog. But I feel naturally, most of us, not all of us, most of us will feel emphatic. And so
*  it may well be in the long-term interest of survival of homo sapiens sapiens, that if we do
*  build AGI and it really becomes very powerful, that it has an emphatic response and doesn't just
*  exterminate humanity. So as part of the full conscious experience to create a consciousness,
*  artificial or in our human consciousness, do you think fear, maybe we're going to get into
*  the earlier days with Nietzsche and so on, but do you think fear and suffering are essential
*  to have consciousness? Do you have to have the full range of experience to have a system that
*  has experience? Or can you have a system that only has a very particular kinds of very positive
*  experiences? Look, you can have in principle, you can, people have done this in the rat where you
*  implant an electrode in the hypothalamus, the pleasure center of the rat and the rat stimulates
*  itself above and beyond anything else. It doesn't care about food or natural sex or drink anymore,
*  it just stimulates itself because it's such a pleasurable feeling. I guess it's like an orgasm
*  just you have all day long. And so a priori, I see no reason why you need a great variety. Now,
*  clearly to survive, that wouldn't work. But if I'd engineered artificially, I don't think
*  you need a great variety of conscious experience. You could have just pleasure or just fear.
*  It might be a terrible existence, but I think that's possible, at least on conceptual logical
*  ground. Because any real creature with artificial engineered, you want to give it fear, the fear of
*  extinction that we all have. And you also want to give it a positive, repetitive states, states
*  that it wants to, that you want the machine encouraged to do because they give the machine
*  positive feedback. So you mentioned panpsychism to jump back a little bit, you know, everything
*  having some kind of mental property. How do you go from there to something like human consciousness?
*  So everything having some elements of consciousness to what is there something
*  special about human consciousness? So just it's not everything like a spoon. There's no,
*  the form of panpsychism I think about doesn't ascribe consciousness to anything like this,
*  the spoon on my liver. However, it is the theory, the integrated information theory does say that
*  system even ones that look from the outside relatively simple, at least if they have this
*  internal causal power, they are, it does feel like something. The theory doesn't say anything
*  what's special about human. Biologically, we know what the one thing that's special about human is
*  we speak and we have an overblown sense of our own importance. We believe we're exceptional and
*  we're just God's gift to the universe. But behaviorally, the main thing that we have,
*  we can plan over the long term. We have language and that gives us enormous amount of power.
*  That's why we are the condominant species on the planet.
*  So you mentioned God, you grew up a devout Roman Catholic, Roman Catholic family. So, you know,
*  with consciousness, you're sort of exploring some really deeply fundamental human things that
*  religion also touches on. So where does religion fit into your thinking about consciousness? And
*  you've grown throughout your life and changed your views on religion, as far as I understand.
*  Yeah, I mean, I'm now much closer to so I'm not a Roman Catholic anymore. I don't believe there's
*  sort of this God, the God I was educated to believe in, you know, sit somewhere in the fullness of
*  time, I'll be united in some sort of everlasting bliss. I just don't see any evidence for that.
*  Look, the world, the night is large and full of wonders.
*  Right. There are many things that I don't understand. I think many things that we as a
*  cult look, we don't even understand more than 4% of all the universe, right? Dark matter,
*  dark energy, we have no idea what it is. Maybe it's lost socks. What do I know?
*  So all I can tell you is it's a sort of my current religious or spiritual sentiment is much closer to
*  some form of Buddhism. Can you just without the reincarnation? Unfortunately, there's no evidence
*  for reincarnation. So can you describe the way Buddhism sees the world a little bit?
*  Well, so the you know, they talk about so when I spent several meetings with with the Dalai Lama,
*  and what always impressed me about him, he really unlike for example, let's say the Pope or some
*  cardinal, he always emphasized minimizing the suffering of all creatures. So they have this,
*  from the early beginning, they look at suffering in all creatures, not just in people,
*  but in everybody, this universal and of course, by degrees, right in the animal
*  general will have less is less capable of suffering than a than a well developed,
*  normally developed human. And they think consciousness pervades in this universe.
*  And they have these techniques, you know, you can think of them like mindfulness, etc.
*  and meditation that tries to access sort of what they claim of this more fundamental
*  aspect of reality. I'm not sure it's more fundamental as I think about it, there's a
*  physical and then there's this inside view consciousness and those are the two aspects.
*  That's the only thing I've I've access to in my life. And you got to remember my conscious
*  experience and your conscious experience comes prior to anything you know about physics comes
*  prior to knowledge about the universe and atoms and super strings and molecules and all of that.
*  The only thing you directly acquainted with is this world that's populated with with things
*  and images and and sounds in your head and touches and all of that.
*  Stanislav I actually have a question. So, it sounds like you kind of have a rich life, you
*  talk about rock climbing and it seems like you really love literature and
*  consciousness is all about experiencing things. So, do you think that has helped
*  your research on this topic?
*  Jürgen Yes, particularly if you think about it,
*  the various states of work, then when you do rock climbing, or now I do rowing, crew rowing,
*  and a bike every day, you can get into this thing called the zone. And I've always I want to
*  I wanted to about it, particularly with respect to consciousness because it's a strangely addictive
*  state. You want to you want to appear I mean, once people have it once they want to keep on
*  going back to it. And you wonder what is it so addicting about it. And I think it's the
*  experience of of almost close to pure experience. Because in this in this zone, you're not conscious
*  of inner voice anymore. There's always this inner voice nagging you, right? You have to do this,
*  you have to do that, you have to pay your taxes, you have this fight with your ex and all of those
*  things are always there. But when you're in the zone, all of that is gone. And you're just is in
*  this wonderful state where you're fully out in the world, like you're, you're climbing, or you're
*  rowing, or biking, or doing soccer, what or whatever you're doing, and sort of consciousness
*  sort of is this, you're all action. Or in this case of pure experience, you're not action at all.
*  But in both cases, you experience some aspect of, of calling you touch some basic part of, of,
*  of conscious existence that is so basic and so deeply satisfying. You I think you touch the root
*  of being that's really what you're touching there, you're getting close to the root of being.
*  And that's very different from intelligence. So what do you think about the simulation hypothesis,
*  simulation theory, the idea that we all live in a computer simulation?
*  Rapture for nerds. Rapture for nerds. I think it's as likely as the hypothesis that engaged
*  hundreds of scholars for many centuries, are we all just existing in the mind of God?
*  Right. And this is just a modern version of it. It's, it's, it's equally plausible.
*  People love talking about these sorts of things. I know they're book written about the simulation
*  hypothesis. If that's what people want to do, that's fine. It seems rather esoteric. It's never
*  testable. But it's not useful for you to think of in those terms. So maybe connecting to the
*  questions of free will, which you've talked about, I think I vaguely remember you saying
*  that the idea that there's no free will, it makes you very uncomfortable. So what do you think about
*  free will in from the, from a physics perspective, from a consciousness perspective, what is it all
*  fit? Okay. So from the physics perspective, leaving aside quantum mechanics, we believe we
*  live in a fully deterministic world, right? But then comes of course quantum mechanics. So now we
*  know that certain things are in principle not predictable, which I, as you said, I prefer
*  because the idea that at the initial condition of the universe and then everything else, we're just
*  acting out the initial condition of the universe that doesn't, that doesn't. It's not a romantic
*  notion. Certainly not. Right. Now, when it comes to consciousness, I think we do have certain
*  freedom. We are much more constrained by physics, of course, and by our past and by our own conscious
*  desires and what our parents told us and what our environment tells us. We all know that, right?
*  There's hundreds of experiments that show how we can be influenced. But finally, in the, in the
*  final analysis, when you make a life, and I'm talking really about critical decision, where
*  you really think, should I marry? Should I go to this school? That school? Should I take this job
*  as that job? Should I cheat on my taxes or not? These are things where you really deliberate.
*  And I think under those conditions, you are as free as you can be. When you bring your entire being,
*  your entire conscious being to that question and try to analyze it on all the various conditions,
*  and then you take, you make a decision, you are as free as you can ever be. That is, I think,
*  what free will is. It's not a will that's totally free to do anything it wants. That's not possible.
*  Right. So, as Jack mentioned, you actually read a blog about books you've read. Amazing books
*  from, I'm Russian, from Bulgakov to-
*  Ah, Manzan Margarita.
*  Yeah. Neil Gaiman, Carl Sagan, Murakami. So, what is a book that early in your life transformed the
*  way you saw the world? Something that changed your life?
*  Nietzsche, I guess, did. Das Bruch der Tröster. Because he talks about some of these problems.
*  He was one of the first discoverers of the unconscious. This is a little bit before Freud,
*  when he was in the air. He makes all these claims that people, under the guise of, under the mass
*  of charity, actually are very non-charitable. So, he's really the first discoverer of the great land
*  of the unconscious. And that really struck me.
*  And what do you think about the unconscious? What do you think about Freud? What do you
*  think about these ideas? What's just like dark matter in the universe? What's over there in that
*  unconscious?
*  A lot. I mean, much more than we think. This is what a lot of last hundred years of research
*  has shown. So, I think he was a genius, misguided towards the end. But he started out as a neuroscientist.
*  He did studies on the lamprey. He contributed himself to the neuron hypothesis, the idea that
*  they're discrete units that we call nerve cells now. And then he wrote about the unconscious.
*  And I think it's true. There's lots of stuff happening. You feel this particular,
*  when you're in a relationship and it breaks asunder, and then you have this terrible,
*  you can have love and hate and lust and anger and all of it is mixed in. And when you try to
*  analyze yourself, why am I so upset? It's very, very difficult to penetrate to those basements,
*  those caverns in your mind, because the prying eyes of conscience doesn't have access to those.
*  But they're there in the amygdala or lots of other places. They make you upset or angry or sad or
*  depressed. And it's very difficult to try to actually uncover the reason. You can go to a
*  shrink. You can talk with your friend endlessly. You construct, find your story, why this happened,
*  why you love her or don't love her or whatever. But you don't really know whether that actually
*  happened because you simply don't have access to those parts of the brain and they're very powerful.
*  Do you think that's a feature or a bug of our brain? The fact that we have this deep,
*  difficult to dive into subconscious? I think it's a feature because otherwise,
*  look, we are like any other brain or nervous system or computer, we are severely band limited.
*  If everything I do, every emotion I feel, every eye movements I make, if all of that had to be
*  under the control of consciousness, I wouldn't be here. So what you do early on, you have to be
*  conscious when you learn things like typing or like riding on a bike. But then what you do,
*  you train up, I think that involved Basal Ganglia and Stratum, you train up different parts of your
*  brain. And then once you do it automatically like typing, you can show you do it much faster
*  without even thinking about it because you've got these highly specialized what Franz Crick and I
*  call zombie agents that are taking care of that while your consciousness can worry about the
*  abstract sense of the text you want to write. And I think that's true for many, many things.
*  But for the things like all the fights you had with an ex-girlfriend, things that you would think
*  are not useful to still linger somewhere in the subconscious. So that seems like a bug that it
*  would stick there. You think it would be better if you could analyze it and then get it out of the
*  system. Or just forget it ever happened. That seems a very buggy kind of... Well, yeah, in general,
*  we don't have, and that's probably functional, we don't have an ability unless it's extreme.
*  There are cases, clinical dissociations, right? When people are heavily abused, when they completely
*  repress the memory, but that doesn't happen in normal people. We don't have an ability to remove
*  traumatic memories. And of course we suffer from that. On the other hand, probably if you had the
*  ability to constantly wipe your memory, you'll probably do it to an extent that isn't useful
*  to you. So... Yeah, it's a good question.
*  It's a balance. So on the books, as Jack mentioned,
*  correct me if I'm wrong, but broadly speaking, academia and the different scientific disciplines,
*  certainly in engineering, reading literature seems to be a rare pursuit. Perhaps I'm wrong on this,
*  but that's in my experience. Most people read much more technical texts and do not
*  escape or seek truth in literature. It seems like you do. So what do you think is the value? What
*  do you think literature adds to the pursuit of scientific truth? Do you think it's useful for...
*  Give you access to a much wider array of human experiences.
*  How valuable do you think it is? Well, if you want to understand human nature and nature in
*  general, then I think you have to better understand a wide variety of experiences, not just sitting in
*  a lab staring at a screen and having a face flashed onto you for a millisecond and pushing a button.
*  That's what I used to do. That's what most psychologists do. There's nothing wrong with that,
*  but you need to consider lots of other strange states.
*  Literature is a shortcut for this. Well, yeah, because literature, that's what
*  literature is all about. All sorts of interesting experiences that people have. The contingency of
*  it, the fact that women experience a world different, black people experience a world
*  different. The one way to experience that is reading all these different literature and try
*  to find out. You see everything is so relative. You read the books 300 years ago, they thought
*  about certain problems very, very differently than us today. We today, like any culture, think we
*  know it all. That's common to every culture. Every culture believes that it's heyday, they know it all.
*  And then you realize, well, there's other ways of viewing the universe and some of them may have
*  lots of things in their favor. So this is a question I wanted to ask about time scale or scale
*  in general. When you, with IIT or in general, try to think about consciousness, try to think
*  about these ideas, we kind of naturally think in human time scales. And also
*  entities that are sized close to humans. Do you think of things that are much larger,
*  much smaller as containing consciousness? And do you think of things that take
*  ages, eons to operate in their conscious cause effect?
*  That's a very good question. So I think a lot about small creatures because experimentally,
*  a lot of people work on flies and bees. So most people just think they are tormentors. They're
*  just bugs for heaven's sake. But if you look at their behavior, like bees, they can recognize
*  individual humans. They have this very complicated way to communicate. If you've ever been involved
*  or you know your parents when they bought a house, what sort of agonizing decision that is.
*  And bees have to do that once a year, right, when they swarm in the spring. And then they have this
*  very elaborate way. They have three and a scouts. They go to the individual sites. They come back.
*  They have this power, this dance, literally where they dance for several days. They try to recruit
*  other needs. It's very complicated decision way when they finally, once they make a decision,
*  the entire swarm, the scouts warm up the entire swarm, then go to one location. They don't go to
*  50 degrees. They go to one location that the scouts have agreed upon by themselves. That's awesome.
*  If you look at the circuit complexity, it's 10 times more denser than anything we have in our
*  brain. Now they only have a million neurons, but the neurons are amazingly complex. Complex behavior,
*  very complicated circuitry, so there's no question they experience something. Their life is very
*  different. They're tiny. They only live for, well, workers live maybe for two months. So I think,
*  and IIT tells you this. In principle, the substrate of consciousness is the substrate that maximizes
*  the cause-effect power over all possible spatial temple grains. So when I think about, for example,
*  do you know the science fiction story, The Black Cloud? It's a classic by Fred Hoyle, the astronomer.
*  He has this cloud intervening between the earth and the sun and leading to some sort of global
*  cooling. This was written in the 50s. It turns out using the radio dish, they communicate with
*  an entity. It's actually an intelligent entity. They convince it to move away.
*  Here you have a radical different entity. In principle, IIT says, well, you can measure the
*  integrated information in principle at least. Yes, if the maximum of that occurs at a time scale of
*  month rather than in acid sort of fraction of a second, yes, then they would experience life
*  where each moment is a month rather than, or microsecond, rather than a fraction of a second
*  in the human case. So there may be forms of consciousness that we simply don't recognize
*  for what they are because they are so radical different from anything you and I are used to.
*  Again, that's why it's good to read or to watch science fiction movies or to think about this.
*  Do you know Stanislaw Lem, this Polish science fiction writer? He wrote Solaris. It was turned
*  into a Hollywood movie. His best novel was in the 60s. He's an engineer in background. His most
*  interesting novel is called The Victorious where human civilization, they have this mission to this
*  planet and everything is destroyed and they discover machines. Humans got killed and then
*  these machines took over and there was a machine evolution, a Darwinian evolution. He talks about
*  this very vividly and finally the dominant machine intelligence organism that survived
*  are gigantic clouds of little hexagonal universal cell automata. This is written in the 60s.
*  So typically they're all lying on the ground individual by themselves but in times of crisis
*  they can communicate, they assemble into gigantic nets, into clouds of trillions of these particles
*  and then they become hyper intelligent and they can beat anything that humans can throw at it.
*  It's a very beautiful and compelling way you have an intelligence where finally the humans leave
*  the planet. They simply are unable to understand and comprehend this creature and they can say,
*  well either we can nuke the entire planet and destroy it or we just have to leave because
*  fundamentally it's an alien. It's so alien from us and our ideas that we cannot communicate with them.
*  Yeah, actually in the conversation, so your time to Stephen Wolfram brought up is that there could
*  be ideas that you already have these artificial general intelligence like super smart or maybe
*  conscious beings in the cellular automata who just don't know how to talk to them.
*  So it's the language of communication which you don't know what to do with it.
*  So that's one sort of view is consciousness is only something you can measure. So it's not
*  conscious if you can't measure it. So you're making an ontological and an epistemic statement. One is
*  they're, it's just like seeing their multiverses. That might be true but I can't communicate with
*  them. I can't have any knowledge of them. That's an epistemic argument. Those are two different
*  things. So it may well be possible. Look, in another case that's happening right now, people
*  are building these mini organoids. Do you know what this is? So you can take stem cells from under
*  your arm, put it in a dish, add four transcription factors and then you can induce them to grow into
*  large, well large, they're a few millimeters. They're like a half a million neurons that look
*  like nerve cells in a dish called mini organoids. At Harvard, at Stanford, everywhere they're building
*  them. It may well be possible that they're beginning to feel like something but we can't
*  really communicate with them right now. So people are beginning to think about the ethics of this.
*  So yes, he may be perfectly right but they may, it's one question are they conscious or not.
*  It's a totally separate question. How would I know? Those are two different things.
*  If you could give advice to a young researcher dreaming of understanding or creating human
*  level intelligence or consciousness, what would you say? Just follow your dreams. Read widely.
*  I suppose with discipline, what is the pursuit that they should take on? Is it neuroscience?
*  Is it computational cognitive science? Is it philosophy? Is it computer science or robotics?
*  No, in a sense that, okay, so the only known system that have high level of intelligence is
*  homo sapiens. So if you wanted to build it, it's probably good to continue to study closely what
*  humans do. So cognitive neuroscience, you know, somewhere between cognitive neuroscience on the
*  one hand, then some philosophy of mind and then AI computer science. You can look at all the original
*  ideas in neural networks. They all came from neuroscience, right?
*  Yes.
*  Reinforce it, whether it's snarky, Minsky building is snarky or whether it's, you know,
*  the early Schubel and Wiesel experiments at Harvard that then gave rise to networks and then
*  multilayer networks. So it may well be possible. In fact, some people argue that to make the next
*  big step in AI, once we realize the limits of deep convolutional networks, they can do certain
*  things but they can't really understand. They don't, they can't really, I can't really show
*  them one image. I can show you a single image of somebody, a pickpocket who steals a wallet
*  from a purse. You immediately know that's a pickpocket. Now computer system would just say,
*  well, it's a man, it's a woman, it's a purse, right? Unless you train this machine on showing
*  it 100,000 pickpockets, right? So it doesn't have this easy understanding that you have,
*  right? So some people make the argument in order to go to the next step where you really want to
*  build machines that understand in a way you and I, we have to go to psychology. We need to understand
*  how we do it and how our brains enable us to do it. And so therefore being on the cusp, it's also
*  so exciting to try to understand better our nature and then to build, to take some of those inside
*  and build them. So I think the most exciting thing is somewhere in the interface between
*  cognitive science, neuroscience, AI, computer science and philosophy of mind.
*  H.Y.K. Beautiful. Yeah, I'd say there is from the machine learning, from the computer science,
*  computer vision perspective, many of the research is kind of ignore the way the human brain works.
*  So ignore even psychology or literature or studying the brain. I would hope Josh Tannenbaum talks about
*  bringing that in more and more. And that's, yeah. So you've worked on some amazing stuff
*  throughout your life. What's the thing that you're really excited about? What's the mystery that you
*  would love to uncover in the near term beyond all the mysteries you're already surrounded by?
*  H.Y.K. Well, so there's a structure called the claustrum. This is a structure that's
*  underneath our cortex. It's really big. You have one on the left, on the right, underneath this,
*  underneath the insula. It's very thin. It's like one millimeter. It's embedded in
*  wiring in white matter. So it's very difficult to image. And it has connection to every cortical
*  region. And Francis Crick, the last paper he ever wrote, he dictated corrections the day he died in
*  hospital on this paper. We hypothesize, well, because it has this unique anatomy. It gets input
*  from every cortical area and projects back to every cortical area. That the function of this structure
*  is similar. It's just a metaphor to the role of a conductor in a symphony orchestra. You have all
*  the different cortical players. You have some that do motion, some that do theory of mind,
*  some that infer social interaction and color and hearing and all the different modules in cortex.
*  But of course, what consciousness is, consciousness puts it all together into one package,
*  the binding problem, all of that. And this is really the function because it has relatively
*  few neurons compared to cortex, but it talks, it receives input from all of them and it projects
*  back to all of them. And so we're testing that right now. We've got these beautiful neuronal
*  reconstruction in the mouse called crown of thorn neurons that are in the claustrum,
*  that have the most widespread connection of any neuron I've ever seen. They're very deep.
*  You have individual neurons that sit in the claustrum, tiny, but then they have this single
*  neurons, have this huge axonal tree that cover both ipsy and contralateral cortex. And trying
*  to turn using, you know, fancy tools like optogenetics, trying to turn those neurons on
*  or off and study what happens in the mouse. So this thing is perhaps where the parts become the
*  whole. Perhaps it's one of the structures, it's a very good way of putting it, where the individual
*  parts turn into the whole of the conscious experience. Well, with that, thank you very
*  much for being here today. Thank you very much. Thank you, Jack. Thank you much.
