---
Date Generated: November 01, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 5420s
Video Keywords: []
Video Views: 604768
Video Rating: None
Video Description: 
---

# Ray Dalio Principles, the Economic Machine, AI & the Arc of Life  Lex Fridman Podcast #54
**Lex Fridman:** [December 02, 2019](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M95m2EFb7IQ)
*  The following is a conversation with Ray Dalhiel. He's the founder, co-chairman, and
*  co-chief investment officer of Bridgewater Associates, one of the world's largest and
*  most successful investment firms that is famous for the principles of radical truth and transparency
*  that underlies culture. Ray is one of the wealthiest people in the world, with ideas
*  that extend far beyond the specifics of how you made that wealth. His ideas that are applicable
*  to everyone are brilliantly summarized in his book Principles. They are also even further condensed
*  on several other platforms, including YouTube, where, for example, the 30-minute video titled
*  How the Economic Machine Works is one of the best educational videos I personally have ever seen on
*  YouTube. Once again, you may have noticed that the people I've been speaking with are not just
*  computer scientists, but philosophers, mathematicians, writers, psychologists, physicists,
*  economists, investors, and soon much more. To me, AI is much bigger than deep learning,
*  bigger than computing. It is our civilization's journey into understanding the human mind and
*  creating echoes of it in the machine. That journey includes the mechanisms of our economy,
*  of our politics, and the leaders that shape the future of both. This is the Artificial Intelligence
*  Podcast. If you enjoy it, subscribe on YouTube, give it five stars on Apple Podcasts, support it
*  on Patreon, or simply connect with me on Twitter at Lex Friedman, spelled F-R-I-D-M-A-N.
*  This show is presented by Cash App, the number one finance app in the App Store. I personally use
*  Cash App to send money to friends, but you can also use it to buy, sell, and deposit Bitcoin.
*  Most Bitcoin exchanges take days for a bank transfer to become investable. Through Cash App,
*  it takes seconds. Cash App also has a new investing feature. You can buy fractions of a stock,
*  which to me is a really interesting concept. So you can buy $1 worth, no matter what the stock
*  price is. Brokerage services are provided by Cash App Investing, a subsidiary of Square,
*  and member SIPC. I'm excited to be working with Cash App to support one of my favorite organizations
*  that many of you may know and have benefited from called FIRST, best known for their FIRST
*  robotics and Lego competitions. They educate and inspire hundreds of thousands of students in over
*  110 countries and have a perfect rating on Charity Navigator, which means that donated money is used
*  to maximum effectiveness. When you get Cash App from the App Store or Google Play and use code Lex
*  Podcast, you'll get $10 and Cash App will also donate $10 to FIRST, which again is an organization
*  that I've personally seen inspire girls and boys to dream of engineering a better world.
*  And now here's my conversation with Ray Dalio. Truth, or more precisely, inaccurate understanding
*  of reality is the essential foundation of any good outcome. I believe you've said that. Let me ask an
*  absurd sounding question at the high philosophical level. So what is truth when you're trying to do
*  something different than everybody else is doing and perhaps something that has not been done before?
*  How do you accurately analyze the situation? How do you accurately discover the truth,
*  the nature of things? Almost the way you're asking the question implies that truth and
*  newness are almost at odds. And I just want to say that I don't think that that's true, right?
*  So what I mean by truth is, you know, what is the reality? How does the reality work?
*  And so if you're doing something new that has never been done before, which is exciting and I like to do,
*  the way that you would start with that is experimenting on what are the realities and
*  the premises that you're using on that and how to stress test those types of things.
*  I think what you're talking about is instead the fact of how do you deal with something that's
*  never been done before and deal with the associated probabilities. And so I think in that, don't let
*  something that's never been done before stand in the way of you doing that particular thing.
*  Because almost the only way that you understand what truth is, is through experimentation. And so
*  when you go out and experiment, you're going to learn a lot more about what truth is. But the
*  essence of what I'm saying is that when you take a look at that, use truth to find out what the
*  realities are as a foundation. Do the independent thinking, do the experimentation to find out
*  what's true and change and keep going after that. So I think that when you're thinking about it the
*  way you're thinking about it, that almost implies that you're letting people almost say that they're
*  reliant on what's been discovered before to find out what's true. And what's been discovered before
*  is often not true. Conventional view of what is true is very often wrong. It'll go in ups and downs
*  and there are fads and okay, this thing, it goes this way and that way. And so definitions of truth
*  that are conventional are not the thing to go by. How do you know the thing that has been done
*  before that it might succeed? It's to do whatever homework that you have in order to try to get a
*  foundation and then to go into worlds of not knowing and you go into the world of not knowing
*  but not stupidly, not naively. You go into that world of not knowing and then you do experimenting
*  and you learn what truth is and what's possible through that process. I describe it as a five
*  step process. The first step is you go after your goals. The second step is you identify the problems
*  that stand in the way of you getting to your goals. The third step is you diagnose those to get at the
*  root cause of those. Then the fourth step is then now that you know the exact root cause you get
*  you design a way to get around those and then you follow through and do the designs you set out to
*  do and it's the experimentation. I think that what happens to people mostly is that they try to
*  decide whether they're going to be successful or not ahead of doing it and they don't know how to
*  do the process well because the nature of your questions are along those lines like how do you
*  know? Well you don't know but a practical person who is also used to making dreams happen knows how
*  to do that process. I've given personality tests to shapers. So the person what I mean by a shaper
*  is a person who can take something from visualization. They have an audacious goal
*  and then they go from visualization to actualization building it out. That includes
*  Elon Musk. I gave him the personality test. I've given it to Bill Gates and I give it to many many
*  such shapers and they know that process that I'm talking about. They experience it which is a
*  process essentially of knowing how to go from an audacious goal but not in a ridiculous way,
*  not a dream and then to do that learning along the way that allows them in a very practical way to
*  learn very rapidly as they're moving toward that goal. So the call to adventure, the adventure starts
*  not trying to analyze the probabilities of the situation but using what instinct? How do you
*  dive in? So let's talk about it. It is being a, it's simultaneously being a dreamer and a realist.
*  It's to know how to do that well. The pull comes from a pull to adventure for whatever reason.
*  I can't tell you how much of it's genetics and how much it's environment but there's a early on
*  it's exciting. That notion is exciting. Being creative is exciting and so one feels that.
*  Then one gets in the habit of doing that. Okay, how do I know? How do I learn very well and then
*  how do I imagine and then how do I experiment to go from that imagination? So it's that process
*  that one and then one the more one does it the one more the better one becomes that.
*  You mentioned shapers, Elon Musk, Bill Gates. What, who are the shapers do you find yourself
*  thinking about when you're constructing these ideas? The ones that define the archetype of
*  a shaper for you? Well as I say a shaper for me is somebody who comes over with a great visualization
*  usually a really unique visualization and then actually builds it out and makes the world
*  different changes the world in that kind of a way. So when I look at it Mark Benioff with Salesforce,
*  Chris Anderson with Ted, Mohamed Younis with Social Enterprise and Philanthropy,
*  Jeffrey Canada and Harlem Children's Zone. There are all domains have shapers who have the ability
*  to visualize and make extraordinary things happen. What are the commonalities between some of them?
*  The commonalities are first of all the excitement of something new that called through adventure and
*  then again that practicality the capacity to learn it the capacity then they're able to be
*  in many ways full rage. That means they're able to go from the big big picture down to the detail.
*  So let's say for example Elon Musk he describes he gets a lot of money from selling PayPal his
*  interest in PayPal. He said why isn't anybody going to Mars or outer space what are we going to do if
*  the planet goes to hell and how do I how are we going to get that nobody's paying attention to that.
*  He doesn't know much about it he then reads and learns and so on says I'm going to take okay half
*  of my money and I'm going to put it in there and I'm going to do this thing and he learns and blah
*  blah blah blah and he's got creative okay that's one dimension and so he gave me the
*  keys to his car with his one just early days in Tesla and he then points out the details
*  okay if you push this button here it's this the detail that so he's simultaneously
*  talking about the big the big big big picture okay when does humanity going to abandon the planet
*  but he will then be able to take it down into the detail so he can go let's call it helicoptering.
*  He can go up he can go down and see things at those types of perspectives and then you see that
*  with the other shapers and that's a common thing that they can do that.
*  Another important difference that they have in mind is how they deal with people I mean meaning
*  there's nothing more important than achieving the mission and so what they have in common is that
*  there's a test that I give these personality tests because they're very helpful for understanding
*  people and so I gave it to all these shapers and one of the things in workplace inventory test
*  is this test and it has a category called concern for others what it it's they're all having concern
*  for others this includes Mohammed Yunus who invented microfinance social enterprise impact
*  investing as Mohammed Yunus received the Nobel peace prize for this congressional medal of honor
*  one of the fortune determined one of the 10 greatest entrepreneurs of our time he's built
*  all sorts of businesses to give back money and social enterprise a remarkable man he has nobody
*  that I know practically could have more concern for others he lives a life of a saint I mean very
*  modest lifestyle and he puts all his money into trying to help others and he tests low on what's
*  called concern for others because what it really those the questions under that are questions about
*  conflict to get at the mission so they all Jeffrey Canada would change Harlem children's zone
*  and develop that to take children in Harlem and get them well taken care of not only just in their
*  education but their whole lives harm him also concern for others what they mean is that they
*  can see whether those individuals are performing at a level that an extremely high level that's
*  necessary to make those dreams happen so when you think of let's say Steve Jobs was famous for being
*  you know difficult with people and so on and I didn't know Steve Jobs so I can't speak personally
*  to that but his comments on do you have a players and if you have a players if you put in b players
*  pretty soon you have c players and so on that is a common element of them holding people to high
*  standards and not letting anybody stand in the way of the the mission what do you think about that
*  kind of idea sorry to pause on that for a second that the a b and and c players and the the
*  importance of so when you have a mission to really only have a players and be sort of
*  aggressively filtering for that yes but I think that there are all different ways of being a
*  players and I think in what a great a great team you have to appreciate all the differences
*  in ways of being a players okay yes that's the first thing and then you always have to be
*  super excellent in my opinion you always have to be really excellent people with people to help
*  them understand each other themselves and get in sync with them about what's true about them and
*  their circumstances and how they're doing so that they're having a fabulous personal development
*  experience at the same time as you're dealing with them so and when I say that they're all
*  different ways this is one of the then qualities you you asked me what are the qualities so one of
*  third qualities that I would say is to know how to deal well with your not knowing and to be able
*  to get the best expertise so that you're a great orchestrator of different ways so that the people
*  who are really really successful unlike most people believe that they're successful because
*  of what they know they're even more successful by being able to effectively learn from others
*  and tap into the skills of people who see things different from them brilliant so how do you when
*  they're that personality being first of all open to the fact that there's other people see things
*  differently than you and at the same time have supreme confidence in your vision is there just
*  the psychology of that do you see a tension there between the confidence and the open-mindedness
*  and now it's funny because I think we grow up thinking that there's a tension there right
*  that there's a confidence and and the more confidence that you have there's a tension
*  with the open-mindedness and not being sure okay confident and accurate are almost negatively
*  correlated many people they're extremely confident and they're often inaccurate and so I
*  think one of the greatest tragedies of people is not realizing how those things to go together
*  because instead it's really that by saying I know a lot and how do I know I'm still not wrong
*  and how do I take that the best thinking of all available to me and then raise my probability of
*  learning all these people think for themselves okay I mean meaning they're smart but they take
*  in like vacuum cleaners they take in ideas of others they stress test their ideas with others
*  they assess what comes back to them in the form of other thinking and they also know what they're
*  not good at and what other people who are good at the things that they're not good at they know
*  how to get those people and be successful all around because nobody has enough knowledge in
*  their heads and that I think is one of the great differences so the reason my company has been
*  successful in terms of this is because of an idea meritocratic decision making a process by which
*  you can get the best ideas you know what's an idea meritocracy an idea meritocracy is to get the best
*  ideas that are available out there and to work together with other people in the team to achieve
*  that that's an incredible process that you describe in several places to arrive at the truth but
*  apologize if I'm romanticizing the notion but let me linger on it just having enough self-belief
*  you don't think there's a self-delusion there that's necessary especially in the beginning you talk
*  about in the journey maybe the trials or the abyss do you think there is value to
*  deluding yourself I think what you're calling delusion is a bad word yes for uncertainty okay
*  so I mean in other words because we keep going back to the question how would you know and all
*  of those things no I think that delusion is not going to help you that you have to find out
*  truth okay to deal with uncertainty not saying listen I have this dream and I don't know how
*  I'm going to get that dream I mentioned in my book principles and described the process in a more
*  complete way than we're going to be able to go here but what happens is I say you form your dreams
*  first and you can't judge whether you're going to achieve those dreams because you haven't learned
*  the things that you're going to learn on the way toward those dreams okay so if that isn't
*  delusion I wouldn't use delusion I think you're overemphasizing the importance of knowing whether
*  you're going to succeed or not get rid of that okay if you can get rid of that and say okay
*  no I can have that dream but I'm so realistic in the notion of finding out I'm curious I'm a great
*  learner I'm a great experimenter along the way you'll do those experiments which will teach you
*  more truths and more learning about the reality so that you can get your dreams because if you still
*  live in that world of delusion okay and you think your illusion is helpful no the delusion isn't
*  don't confuse delusion with not knowing yes but nevertheless so if we look at the abyss we can
*  look at your own that you describe it's difficult psychologically for people so many people quit
*  many people choose a path that is more comfortable than I mean that the the heartbreak of that you
*  know breaks people so if you have the dream and there's this cycle of learning setting a goal and
*  so on what's your value for the psychology of just being broken by these difficult moments well
*  that's that that's classically the defining moment it's almost like evolution taking care of okay now
*  you're you crash you're in the abyss oh my god that's bad and then the question is what do you do
*  and it sorts people okay and that's what that's some people get off the field and they say oh I
*  don't like this and so on and some people learn and they have and they have a metamorphosis
*  and it changes their approach to learning it the number one thing it should give them is
*  uncertainty you should take an audacious dreamier guy who wants to change the world
*  crash okay and then come out of that crashing and saying okay I can be audacious and scared that I'm
*  going to be wrong at the same time and then how do I do that because that's the key when you don't
*  lose your audaciousness and you keep going after your big goal and at the same time you say hey I'm
*  worried that I'm going to be wrong you gain your radical open-mindedness that allows you to take
*  in the things that allows you to go to the next level of being successful so your own process I
*  mean you've talked about it before but it would be great if you can describe it because our darkest
*  moments are perhaps the most interesting so your own in with the prediction of the of another
*  depression economic depression yes apologize economic depression can you talk to what you
*  were feeling thinking planning strategizing at those moments yeah that was that was my biggest
*  moment okay building my little company this is in 1981 82 I had calculated that American banks
*  had given a lot more money to uh lent a lot more money to latin american countries than those
*  countries were going to pay back and that they would have a debt crisis and that this had sent
*  the economy tumbling and that was an extremely controversial point of view then it started
*  happening it happened in Mexico defaulted in August 1982 I thought that there was going to be a
*  an economic collapse that was going to follow because there was a series of the other countries
*  it was just playing out as I had imagined and that well couldn't have been more wrong that was the
*  exact bottom in the stock market because central banks ease monetary policy blah blah blah and I
*  couldn't have been more wrong and I was very publicly wrong and all and all of that and I lost
*  money for me and I lost money for my clients and I was I only had a small company then but I um
*  I had these were close people I had to let them go I was down to me as the last person I didn't
*  have it I was so broke I had to borrow four thousand dollars from my dad to help to pay for
*  my family bills very painful and at the same time I would say it definitely was uh one of the best
*  things that ever happened to me maybe the best thing from happened to me because it changed my
*  approach to decision making it's what I'm saying in other words I kept saying okay how do I know
*  whether I'm right how do I know I'm not wrong it gave me that and now and it didn't give up my
*  audaciousness because it I was in a position what am I going to do am I going to go down back put
*  on a tie go to wall street and be and just do those things no I can't bring myself to do that
*  so I'm at a juncture how do I deal with my risk and how do I deal with that and it told me how
*  to deal with my uncertainties and that taught me for example a number of techniques first to find
*  the smartest people I could find who disagreed with me and to have quality disagreement I learned
*  the art of thoughtful disagreement I learned how to produce diversification I learned how to do a
*  number of things that is what led me to create an idea meritocracy in other words person by person
*  I hired them and I wanted the smartest people who would be independent thinkers who would disagree
*  with each other and me well so that we could be independent thinkers to go off to produce those
*  audacious dreams because you have to be an independent thinker to do that and to do that
*  not independently of the consensus independently of each other and then work ourselves through that
*  because who know whether you're going to have the right answer and by doing that then that was the
*  key to our success and the things that I want to pass along to people the reason I'm doing this
*  podcast with you is you know I'm 70 years old and that is a magical way of achieving success
*  if you can create an idea meritocracy it's it's so much better in terms of achieving success and also
*  quality relationships with people but that's what that experience gave me so if we can linger on a
*  little bit longer the idea of an idea meritocracy it's fascinating but especially because it seems
*  to be rare not just in companies but in society so there is a lot of people on twitter and public
*  discourse and politics and so on that are really stuck in certain sets of ideas whatever they are
*  so when you're confronted with it with an idea that's different than your own about a particular
*  topic what kind of process do you go through mentally are you arguing through the idea with
*  the person sort of present is almost like a debate or do you sit on it and consider the world sort of
*  empathetically if this is true then what does that world look like does that world make sense
*  and so on so what's the process of considering those conflicting ideas for you I'm going to
*  answer that question but after saying first almost implicit in your question is it's not common okay
*  what's common produces only common results okay so don't judge anything that is good based on
*  whether it's common because you're it's only going to give you a common results if you want unique
*  you have a unique approach okay and so that art of thoughtful disagreement is the is the capacity
*  to hold two things in your mind at the same time the gee I think this makes sense and then saying
*  I'm not sure it makes sense and then try to say why does it make sense and then to triangulate
*  with others so if I'm having a discussion like that and I work myself through and I'm not sure
*  um then I have to do that in a good way so I always give attention for example let's start
*  off what does the other person know relative to what I know so if a person has a higher expertise
*  or things I'm much more inclined to ask questions I'm always asking questions if you want to learn
*  you're asking questions you're not arguing okay you're taking in you're assessing when it comes
*  into you does that make sense are you learning something are you getting epiphanies and so on
*  and I try to then do that if the conversation um as we're trying to decide what is true
*  and we're trying to do that together and we see truth different then I might even call in another
*  really smart capable person and try to say what is true and how do we explore that together
*  and you go through that same thing so I would I said I describe it as having open-mindedness
*  and assertiveness at the same time that you can simultaneously be open-minded and take in with
*  that curiosity and then also be assertive and say but that doesn't make sense why would this be the
*  case and you do that back and forth and when you're doing that kind of back and forth on the topic
*  like the economy which you have to me perhaps I'm naive but it seems both incredible and
*  incredibly complex the economy the trading the transactions that these transactions between two
*  individuals somehow add up to this giant mechanism you've put out a 30-minute video you have a lot of
*  incredible videos online that people should definitely watch on YouTube but you've put out
*  this 30-minute video titled how the economic machine works that is probably one of the best
*  if not the best video I've seen on the internet in terms of educational videos so people should
*  definitely watch it especially because it's not that the individual components of the video are
*  somehow revolutionary but the simplicity and the clarity of the different components just makes you
*  there's a few light bulb moments there about what how the economy works as a machine
*  so as you described there's three main forces that drive the economy productivity growth short-term
*  death cycle long-term death cycle the the former productivity growth is how valuable things
*  how much value people create valuable things people create the latter is people borrowing from
*  the their future selves to hopefully create those valuable things faster
*  so this is an incredible system to me maybe we can linger on a little bit but you've also said
*  what most people think about as money is actually credit total amount of credit in the US is
*  50 trillion dollars total amount of money is three trillion dollars that's just crazy to me
*  maybe maybe i'm silly maybe you can educate me but that seems crazy
*  it gives me just pause that the human civilization has been able to create a system that has so much
*  credit so that's a long way to ask do you think credit is good or bad for society
*  that system of that's so fundamentally based on credit i think credit is great even though
*  people often overdo it the credit is that somebody has earned money yeah and you know
*  and what happens is they lend it to somebody else who's got better ideas and they cut a deal and
*  then that person with the better ideas is going to pay it back and if it works well it helps
*  resource allocations go well providing people like the entrepreneurs and all of those they need
*  capital they don't have capital themselves and so somebody's going to give them capital and they'll
*  give them credit along those lines then what happens is it's not managed well in a variety
*  of ways so i did a another book on principles principles of big debt crises that go into
*  that and it's free by the way i put it free online on as a pdf so if you go online and you look
*  principles for big debt crisis is under my name you can download it in a pdf where you can
*  buy a print book of it and it goes through that particular process and so you always have it
*  overdone in always the same way everything by the way almost everything happens over and over again
*  for the same reasons okay so these debt crises all happen over and over again for the same reasons
*  they get it overdone in the book it explains how you identify whether it's overdone or not
*  they get it overdone and then you go through the process of making the adjustments according that
*  and then and it explains how they can use the levers and so on if you didn't have credit then
*  you would be sort of everybody's sort of be stuck so credit is a good thing but it can easily be
*  overdone so now we get into the question what is money what is credit okay you get into money and
*  credit so if you're holding credit and you think that's worthwhile keep in mind that the central bank
*  let's say it can print the money what does that prompt that you have an iou and the iou says you're
*  going to get a certain number of dollars let's say or yen or euros and that is what the iou is
*  and so the question is will you get that money and what will it be worth and then also you have a
*  government which is a participant in that process because they want they are on the hook they owe
*  money and then will they print the money to make it easy for everybody to pay so you have to pay
*  attention to those two i would suggest like you you recommend to other people just take that 30
*  minutes and it and it and it comes across pretty clearly but my conclusion is that of course you
*  want it and even if you understand it and the cycles well you can benefit from those cycles
*  rather than to be hurt by those cycles because i don't know the way the cycle works if somebody
*  gets over indebted they have to sell an asset okay then i don't know that's when assets become
*  cheaper how do you acquire the asset it's a whole process so again maybe another dumb question but
*  there are no such things as dumb questions there you go but what is money so you've mentioned
*  you know credit and money it's another thing that if i just zoom out from an alien perspective
*  and look at human civilization it's incredible that we've created a thing that's not that only
*  works because currency because we all agree it has value so i guess my question is how do you think
*  about money as this emergent phenomenon and what do you think is the future of money you've commented
*  on bitcoin other forms what do you think is uh it's history and future how do you think about
*  money there are two things that money is for it's a medium of exchange and it's a storehold of
*  wealth yes that's that that so money you know so you could say something's a medium of exchange
*  and then you could say is it a storehold of wealth okay so those and money is that vehicle that is
*  those things and can be used to pay off your debt so when you have a debt and you provide it it pays
*  off your debt so that that's that process and it's a i apologize to interrupt but it only can be a
*  medium of exchange or store wealth when everybody recognizes it to be of value that's right right
*  and so you see in the history and you around the world and you go to places
*  i was in an island in the pacific in which they had as money these big stones and literally they
*  were taking a boat this this big carved stone and they were taking it from one of the islands to
*  the other and it sank the the the piece of this big stone piece of money that they had and it went
*  to the bottom and they still perceived it as having value so that it was even though it was
*  in the bottom and it's this big hunk of rock the fact that somebody owned it they would say oh i'll
*  i'll own it for this and that i've seen beads in different places shells converted to this and
*  mediums of exchange and when we look at what we've got you're exactly right it is the notion that
*  if i give it to you i can then take it and i can buy something with it and that's so it's a matter
*  of perception okay and then we go through then the history of money and the vulnerabilities of money
*  and what we have is um there's through history there's been two types of money those that are
*  claims on something of value like the connection of to gold or something that's right that that
*  would be and or they just are money without any connection which and then we have a system now
*  which is a fiat monetary system so that's what money is then it will last as long as it's kept
*  a value and it works that way so let's say central banks when they get in the position of like they
*  owe a lot of money like we have the in the case it's increasingly the case and they also in our
*  bind and they have the printing press to print the money and get out of that and you have a lot of
*  people might be in that position then you can print it and then it could be devalued in there
*  and so history has shown forget about today history has shown that no currency has every currency
*  has either ended as being a currency even or devalued as a currency over periods of time long
*  periods of time so it evolves and it changes but everybody needs that medium of exchange
*  and everybody needs that storehold of wealth so it keeps changing what is money over a period of
*  time but so much is being digitized today and there's this ideas that are based on the blockchain
*  of bitcoin and so on so if all currencies like all empires come to an end what do you think
*  well do you think something like bitcoin might emerge as as a common store of value
*  a store of wealth and a medium of exchange the problem with bitcoin is that it's not
*  of an effective medium exchange like it's not easy for me to go in there and buy things with it
*  and then it's not an effective storehold of value because it has a volatility that's based on
*  speculation and the like so it's not a very effective saving that's very different from
*  facebook's of a stable value currency which would be effective as both a medium of exchange
*  and a storehold of wealth because if you were to hold it and the way it's linked to number of things
*  that it's linked to would mean that it could be a very effective storehold of wealth then you have
*  a digital currency that could be a very effective medium exchange and storehold of wealth that so in
*  my opinion some digital currencies are likely to succeed more or less based on that ability to do
*  it then the question is what happens okay what happens is do central banks allow that to happen
*  i really do believe it's possible to get a better form of money that central banks don't control
*  okay a better force of money that central banks don't control but then that's not yet happened
*  and we also have to and so they've got to go through that evolutionary process in order to
*  go through that evolutionary process first of all governments have got to allow that to happen
*  which is to some extent a threat to them in terms of their power and and that's an issue and and
*  then you have to also build the confidence in all of the components of it to say okay that's going
*  to be effective because i won't get in i won't have problems owning it so i think that digital
*  currencies have a have some element of potential but there's a lot of hurdles that are going to
*  have to be gotten over i think that it'll be a very long time possibly never but anyway a very
*  long time before we have that let's say get into a position that would be in a effective means
*  relative to gold let's say if you were to think of that because gold has a track record you know of
*  thousands of years right you know all across countries and it has its mobility it has the
*  ability to put it down and has certain abilities it's got disadvantages relative to digital
*  currencies but but central banks will hold it like there's central banks that worry about others
*  you know the other countries central banks might worry about whether the u.s dollar is going to
*  print them out and that and so the thing they're going to go to is not going to be the digital
*  currency thing they're going to go to is is gold or something else some other currency they got
*  to pick it and so i think it's a long way to go but you think it's possible that one day we don't
*  even have a central bank because of the a currency that doesn't that's uh cannot be controlled by the
*  central bank is the primary currency or does that seem very unlikely it would be very remote
*  possibility or very long in the future got it again maybe a dumb question but romanticize one
*  when you sit back and you look you describe these transactions between individuals somehow creating
*  short-term debt cycles long-term debt cycles this productivity growth does it amaze you that this
*  whole thing works that that there's however many million hundreds of millions of people in the
*  united states globally over seven billion people that this thing between individual transactions
*  it just it works yeah it it amazes me like i go i go back and forth between being in it and then
*  i think like how did a credit card how is that really possible i'm still used like look up
*  credit card i put it on the guy doesn't know me yeah it's all strangers okay we're making the
*  digital injuries is that really secure enough and that that kind of thing and then it goes back and
*  it goes this and it clears and it all happens and it what i marvel at that and those types of things
*  is because of the the capacity of the human mind to create abstractions that are true you know it's
*  imagination and then the ability to go from one level and then if these things are true then you
*  go to the next level and if those things are true then you go to the next level and all those miracles
*  that we almost become common it's like when i'm flying in a plane or when i'm looking at all of
*  the things that happen when i get communications in the middle of i don't know africa or antarctica
*  and we're communicating in the ways where i see the face on my ipad of somebody my grandkid in
*  someplace else and i look at this and i say wow yes it all amazes me so while being amazing do
*  you have a sense the principality you described that the whole thing is stable somehow also or
*  is this are we just lucky so the the principles that you describe are those describing a system
*  that's it's stable robust and will remain so or is it a lucky accident of our early history
*  my area of expertise is economics and markets so i get down to like a real nitty gritty yes
*  i can't tell you whether the plane is going to fall out of the sky yes because of its
*  particular fundamentals i don't know enough about that but it happens over and over again
*  and so on it gives me faith okay so without me knowing it in the markets and the economy
*  i know those things well enough in a sense to say that by and large that structure is right what
*  we're seeing is right now whether there are disruptions and it has effects that can come
*  not because that structure is right and i believe it's right but whether it can be hurt by let's
*  say connectivity or journal entries they could take all the money away from you through your
*  digital entries there's all sorts of things that can happen in various ways that means that that
*  money is worthless or the system falls but from what i see in terms of its basic structure and
*  those complexities that still take my breath away i would say knowing enough about the mechanics of
*  them that doesn't worry me have you seen disruptions in your lifetime that really surprised you
*  oh all the time this is one of the great lessons of my life is that many times i've seen things
*  that i was very surprised about and that i realized almost all of those i was surprised about because
*  they were just the first time it happened to me they didn't happen in my lifetime before
*  but when i researched them they happened in other places or other people's lifetimes so for example
*  i remember in 1971 the dollar there was no such thing as a devaluation of a currency
*  it didn't experience it and with the dollar was connected to gold and i was watching events happen
*  and then you get on and any that definition of money all of a sudden went out the the window
*  because it was not tied to gold and then you have this devaluation and so and then or the first oil
*  shock or the second oil shock or so many of these things and what i but almost always i realized
*  that they um when i looked in history they happened before they just happened in other
*  people's lifetimes which led me to realize that i needed to study history and what happened in
*  other people's lifetimes and what happened in other countries and places so that i would have
*  timeless and universal principles for dealing with that thing so i oh yeah i've been some
*  you know the implausible happening but it's like a a one in a hundred year storm right okay or it's
*  or um they've happened before yeah they just happened just not to you let me talk about
*  if we could about ai a little bit so we've uh bridgewater associates
*  manage about 160 billion dollars in assets and our artificial intelligence systems algorithms
*  are pretty good with data what role in the future do you see ai play in analysis and decision making
*  this kind of data rich and impactful area of investment i'm going to answer that not only
*  an investment but i give them more all-encompassing rule for ai as i think you know for the last 25
*  years we have taken our thinking and put them in algorithms and so we make decisions that the computer
*  takes those criteria algorithms and they put them and they're in there and it takes data and they
*  operate as an independent decision maker in parallel with our decision making so for me it's
*  like there's a chess game playing and i'm a person with my chess game and i'm saying it made that
*  move and i'm making the move and how do i compare those two moves so we've done a lot but let me
*  give you an a rule if the future can be different from the past and you don't have deep understanding
*  you should not rely on ai okay those two things deep understanding of the cause of fact
*  relationships that are leading you to place that bet in anything okay anything important let's say
*  if it was do surgeries and you would say how do i do surgeries i think it's totally fine to watch
*  all the doctors do the surgeries you can put it on take a digital camera and do that convert that
*  into ai algorithms that go to robots and have them do surgeries and i'd be comfortable with that
*  because if it'll do the if it keeps doing the same thing over and over again and you have enough of
*  that that would be fine even though you may not understand the algorithms because you're if the
*  thing's happening over and over again and you're not asking the future would be the same that
*  appendicitis or whatever it is will be handled the same way the surgery that's fine however
*  what happens with ai is for the most part is it takes a lot of data and it um with a high enough
*  sample size and then it puts together its own algorithms okay there are two ways you can come
*  up with algorithms you can either take your thinking and express them in algorithms or you can
*  say let's put the data in and say what is the algorithm when you that's machine learning yeah
*  and when you have machine learning um it'll give you equations which quite often are not understandable
*  if you would try to say okay now describe what it's telling you it's very difficult to describe
*  and so they can escape understanding and so it's very good for doing those things that could be
*  done over and over again if you're watching and you're not taking that but if the future is
*  different from the past and you have that then you're if the future is different from the past
*  and you don't have deep understanding you're going to get in trouble and so that's the main thing as
*  far as ai is concerned ai and let's say computer replications of thinking in very ways i think
*  it's particularly good for processing but but the the notion of what you want to do is better most
*  of the time determined by the human mind that what are the principles like okay how should i
*  raise my children it's going to be a long time before ai you're going to say it has a good enough
*  judgment to do that who should i marry all of those things maybe you can get the computer to
*  help you but if you just took data and do machine learning it's not going to find it if you were to
*  then take one of my criteria for um any of those questions and then say put them into an algorithm
*  you'd be a lot better off than if you took ai to do it but by and large the mind should be do used
*  for inventing and those creative things and then the computer should be used for processing because
*  it could process a lot more information a lot faster a lot more accurately and a lot less
*  emotionally so any notion of thinking in the form of processing type thinking should be done by a
*  computer and anything that is in the notion of doing that other type of thinking should be
*  operating with with the brain operating in a way where you know you can say ah that makes sense
*  you know the process of reducing your understanding down to principles
*  is kind of like the process the uh the first one you mentioned a type of ai algorithm where you're
*  encoding your expertise you're trying to program write a program the human is trying to write a
*  program how do you think that's attainable the process of reducing principles to a computer
*  program or when you when you say when you write about when you think about principles
*  is there still a human element that's not reducible to an algorithm my experience has been
*  that almost all things including those things that i thought were pretty much impossible
*  to express i've been able to express in algorithms but that doesn't constitute all things so you can
*  you can you can express far more than you can imagine you'll be able to express so i use the
*  example of okay it's not how do you raise your children okay you will be able to take it one
*  piece by piece okay how at what age what school and the way to do that that was my experience is
*  to take that and when you're in the moment of making a decision or just past making a decision
*  to take the time and to write down your criteria for making that decision in words
*  okay that that way you'll get your your principles down on paper i created an app
*  online call it's right now just on the iphone it'll be on and try getting an android and it'll be
*  get on android it'll be in a few months it'll be on android awesome but it has an app in there
*  that helps people write down their own principles because this is very powerful so when you're in
*  that moment where you've just you're thinking about it and you're thinking your criteria for
*  you know choosing the school for your child or whatever that might be and you write down
*  your criteria or whatever they are those principles you write down and you you that will at that moment
*  make you articulate your principles in a very valuable way and if you have the way that we
*  operate that you have easy access so in the next time that comes along you can go to that or you
*  can show those principles to others to see if they're the right principles you will get a
*  clarity of that principle that's really invaluable in words and that'll help you a lot then but then
*  you start to think how do i express that in data and it'll shock you about how you can do that
*  you'll you'll form an equation that will show the relationship between these particular parts and
*  then the essentially the variables that are going to go into that particular equation and you will
*  be able to do that and you take that little piece and you put it into the computer and then take the
*  next little piece and you put that into the computer and before you know it you will have
*  a decision-making system that's of the sort that i'm describing so that you're almost making an
*  argument against an earlier statement you've made you're convincing me at first you said there's no
*  way a computer could raise a child essentially but now you've described making me think of it if you
*  have that kind of idea meritocracy you have this rigorous approach that bridgewater takes
*  an investment and apply it to raising a child it feels like through the process you just described
*  we could as a society arrive at a set of principles for raising a child and encoded into computer that
*  originality will not come from machine learning the first time you do so that the original yes
*  that's what i'm referring to but eventually as we together develop it and then we can automate it
*  that's why i'm saying the processing yes can be done by the computer so we're saying the same
*  thing we're not inconsistent we're saying the same thing that the processing of that information and
*  those algorithms can be done by the computer in a very very effective way you don't need to sit
*  there and process and try to weigh all those things in your equation and all those things
*  but that notion of okay how do i get at that principle and you're saying you'd be surprised
*  uh yes you how much you can express that's right you can do that so this is where uh i think you're
*  going to see the future and right now we you know go to our devices and we get information to a
*  large extent and then we get some guidance we have our gps and the like in my opinion principles
*  principles principles principles i want to emphasize that you write them down
*  you've got those principles they will be converted into algorithms for decision making and they're
*  going to also have the benefit of collective decision making because right now individuals
*  based on what's stuck in their heads are making their decisions in very ignorant ways they're not
*  the best decision makers they're not the best criteria and they're operating when those
*  principles are written down and converted into algorithms it's almost like you'll look at that
*  and follow the instructions and it'll give you better results medic medicine will be much more
*  like this you can go to your local doctor and you could ask his point of view and whatever and he's
*  rushed and he may not be the best doctor around and you're going to go to this thing and give
*  that same information or just automatically have it input in that and it's going to tell you okay
*  here's what you should go do and it's going to be much better than your local doctor and that the
*  converting of information into intelligence okay intelligence is the thing we're coming out with
*  again i'm 70 and i want to pass all these things along so all these tools that i've found need to
*  develop all over these periods of time all those things i want to make them available and what's
*  going to happen as you they're they're going to see this they're going to see these tools
*  operating much more that way the idea of converting data into intelligence intelligence for example on
*  what they are like right on what are your strengths and weaknesses intelligence on who do i work well
*  with under what circumstance personalized intelligence we're going to go from what are
*  called systems of record which are a lot of okay information organized in the right way
*  to intelligence and we're going to that that'll be the next big move in my opinion and so you
*  will get intelligence back and that that intelligence comes from reducing things down to principles into
*  that's how it happens so what's your intuition if we look at future societies do you think we'll
*  be able to reduce a lot of the
*  the details of our lives down to principles that would be further and further automated
*  i think the real question hinges on people's emotional emotions and irrational behaviors
*  i think that there's subliminal things that we want okay and then there's cerebral you know
*  conscious logic oh and the two often are at odds so there's almost like two us and you right and
*  so let's say what do you want and your mind will answer one thing your emotions will answer
*  something else so when i think about it i think emotions are i want inspiration i want love is a
*  good thing being able to have a good impact but it is in the reconciliation of your subliminal wants
*  and your intellectual wants so that you really say they're aligned and so to do that in a way
*  to get what you want so irrationality is a bad thing if it means that it doesn't make sense in
*  getting you what you want but you better decide which you you're satisfying is it the lower level
*  you emotional subliminal one or is it the other but if you can align them so what i find is that
*  by going from my you you experience the decision do this thing subliminally and that's the thing
*  i want it comes to the surface i find that if i can align that with what my logical me wants and
*  do the double double check between them and i get the same sort of thing that that helps me a lot
*  i find for example meditation is one of the things that helps to achieve that alignment it's fantastic
*  for achieving that alignment and often then i also want to not just do it in my head i want to say
*  does that make sense help you and so i do it with other people and i say okay well let's say i want
*  this thing and whatever does that make sense and when you do that kind of triangulation your two
*  and you do that with also the other way then you certainly want to be rational right but
*  rationality has to be defined by those things and then you discover sort of new ideas that
*  that drive your future so it's always you're always at the edge of the set of principles you've
*  developed you're doing new things always right that's where the intellect is needed well and
*  the inspiration the inspiration is needed to do that right like what are you doing it for
*  so what is that excitement what is the adventure the curiosity the hunger what's uh if you can be
*  freud for a second what's in that subconscious what's the thing that drives us i think you can't
*  generalize of us i think different people are driven by different things there's not a common one
*  right so like if you would take the shapers i think it is a combination of
*  subliminally it's a combination of excitement curiosity is there a dark element there is there
*  is there demons there's their fears is there in your sense most of the ones most of the ones
*  that i'm dealing with i have not seen that i see the what i really see is
*  if i can do that that would be the most dream and then the act of creativity and you say oh
*  so excitement is one of the things curiosity is a big pull okay and then tenacity you know okay
*  to do those things but definitely emotions are entering into it then there's an intellectual
*  component of it too okay it may be empathy it may can i have an impact can i have an impact
*  the desire to have an impact that's an emotional thrill and but it also it has empathy and then
*  you start to see spirituality but a spirituality i mean the connectedness to the whole you start
*  to see people operate those things those tend to be the things that you see the most of
*  and i think you're going to shut down this idea completely but there's a notion that some of these
*  shapers really walk the line between sort of madness and genius do you think madness has a
*  role in any of this or do you still see steve jobs and the al musk is fundamentally rational
*  yeah there's a continuum there and what comes to my mind is that genius is that at often at the edge
*  in some cases imaginary genius is at the edge of insanity and it's almost like a radio that i
*  think okay if i can tune it just right it's playing right but if i go a little bit too far
*  it goes off yeah okay and so you can you can see this k jameson was studying bipolar what it chose
*  is that you know that's definitely the case because when you're going out there that imagination
*  whatever but is that the can be near the edge sometimes it doesn't have to always be so let me
*  ask you about automation that's been a part of public discourse recently what's your view on
*  the impact of automation of whether we're talking about ai or more basic forms of automation on the
*  economy in the short term in the long term do you have concerns about it as some do or do you think
*  it's overblown it's not overblown i mean it's a it's a giant thing it'll come at us in a very big
*  way in in the future we're right at the edge of even really accelerating it it's had a big impact
*  and it will have a big impact and it's a two-edged sword because it'll have tremendous benefits and
*  at the same time it has profound benefits in employment and distributions of wealth because
*  the way i think to think about it is there are certain things human beings can do and over time
*  we've evolved to go to almost higher and higher levels and now we're almost like we're at this
*  level you know it used to be your labor and you would then do your labor and okay we can get past
*  the labor we got tractors and things and you go up up up up up and we're up over here and up to the
*  point in our minds where okay anything related to mental processing the computer can probably
*  do better and we can find that and so other than almost inventing you're at a point where
*  the machines and the automation will probably do it better and and that's accelerating and that's
*  a force and that's a force for the good and at the same time it what it does is it displaces people
*  in terms of employment and changes and it produces wealth gaps and all of that so i think the real
*  issue is that that has to be viewed as a national emergency in other words i think the wealth the
*  wealth gap the the income gap the opportunity gap all of those things that force is creating
*  the problems that we're having today a lot of the problems the the great polarity the disenfranchised
*  not equal not anything approaching equality of education all of these problems a lot of
*  coming as a result of that and so there it needs to be viewed really as an emergency situation
*  in which there's a good work good plan worked out for how to deal with that effectively so that
*  it's dealt with effectively so because it's it's it's you know it's good for the average it's good
*  for the impact but it's not good for everyone and it creates that polarity so it's got to be
*  dealt with yeah and you've talked about the american dream and that that's something that
*  all people should have an opportunity for and then we need to reform capitalism to give that
*  opportunity for everyone let me ask on a on one of the ideas in terms of safety nets that support
*  that kind of opportunity there's been a lot of discussion of universal basic income amongst
*  people so there's andrew yang who's running on that he's a political candidate running for
*  president on the idea of universal basic income what do you think about that giving a thousand
*  dollars or some amount of money to everybody as a way to give them the the padding the freedom to
*  sort of take leaps to take the call for adventure to take the crazy pursuits before i get right into
*  my thoughts on universal basic income i want to start with the the notion that opportunity
*  education development creating equality so that you people say there's equal opportunity and and
*  is the most important thing and then to find out what is the amount how are you going to provide
*  that what where what how does it how do you get the money into a public school system how do you
*  get the teaching how do you what do you the fleshing out that plan to create equal opportunity
*  and all of its various forms is the most pressing thing to do and so i'm you know that is that the
*  opportunity the most important one you're kind of implying is the earlier the better sort of like
*  opportunity to education so in the early development of a human being is when you
*  should have the equal opportunities that's the most important right in the first phase of your life
*  which goes from birth until you're on your own and you're an adult and you're now out there
*  and you deal with early childhood development okay and you take the brain and you say what's
*  important the child care okay like the it makes a world of difference for example if you have good
*  parents who are trying to think about instilling the stability in a non-traumatic environment
*  to provide them so i would say the good guidance that normally comes from parents
*  and the good education that they're receiving are you know the most important things in that
*  person's development the ability to be able to be prepared to go out there and then to go into a
*  market that's an equal opportunity job market to be able to then go into that kind of market
*  is a system that creates not only fairness anything else is not fair and then in addition to that
*  it also is a more effective economic system because the consequences of not doing that
*  to a society are devastating if you look at what the difference in outcomes for somebody who
*  completes high school or doesn't complete high school or does each one of those state changes
*  and you look at what that means in terms of their costs to society not only themselves
*  but their cost and incarceration costs and then and crimes and all of those things it's economically
*  better for the society and it's fairer if they can get those particular things
*  once they have those things then you move on to other things but yes from birth all the way through
*  that process anything less than that is bad is a tragedy and so on so that's what that's yeah those
*  are the things that i'm estimating and so my what i would want above all else is to provide that so
*  with that in mind now we'll talk about universal basic income start with that now we can talk about
*  you well right because you have to have that now the question is what's the best way to provide
*  that okay so when i look at ubi i really think is what is going to happen with that thousand dollars
*  okay and will that thousand dollars come from another program does that come from an early
*  childhood developmental program who are you giving the thousand dollars to and what will they do for
*  that thousand dollars i mean like my reaction would be i think it's a great thing that everybody
*  should have almost a thousand dollars in their bank and so on but when do they get to make decisions
*  or who's the parent a lot of pit times you can give a thousand dollars to somebody and it could
*  have a negative result it can have you know they can use that money detrimentally not just
*  productively and if that money's coming away from some of those other things that are going to produce
*  the things i want and you're shifted to um let's say to come in and give a check doesn't mean its
*  outcomes are going to be good in providing those things that i think are so fundamental important
*  if it was just everybody can have a thousand dollars and use it so when the time comes
*  and use it well that would be really really good because it's almost like everybody you'd wish
*  everybody could have a thousand dollars worth of wiggle room in their lives okay and i think that
*  would be great i love that but i want to make sure that these other things that are taken care of so
*  if it comes out of that budget and um you know i don't want it to come out of that budget that's
*  going to be doing those things and i you know so you have to figure it out and you have a certain
*  skepticism that human nature will use may not always in fact frequently may not use that thousand
*  dollars for the optimal to support the optimal trajectory some will and some won't one of the
*  big advantages of universal basic income is that um if you put it in the hands let's say parents
*  who know how to do the right things and make the right choices for their children because they're
*  responsible and you say i'm going to give them a thousand dollars wiggle room to use for the benefit
*  of their children wow that sounds great if you put it in the hands of let's say um an alcoholic or
*  drug addicted parent who is not making those choices well for their children and what they do
*  is they take that thousand dollars and they don't use it well then that's going to produce more harm
*  than good well put you're if i may say so one of the richest people in the world
*  so you're a good person to ask does money buy happiness no it's been shown that um between
*  once you get over a basic level of income so that you can take care of the pain that you know you
*  can health and whatever there's no correlation between the level of happiness that one has
*  and the level of money that one has that that thing that has the highest correlation is
*  quality relationships with others community if you look at surveys of these things across
*  all surveys and all societies it's a sense of community and interpersonal relationships
*  that is not in any way correlated with money you can go down to native tribes and you know very
*  poor places or you can go in all different communities and so they have the opportunity
*  to have that i'm very lucky in that i started with nothing so i had the full range i can tell
*  you i you know by not having money but but and then having quite a lot of money and i you know
*  i did that in the right order so you start from nothing in long island yep and my dad was a jazz
*  musician but i but i had all really that i needed because i had two parents who loved me and took
*  good care of me and i went to a public school that was a good public school and basically you
*  know that you don't need much more than that in order to that's the equal opportunity part
*  anyway what i'm saying is no i experienced the range and and there are many studies on the
*  answer to your question no money does not bring happiness it bring money gives you an ability to
*  choices does it get in the way in any way of forming those deep meaningful relationships
*  it can there are lots of ways that it makes negative that's one of them it could stand in
*  the way of that yes okay but i could almost list the ways that it could stand it could be a problem
*  yeah what does it buy so if you can elaborate you mentioned a bit of freedom at the most
*  fundamental level it doesn't take a whole lot but it takes enough that you can take care of your
*  yourself and your family to be able to learn do the basics of have the relationships have health
*  care the basics of those types of things you know you can cover the patients and then to have maybe
*  enough security but maybe not too much security that's right that you essentially are okay
*  okay that is that's really good and you don't that's what that's what money will get you and
*  everything else is uh go either way well no there's more there's more okay then beyond that
*  what it then starts to do that's the most important thing yes but beyond that what it's
*  then starts to do is to help to make your dreams happen in various ways okay so for example now i
*  you know like in my case it's those dreams might not be just my own dreams they're
*  they're impact on others dreams okay so my own dreams might be um i don't know i can pass along
*  these at my stage in life i could pass along these principles to you and i can give those things
*  or i can um do whatever i can go on an adventure i can start a business i can do those other things
*  be productive i can self-actualize in ways that might be not possible otherwise and so that's
*  that's my own belief and then in a dot and i can also help others i mean this is you know to the
*  extent when you get older and with time and whatever very you start to feel connected
*  spiritual spirituality that's what i'm referring to you can start to have an effect on others
*  that's beneficial and so on gives you the ability i could tell you that um people who are very wealthy
*  who have that feel that they don't have enough money bill gates will feel almost broke because
*  relative to the things he'd like to accomplish and through the gates foundation and things like
*  that you know oh my god he doesn't have enough money to accomplish the things he wishes for
*  but those things are not you know they're not the most fundamental things so i think that people
*  sometimes think money has value money doesn't have value money is like you say just a medium
*  of exchange at a store i'll do well and so what you have to say is what is it that you're going
*  to buy now there are other people who get their gratification in ways that are different from
*  me but i think in many cases let's say somebody who use money to have a status symbol i what what
*  would i say or that that's probably unhealthy but then i don't know somebody who says i love a
*  great gorgeous painting and it's going to cost lots of money in my priorities i can't i can't
*  get there but um but that doesn't mean i don't who am i to judge others in terms of let's say
*  their element of the freedom to do those things so it's a little bit complicated but by and large
*  that you know that's my view on money and wealth so let me ask you in terms of the idea of so much
*  of your passions in life has been through something you might be able to call work
*  alan watts has this quote he said that the the real key to life secret to life is to be completely
*  engaged with what you're doing in the here and now and instead of calling it work realize it is play
*  so i'd like to ask what is the role of work in your life's journey or in a life's journey
*  and what do you think about this modern idea of kind of separating work and work life balance
*  i have a principle that i believe in is make your work and your passion the same thing
*  okay okay so that's similar that's uh in other words if you can make your work and your passion
*  it's just going to work out great and then of course people have different purposes of work
*  and i don't want to be theoretical about that people have to take care of their family so
*  money at a certain point is um the base is an important component of that work so you look
*  beyond that what do you what is the money going to get you and what are you trying to achieve
*  but the most important thing i agree is meaningful work and meaningful relationships like if you can
*  get into the thing that you're at your mission that you're on and you are excited about that
*  mission that you're on and then you can do that with people who you have the meaningful
*  relationships with you have meaningful work and meaningful relationships i mean that is
*  fabulous for most people and it seems that many people struggle to get there not out of um
*  not necessarily because they're constrained by the fact that they have the financial constraints
*  of having to provide for their family and so on but it's i mean most you know this idea is out
*  there that there needs to be a work-life balance which means that most people we're going to return
*  to the same thing as most doesn't mean optimal but most people seem to not be doing their life's
*  passion not be not unifying work and passion why do you think that is is well the work-life balance
*  there's a life arc that you go through starts at zero and ends somewhere in the vicinity of 80
*  and there is a phase and there's a and you could look at the different degrees of happiness that
*  happen in those phases i can go through that if that was interesting but we don't have time
*  probably for it but you get in the part of the life the that part of the life which has the
*  lowest level of happiness is age 45 to 55 and and and because as you move into this second phase of
*  your life now the first phase of your life is when you're learning dependent on others
*  second phase of your life is when you're working and others are dependent on you and you're trying
*  to be successful and in that phase of one's life you encounter the work-life balance challenge
*  because you're trying to be successful at work and successful at parenting and successful and
*  successful in all those things that take your demand and they get into that and i understand
*  that problem in the work-life balance the issue is primarily to know how to approach that okay
*  so i understand it's stressful it produces stress and it produces bad results and it produces the
*  lowest level of happiness in one's life it's interesting as you get later in life the levels
*  of happiness rise and the highest level of happiness is between ages 70 and 80 which is
*  interesting for other reasons but in that spot i want and that and and the key to work-life balance
*  is to realize and to learn how to get more out of an hour of life okay because an hour of work
*  what people are thinking is that they have to make a choice between one thing and another and of
*  course they they do but they don't realize that if they develop the skill to get a lot more out of
*  an hour it's the equivalent of having many more hours in your life and so you know that's why in
*  the book principles i try to go into okay now how can you get a lot more out of out of an hour that
*  allows you to get more life into your life and it reduces the work-life balance and that's the
*  primary struggle in that 35 to 45 you know if you could linger on that so what are the ups and downs
*  of life in terms of happiness in general and perhaps in your own life when you look back at
*  the moments the peaks it's pretty pretty much same pattern really in one's life is tends to be a very
*  happy period all the way up and 16 is like a really great happy you know i think like myself
*  you start to get elements of freedom you get your driver's license whatever but 16 is there
*  junior year in high school quite often could be a stressful period to try to think about the high
*  school you go into college tends to be very hot happiness generally speaking freedom and then
*  freedom yeah friendships all of that freedom is a big thing and then you and then 20 23 is a peak
*  point kind of in and happiness that freedom then sequentially one has a great time they date they
*  go out and so on you find the love of your life you begin to develop a family and then with that
*  as time happens you have more of your work life balance challenges that come in your responsibilities
*  and then as you get there in that mid part of your life that is the most that is the biggest struggle
*  chances are you will crash in that period of time you know you'll have you'll have your series of
*  failures that's that that's that that's when you go into the abyss you learn you hopefully
*  learn from those mistakes you have a metamorphosis you come out you change you hopefully become
*  better and you take more responsibilities and so on and then when you get to the later part as you
*  are starting to approach the transition and that late part of the second phase of your life before
*  you go into the third phase of your life the second phase is you're working trying to be successful
*  third phase of your life is you want people to be successful without you
*  okay yes you want your kids to be successful without you because when you're at that phase
*  they're making their transition from the first phase to the second phase and they're trying to
*  be successful and you want them to be successful without you and you have your parents are gone
*  and then you have freedom and then you have freedom again and that with that freedom and
*  then you have these history is shown with this you have friendships you have perspective on life
*  you have different things and that's one of the reasons that that later part of the life can be
*  real it on average actually it's the highest very interesting thing if they they there are surveys
*  and say how good do you look and how good do you feel and and that's the highest survey the person
*  now they're not looking the best yeah and they're not feeling the best right maybe it's 35 that
*  they're actually looking the best and feeling the best but they rank the highest at that point survey
*  results of being the highest that's so fast in that 70 to 80 period of time because it has to do with
*  an attitude on life then you start to have grandkids oh grandkids are great and you start to experience
*  that transition well so that's what the arc of life pretty much looks like and
*  and i'm experiencing it you know that's you've learned that when you meditate we're all human
*  we're all mortal when you meditate on your own mortality having achieved a lot of success
*  on whatever dimension what do you think is the meaning of it all the meaning of our short
*  existence on earth as human beings i think that evolution is the greatest force of the universe
*  and that we're all tiny bits of an evolutionary type of process where it's just matter and
*  machines that go through time and that we all have a deeply embedded
*  inclination to evolve and contribute to evolution so i think it's to personally evolve and contribute
*  to evolution i could have predicted you would answer that way it's brilliant and exactly right
*  and i think we've said it before but i'll say it again you have a lot of incredible videos out
*  there that people should definitely watch i don't say this often i mean it's literally the best
*  spend of time and in terms of reading principles and reading basically anything you write on
*  linkedin and so on is a really good use of time it's a lot of light bulb moments a lot of
*  transformative ideas in there so ray thank you so much it's been an honor i really appreciate it
*  it's been a pleasure for me too i'm happy to hear it's a use to you and others thanks for
*  listening to this conversation with ray dalio and thank you to our presenting sponsor cash app
*  download it use code lex podcast you'll get ten dollars and ten dollars will go to first
*  a stem education non-profit that inspires hundreds of thousands of young minds to learn and to dream
*  of engineering our future if you enjoy this podcast subscribe on youtube get five stars on
*  apple podcast support on patreon or connect with me on twitter finally closing words of advice from
*  ray dalio pain plus reflection equals progress thank you for listening and hope to see you next
*  time
