---
Date Generated: November 01, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 3324s
Video Keywords: []
Video Views: 783109
Video Rating: None
Video Description: 
---

# Garry Kasparov Chess, Deep Blue, AI, and Putin  Lex Fridman Podcast #46
**Lex Fridman:** [October 27, 2019](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8RVa0THWUWw)
*  The following is a conversation with Gary Kasparov. He is considered by many to be the
*  greatest chess player of all time. From 1986 until his retirement in 2005, he dominated the chess
*  world, ranking world number one for most of those 19 years. While he has many historical matches
*  against human chess players, in the long arc of history, he may be remembered for his match
*  against the machine, IBM's Deep Blue. His initial victories and eventual loss to Deep Blue captivated
*  the imagination of the world, of what role artificial intelligence systems may play in
*  our civilization's future. That excitement inspired an entire generation of AI researchers,
*  including myself, to get into the field. Gary is also a pro-democracy political thinker and leader,
*  a fearless human rights activist, and author of several books, including How Life Imitates Chess,
*  which is a book on strategy and decision making, Winter's Coming, which is a book articulating
*  his opposition to the Putin regime, and Deep Thinking, which is a book on the role of both
*  artificial intelligence and human intelligence in defining our future. This is the Artificial
*  Intelligence Podcast. If you enjoy it, subscribe on YouTube, give it five stars on iTunes,
*  support it on Patreon, or simply connect with me on Twitter at Lex Friedman, spelled F-R-I-D-M-A-N.
*  And now, here's my conversation with Gary Kasparov. As perhaps the greatest chess player of all time,
*  when you look introspectively at your psychology throughout your career, what was the bigger
*  motivator, the love of winning or the hatred of losing? Tough question. I have to confess,
*  I never heard it before, which is again, congratulations, it's quite an accomplishment.
*  Losing was always painful. For me, it was almost like a physical pain because I knew that if I
*  lost the game, it's just because I made a mistake. So I always believed that the result of the game
*  had to be decided by the quality of my play. Okay, you may say it sounds arrogant, but it helped me
*  to move forward because I always knew that there was room for improvement. Was there the fear of
*  the mistake? Actually, fear of mistake guarantees mistakes. And the difference between top players
*  and very top is that it's the ability to make a decision without predictable consequences.
*  You don't know what's happening. It's just intuitively, I can go this way or that way.
*  And there are always hesitations. People are like, you are just at the crossroad. You can go right,
*  you can go left, you can go straight. You can turn and go back. And the consequences are just
*  very uncertain. You have certain ideas what happens on the right or on the left or on just
*  if you go straight. But it's not enough to make well calculated choice. And when you play chess
*  at the very top, it's about your inner strength. So I can make this decision. I will stand firm,
*  and I'm not going to waste my time because I have full confidence that I will go through.
*  Now, going back to the original question is, I would say neither. It's just it's the it's
*  laugh-winning, hateful losing. There were important elements, psychological elements. But
*  the key element, I would say the driving force was always my passion for making a difference.
*  I can move forward and I can always enjoy not just playing but creating something new.
*  Creating something new. How do you think about that?
*  It's just finding new ideas in the openings, some original plan in the middle game.
*  Actually, that helped me to make the transition from the game of chess where I was on the very top
*  to another life where I knew I would not be number one. I would not be necessarily on the top, but
*  I could still be very active and productive by my ability to make the difference by influencing
*  people, say joining the democratic movement in Russia or talking to people about human-machine
*  relations. There's so many things where I knew my influence may not be as decisive as in chess,
*  but still strong enough to help people to make their choices.
*  So you can still create something new that makes a difference in the world outside of chess. But wait,
*  you've kind of painted a beautiful picture of your motivations to chess, to create something new,
*  to look for those moments of some brilliant new ideas. But were you haunted by something?
*  You make it seem like to be at the level you're at, you can get away without having demons,
*  without having fears, without being driven by some of the darker forces.
*  You sound almost religious, the darker forces, spiritual demons. I mean, do you have a call for
*  a priest? That's what I'm addressing.
*  Yeah. Now, just let's go back to these crucial chess moments where I had to make big decisions.
*  As I said, it was all about my belief from very early days that I can make all the difference by
*  playing well or by making mistakes. Yes, I always had an opponent across the chessboard, opposite
*  me. But no matter how strong the opponent was, whether it just was an ordinary player or another
*  world champion like Anatoly Karpov, having all respect for my opponent, I still believe that
*  it's up to me to make the difference. I knew I was not invincible, I made mistakes, I made some
*  blunders, and with age, I made more blunders. I knew it, but it's still very much for me to
*  be decisive factor in the game. Even now, look, my latest chess experience was horrible. I mean,
*  I played Fabio Caruana, number two, number three player in the world these days. We played this 960
*  with the so-called Fischer Random Chess, reshuffling pieces. Yeah, I lost very badly, but it's because
*  I made mistakes. I mean, I had so many winning positions. I mean, 15 years ago, I would have
*  crushed him. And while I lost, I was not so much upset. I mean, as I said in the interview,
*  I can fight any opponent, but not my biological clock. So it's fighting time is always a losing
*  proposition. But even today, at age 56, I knew that I could play great game. I couldn't finish
*  it because I didn't have enough energy or just I couldn't have the same level of concentration.
*  But in a number of games where I completely outplayed one of the top players in the world,
*  gave me a certain amount of pleasure that is even today, I haven't lost my touch. Not the same,
*  okay, the jaws are not as strong and the teeth are not as sharp, but I could get him just almost on
*  the ropes. You still got it. Still got it. And I think my wife said it well. I mean, she said,
*  it's somehow, it's only just fighting your biological clock. It's just, you know,
*  maybe it's a signal because, you know, the goddess of chess, since you spoke great,
*  the goddess of chess, Keisha, maybe she didn't want you to win because, you know, if you could
*  beat number two, number three player in the world, I mean, that's this one of the top players who
*  just recently played a world championship match. If you could beat him, that was really bad for
*  the game of chess. People will say, oh, look, the game of chess, you know, it's not making any
*  progress. The game is just, you know, it's totally devalued because, look, the guy coming out of
*  retirement, you know, just, you know, winning games. Maybe that was good for chess. Not good for you,
*  but it's, look, I've been following your logic. We should always look for, you know, demons,
*  you know, superior forces and other things that could, you know, if not dominate our lives,
*  but somehow, you know, play a significant role in the outcome.
*  Yeah. So the goddess of chess had to send a message.
*  Yeah. That's okay. Okay. So Gary, you should do something else. Time.
*  Now for a question that you have heard before, but give me a chance. You've dominated the chess
*  world for 20 years, even still got it. Is there a moment you said you always look to create something
*  new? Is there games or moments where you're especially proud of in terms of your brilliance
*  of a new creative move? You've talked about Mikhail Tal as somebody who was aggressive and
*  creative chess player in your own game. Look, you mentioned Mikhail Tal. It's very
*  aggressive, very sharp player, famous for his combinations and sacrifices, even called magician
*  from Riga for his very unique style. But any world champion, you know, was a creator. Some of them
*  were so flamboyant and flash like Tal. Some of them were no just, you know, less discerned
*  at the chess board like the Grand Petrosian, but every world champion, every top player,
*  brought something into the game of chess. And each contribution was priceless because it's
*  not just about sacrifices. Of course, amateurs, they enjoy, you know, the brilliant games where
*  pieces being sacrificed, it's all just, you know, it's all piece of hanging. And it's all of a
*  sudden, you know, being material down, rook down or just, you know, queen down, the weaker side
*  delivers the final blow and just, you know, mating opponents king. But there are other kinds of
*  beauty. I mean, it's a slow positional maneuvering, you know, looking for weaknesses and just, and
*  gradually strangling your opponent and eventually delivering sort of a positional masterpiece.
*  So I think I made more difference in the game of chess than I could have imagined when I started
*  playing. And the reason I thought it was time for me to leave was that, I mean, I knew that I was not,
*  I was not no longer in the position to bring the same kind of contribution, the same kind of
*  new knowledge into the game. So, and going back, I could immediately look at my games against
*  Anzali Karpov. It's not just I won the match in 1985 and became world champion at age 22,
*  but there were at least two games in that match. Of course, the last one, game 24, that was the
*  size of game of the match, I won and became world champion. But also the way I won it was, it was a
*  very sharp game and I found a unique maneuver that was absolutely new. And it became some sort of,
*  just a typical now, though just when the move was made, was made on the board and put on display,
*  a lot of people thought it was ugly. And another game, game 16, in the match where I just also
*  managed to outplay Karpov completely with black pieces, just paralyzing his entire army in its own
*  camp. Technically or psychologically, or was that a mix of both in game 16? Yeah, I think it was a
*  big blow to Karpov. I think it was a big psychological victory for a number of reasons. One, the score was
*  equal at the time and the world champion by the rules could retain his title in case of a tie.
*  Before game 16, we have nine games to go. And also it was some sort of a bluff because
*  neither me nor Karpov saw the refutation of this opening idea. And I think it says for Karpov,
*  it was double blow because not that he lost the game, it was triple blow. He lost the game,
*  it was a brilliant game and I played impeccably after just this opening bluff.
*  And then they discovered that it was a bluff. So again, I didn't know I was bluffing. So that's why
*  why it happens very often. Some ideas could be refuted. And it's just what I found out,
*  and this is again, going back to your spiritual theme is that you could spend a lot of time working.
*  And when I say you could, it's in the eighties, in the nineties. It doesn't happen these days
*  because everybody has a computer. You could immediately see if it works or it doesn't work.
*  Machine shows your refutation in a split of a second. But many of our analysis in the eighties
*  or in the nineties, they were not perfect simply because we were humans and you analyze the game,
*  you look for some fresh ideas. And then it happens that there was something that you missed
*  because the level of concentration at the chessboard is different from one that when you
*  analyze the game, moving the pieces around. But somehow if you spend a lot of time at the chessboard
*  preparing, so in your studies with your coaches, hours and hours and hours, and nothing of what you
*  found had materialized on the chessboard. Somehow these hours helped, I don't know why, always helped
*  you. It's as if the amount of work you did could be transformed into some sort of spiritual energy
*  that helped you to come up with other great ideas during the board. Again, even if there was no
*  direct connection between your preparation and your victory in the game, there was always some
*  invisible connection between the amount of work you did, your dedication to actually,
*  and your passion to discover new ideas, and your ability during the game at the chessboard when the
*  clock was ticking, we still had ticking clock, not digital clock at the time. So to come up with some
*  brilliance. And I also can mention many games from the nineties. Obviously all amateurs would pick up
*  my game against Veselin Topolov in 1999 and Vykonzai. Again, because it was a brilliant game,
*  the Black King traveled from its own camp into the whites camp across the entire board.
*  It doesn't happen often, trust me, as you know, in the games of the professional players, top
*  professional players. So that's why visually it was one of the most impressive victories. But
*  I could bring to your attention many other games that were not so impressive for amateurs, not so
*  not so beautiful, just because it's sacrifice is always beautiful. You sacrifice passes,
*  and then eventually you have so very few resources left, and you use them just to crush
*  your opponent basically. You have to make the king because you have almost nothing left
*  at your disposal. But up to the very end, again, less and less, but still up to the very end,
*  I always had games with some sort of interesting ideas and games that gave me great satisfaction.
*  But I think what happened from 2005 up to these days was also a very big accomplishment,
*  since I had to find myself to sort of relocate myself.
*  Yeah, re-channel the creative energies.
*  Exactly. And to find something where I feel comfortable, even confident that
*  my participation still makes the difference.
*  Beautifully put. So let me ask perhaps a silly question, but sticking on chess for just a little
*  longer. Where do you put Magnus Carlsen, the current world champion, in the list of all-time
*  greats? In terms of style, moments of brilliance, consistency?
*  It's a tricky question. The moment you start ranking world champions, I think it's not fair
*  because any new generation knows much more about the game than the previous one. So when people
*  say, oh, Gary was the greatest, Fischer was the greatest, Magnus was the greatest, it disregards
*  the fact that the great players of the past, the Alaskia, Capaplank, Alokian, they knew so little
*  about chess by today's standards. Today, just any kid that spent a few years with his or her chess
*  computer knows much more about the game simply just because you have access to this information.
*  And it has been discovered generation after generation, we added more and more knowledge
*  to the game of chess. It's about the gap between the world champion and the rest of the field.
*  So now if you look at the gap, then probably Fischer could be on top, but very short period
*  of time. Then you should also add a time factor. I was on top, not as big as Fischer, but much longer.
*  And also, unlike Fischer, I succeeded in beating next generation.
*  Here's the question. Let's see if you still got the fire, speaking of the next generation,
*  because you did succeed beating the next generation. It's close. Okay, Anand, short, Anand,
*  Shirov. Crown makers are already 12 years younger, so that's a neck. But still, I competed with them,
*  and I just beat most of them, and I was still dominant when I left at the age of 41. So back to
*  Magnus. Magnus consistency is phenomenal. The reason Magnus is on top and it seems unbeatable
*  today, Magnus is a lethal combination of Fischer and Karpov, which is very unusual because Fischer's
*  style was very dynamic, just fighting to the last point, just using every resource available.
*  Karpov was very different. It's just an unparalleled ability to use every piece with
*  a maximum effect. Just its minimal resources always produce maximum effect. So now imagine
*  that you merge these two styles. So it's like squeezing every stone for a drop of water,
*  but doing it just for 50, 60, 70, 80 moves. I mean, Magnus could go on as long as Fischer
*  with all his passion and energy, and at the same time being as meticulous and deadly as Karpov,
*  by just using every little advantage. And he has very good health. It's important. I mean,
*  physical conditions are, by the way, very important. So a lot of people don't recognize it.
*  Their latest study shows that chess players burn thousands of calories during the game. So that
*  puts him on the top of this field of the world champions. But again, the discussion that I saw
*  recently on the internet, whether Garry Kasparov or his peak, let's say late 80s, could beat
*  Magnus Carlsen today, I mean, it's totally irrelevant because Garry Kasparov in 1989,
*  okay, has played great chess, but still I knew very little about chess compared to Magnus Carlsen
*  in 2019, who by the way learned from me as well. So that's why, yeah. I'm extremely cautious in
*  making any judgment that involves time gaps. You ask soccer fans, so who is your favorite,
*  Pele, Maradona or Messi? Yeah. Yeah. Who's your favorite? Messi. Messi. Why? Because-
*  Maybe Maradona. Maybe. Not because you're younger, but that's simple. Your instinctive answer is
*  correct because you didn't say Maradona in action. I saw all of them in action, so that's why. But
*  since when I was just following it, it's Pele and Maradona, they were big stars and Messi's already
*  just, I was gradually losing interest in other things. So I remember Pele in 1970, the final
*  match, Brazil-Italy. So that's the first World Cup soccer I watched. And actually my answer,
*  just because I was asked this question as well. So I say that it's just while it's impossible to
*  make a choice, I would still probably go with Maradona for simple reason. The Brazilian team
*  in 1970 could have won without Pele. It was absolutely great. Still could have won. Maybe,
*  but the Argentinian team in 1986 without Maradona would not be unified. So this is, and Messi,
*  he still hasn't won a title. That's- That's- Could argue for that for an hour, but- Yeah. Yes. You
*  could say if you ask Maradona, if you look in his eyes, especially, let's say, Gary Kasparov in 1989,
*  he would have said, I was sure as hell would beat Magnus Carlsen. Just simply because- The confidence,
*  the fire. Simply because, simply because, again, they saw me in action. So this, again, it's the
*  age factor that's important. Therefore, with the passion and energy and being equipped with all
*  modern ideas. But again, then you make a very just important assumption that you could empower
*  Gary Kasparov in 1989 with all ideas that have been accumulated over 30 years. That would not be
*  Gary Kasparov. That would be someone else. Yeah. Because again, I belonged to 1989. I was way ahead
*  of the field and I beat Karpov several times in the world championship matches and I crossed 2800,
*  which by the way, if you look at the- In the rating, which is just- Even today, so this is
*  the rating that I retired. So it's still, it's a top two, three. So that's Karwan and Ding. It's
*  about the same rating now. And I crossed 2800 in 1990. Well, just you look at the inflation.
*  When I crossed 2800 in 1990, there was only one player in 2700 category, Anatoly Karpov. Now he
*  had more than 50. So just when you see this. So if you add inflation, so I think my 2851,
*  it could probably could be more valuable as Magnus 2882, which was his highest rating. But anyway,
*  again, enough hypotheticals. You're lost to IBM D. Blue in 1997. In my eyes, that is one of the
*  most seminal moments in the history. Again, I apologize for being romanticizing the notion,
*  but in the history of our civilization, because humans as a civilizations for centuries saw chess
*  as the peak of what man can accomplish of intellectual mastery. And that moment when a
*  machine could beat a human being was inspiring to just an entire, anyone who cares about science,
*  innovation, the entire generation of AI researchers. And yet, to you that loss,
*  at least if reading your face was seemed like a tragedy, extremely painful, like you said,
*  physically painful. Why? When you look back at your psychology, that loss, why was it so painful?
*  Were you not able to see the seminal nature of that moment? Or was that exactly why it was that
*  painful? As I already said, losing was painful, physically painful. And the match I lost in 1997
*  was not the first match I lost to a machine. It was the first match I lost period. Yeah.
*  Oh, wow. Oh, wow. Yeah, it's right. Yeah. That makes all the difference to me. Yes. First time
*  I lost. Now, I lost. And the reason I was so angry that I just, I had suspicions that my loss was not
*  just a result of my bad play. Yes. So though I played quite poorly, just when you started looking
*  at the games today, I made tons of mistakes. But I had all reasons to believe that there were
*  other factors that had nothing to do with the game of chess. And that's why I was angry. But look,
*  it was 22 years ago. It's all under the bridge. We can analyze this match. And this is with
*  everything you said. I agree. It was probably one exception is that considering chess as the sort of
*  pinnacle of intellectual activities was our mistake. Because we just thought, oh, it's a game of the
*  highest intellect. And it's just, you have to be so intelligent. And you could see things that
*  you know, the ordinary mortals could not see. It's a game. And all machines had to do in this game
*  is just to make fewer mistakes, not to solve the game. Because the game cannot be solved.
*  I mean, according to Shannon, the number of legal moves is 10 to the 46 power, too many zeros. So
*  just for any computer to finish the job, you know, in the next few billion years. But it doesn't have
*  to. It's all about making fewer mistakes. And I think that's the this match actually, and what's
*  happened afterwards with other games, with with go with shoggy, with video games, it's a demonstration
*  that it's the machines will always be humans in what I call closed systems. The moment you build
*  a closed system, no matter how the system is called chess, go, shoggy, daughter,
*  machines will prevail simply because they will bring down number of mistakes. Machines don't
*  have to solve it. They just have to the way they outplay us. It's not by just being more intelligent.
*  It's just by by doing something else. But eventually, it's just it's capitalizing on
*  our mistakes. When you look at the chess machines ratings today in compared compare this to Magnus
*  Carlsen is the same as comparing Ferrari to Usain Bolt. It's the the gap is is I mean, by
*  chess standards is insane. 34 3500 to 2800 2850 on Magnus. It's like difference between Magnus and
*  an ordinary player from an open international tournament. It's not because machine understandings
*  better than Magnus Carlsen, but simply because it's steady. Machine has steady hand. And I think
*  that is what we we we we have to learn from 1997 experience, and from further encounters with
*  computers and sort of the the current state state affairs with Alpha Zero, you are beating other
*  machines. The idea that we can compete with computers in so called intellectual fields.
*  It's it's it was wrong from the very beginning. It's just it's by the way, the 1997 match was not
*  the first victory of machines over all grandmasters, grandmasters. Yeah, no, actually,
*  it's I played against first decent chess computers from late from late 80s. So I played with the
*  prototype of Deep Blue called Deep Thought in 1989 to rapid chess games in New York. I won handily
*  to both games. We played against new chess engines like Fritz and other programs. And then it's the
*  was Israeli Junior that appeared in 1995. Yeah, so there were there were several programs. I you know,
*  I lost few games in Blitz. I lost one match against the computer chess engine 1994 rapid chess. So I
*  lost one game to Deep Blue in 1996 match the man the match I won. Some people you know, tend to forget
*  about it that I won the first match. Yes. But it's it's we we made a very important psychological
*  mistake thinking that the reason we lost Blitz matches five five minutes games, the reason we
*  lost some of the rapid chess matches 25 minutes just because we didn't have enough time. If you
*  play a longer match, we will not make the same mistake. Nonsense. So yeah, we had more time,
*  but we still make mistakes and machine also has more time and machines machine will always you
*  know, will always be steady and consistent compared to humans instabilities and inconsistencies.
*  And today we are at a point where yes, nobody talks about you know, humans playing as machines
*  that machines can offer handicap to top players are still you know, will will will be favoring.
*  I think we're just learning that is it's it's no longer human versus machines. It's about human
*  working with machines. That's what I recognized in 1998. That's after leaking my wounds and spending
*  one year and just you know, ruminating so the so what's happened in this match. And I knew that
*  though we still could plan against the machines, I had two more matches in 2003 playing both Deep
*  Fritz and Deep Junior both matches ended as a tie. Though these machines were not weaker,
*  at least I just probably stronger than Deep Blue. And by the way today, just app on your mobile
*  phone is probably stronger than Deep Blue. I'm not speaking about chess engines that are so much
*  superior. And by the way, when you analyze games we played against Deep Blue 1997 on your chess
*  engine, they'll be laughing. Yeah, so this is and it's also shows that's how chess change because
*  chess commentators, they look at some of our games like game four, game five, brilliant idea. Now you
*  ask Stockfish, you ask Houdini, you ask Commodore all the leading chess engines. Within 30 seconds,
*  they will show you how many mistakes both Gary and Deep Blue made in the game that was
*  a
*  Trumpet as the as a great chess match in 1997. Well, okay, so you've made an interesting if you
*  can untangle that comment. So now in retrospect, it was a mistake to see chess as the peak of human
*  intellect. Nevertheless, that was done for centuries. So in Europe, because you know,
*  you move to the Far East, they will go there. They had short games. Some of the games like, you know,
*  board games. Yes. Yeah, I agree. So if I push back a little bit, so now you say that, okay, but it was
*  a mistake to see chess as the epitome. And now, and then now there's other things maybe like language,
*  that conversation, like some of the things that in your view is still way out of reach of computers,
*  but inside humans, do you think? Can you talk about what those things might be? And do you think,
*  just like chess that might fall soon with the same set of approaches, if you look at Alpha Zero,
*  the same kind of learning approaches as the machines grow in size? No, no, it's not about
*  growing in size. It's about again, it's about understanding the difference between closed system
*  and open ended system. So you think that key difference, so the board games are closed in
*  terms of the rules, the actions, the state space, everything is just constrained. You think once you
*  open it, the machines are lost? Not lost, but again, the effectiveness is very different because
*  machine does not understand the moment it's reaching territory of diminishing returns.
*  It's the, to put it in a different way, machine doesn't know how to ask right questions. It can
*  ask questions, but it will never tell you which questions are relevant. So it's like about the,
*  it's a direction. So I think it's in human-machine relations, we have to consider so our role. And
*  many people feel uncomfortable that the territory that belongs to us is shrinking.
*  I'm saying, so what, you know, this is eventually will belong to the last few decimal points,
*  but it's like having so very powerful gun. And all you can do there is slightly, you know,
*  altered direction of the bullet, maybe, you know, 0.1 degree of this angle. But that means a mile
*  away, 10 meters of target. So that's, we have to recognize that is a certain unique human qualities
*  that machines in a foreseeable future will not be able to reproduce. And the effectiveness of
*  this cooperation, collaboration depends on our understanding what exactly we can bring into the
*  game. So the greatest danger is when we try to interfere with machine superior knowledge.
*  So that's why I always say that sometimes you'd rather have by reading this history,
*  pictures and radiology, you may probably prefer an experienced nurse than rather than having
*  top professor, because she will not try to interfere with machines understanding. So this,
*  it's very important to know that if machines knows how to do better things in 95%, 96% territory,
*  we should not touch it because it's, it's, it happened. It's like in chess,
*  recognize they do it better. See where we can make the difference. You mentioned AlphaZero.
*  It's actually a first step into what you may call AI because everything that's being called AI today
*  is just, it's one or another variation of what Claude Shannon characterized as a brute force.
*  It's a type A machine, whether it's Deep Blue, whether it's Watson and all these,
*  the modern technologies that are being competitive as AI, it's still brute force. It's the,
*  all they do, it's they do optimization. It's this, they are, you know, they keep, you know,
*  improving the way to process human generated data. Now AlphaZero is the first step towards,
*  you know, machine produced knowledge, which is by the way, it's quite ironic that the first company
*  that championed that was IBM. Oh, it's in bad gamma. Interesting. Yes. You just, you should,
*  you should look at IBM. It's a new gamma. It's the, it's the science, he's still working at IBM.
*  They had an early nineties. It's just, it's the, it's the program that played in the AlphaZero
*  type. So just trying to come up with own strategist, but because of success of Deep Blue,
*  this project had been not abandoned, but just, you know, it's, it's, it wasn't, it was put on
*  calls. And now we just, you know, it's, it's, it's, you know, it's, everybody talks about, about this,
*  the, the machines generated knowledge. So as revolutionary, and it is, but there's still,
*  you know, many open-ended questions. Yes. AlphaZero generates its own data. Many ideas that AlphaZero
*  generated in chess were quite intriguing. So I, I looked at these games with, not just with interest,
*  but with, you know, it's quite exciting to learn how machine could actually, you know, juggle all
*  the pieces and just play positions with a broken material balance, sacrificing material, always
*  being ahead of other programs, you know, one or two moves ahead by, by foreseeing the consequences,
*  not over calculating because machines, other machines were at least as powerful in calculating,
*  but it's having this unique knowledge based on discovered patterns after playing 60 million games.
*  Almost something that feels like intuition. Exactly. But there's one problem. Yeah. Now,
*  the simple question, if, if AlphaZero faces superior opponent, let's say another powerful computer
*  accompanied by a human who could help just to discover certain problems, because I already,
*  I look at many AlphaZero games. I visited their lab, you know, spoke to them, his team, and I,
*  I know there's certain weaknesses there. Now, if these weaknesses are exposed, then the question is,
*  how many games will it take for AlphaZero to correct it? The answer is hundreds of thousands,
*  even if it keeps losing it, it's just because the whole system is based. So it's now imagine so this
*  is you can have a human by just making a few tweaks. So humans are still more flexible. And,
*  and as long as we recognize what is, what is our role, where we can play sort of, so the most
*  valuable part in this collaboration. So it's, it will help us to understand what are the next steps
*  in human machine collaboration. Beautifully put. So let's talk about the thing that machines certainly
*  don't know how to do yet, which is morality. Machines and morality. It's another question that,
*  you know, just it's, it's, it's being asked all the time these days. And I think it's another
*  phantom that is haunting a general public because it's just being fed with this, you know,
*  illusions is that how can we avoid machines, you know, having bias, being prejudiced?
*  You cannot, because it's like looking in the mirror and complaining about what we see.
*  If you have certain bias in the society, machine will, will just follow it. It's just, it's, it's,
*  you know, you look at the mirror, you don't like what you see there. You can, you know,
*  you can break it. You can try to distort it or you can try to actually change something
*  just by yourself, by yourself. So it's, it's very important to understand is this, is that you cannot
*  expect machines to, to improve the ills of our society. And moreover, machines will simply,
*  you know, just, you know, amplified. Yes. Yeah. But the thing is people are more comfortable with
*  other people doing injustice with being biased. We're not comfortable with machines having the
*  same kind of bias. So that's a, that's an interesting standard that we play some machines
*  with autonomous vehicles. They have to be much safer with automated systems. Of course, of course
*  they're much safer. Statistically, they're much safer than, than, of course. Why would they,
*  it's not, of course it's, it's not given autonomous vehicles. You have to work really hard to make them
*  safer. I, I, I think it just, it goes without saying is the, the outcome of the, of this,
*  I would call it competition with comparison is very clear, but the problem is not about being,
*  you know, safer. It's the 40,000 people or so every year died in car accidents in the United States.
*  And it's, it's statistics. One accident with, with autonomous vehicle and it's front page of a
*  newspaper. So it's, it's, again, it's about psychological. So it's while people, you know,
*  kill each other in car accidents because they make mistakes, they make more mistakes. For me,
*  it's, it's, it's not a question. Of course we make more mistakes because we're human.
*  Yes. Machines also, and by the way, no machine will ever reach a hundred percent perfection.
*  That's another, that's another important fake story that, that, that is being fed to the public.
*  If machine doesn't reach a hundred percent performance is not safe. No, all you can ask
*  any computer, whether it's, you know, playing chess or, or doing the stock market calculations
*  or driving your autonomous vehicle, it's to make fewer mistakes. And yes, I know it's not, you know,
*  it's not easy for us to accept because, ah, if, you know, if you have two humans, you know,
*  colliding in their cars. Okay. It's like if one of one of these courses, autonomous vehicle. And by
*  the way, even if it's human's fault, terrible. How could you allow a machine to, ah, to, to,
*  to run without a driver at the wheel? So, you know, let's linger that for a second,
*  that double standard, the way you felt with your first loss against, ah, deep blue, were you
*  treating the machine differently than you would have a human or so what do you think about that
*  difference between the way we see machines and humans? No, it's the, at that time, you know,
*  for me it was a match and that's why I was angry because I believed that the match was not, you
*  know, fairly organized. So it's, it's, ah, ah, definitely there were unfair advantages for,
*  for IBM and I want to play there another match like a rubber match. So you're angered or
*  displeasure was aimed more like at the humans behind IBM versus the actual algorithm. Absolutely.
*  Look, I knew at the time, and by the way, I was objectively speaking, I was stronger at that time.
*  So that's, that probably added to my anger because I knew I could beat machine. Yeah. Yeah. So
*  that's, and that's the, and that's, I lost, and I knew I was not well prepared. So because they,
*  I have to give them credit. They did some good work, ah, from 1996 and I, but I still could beat
*  the machine. So I made too many mistakes. Also, this is the whole, it's this, the publicity around
*  the match. So I, I underestimated the effect, you know, just it's, and being called the, you know,
*  the, the, the brain's last stand. You know, it's okay. No, no, no pressure.
*  Okay. Well, let me ask. Uh, so I was born also in the Soviet Union. What lessons do you draw
*  from the rise and fall of the Soviet Union in the 20th century? When you just look at this
*  nation that is now looking, pushing forward into what Russia is, if you look at the long arc of
*  history of the 20th century, what do we take away? What do we take away from that?
*  I think the lesson of history is clear. Uh, undemocratic systems, totalitarian regimes,
*  systems that are based on controlling their citizens and just, uh, every aspect of their
*  life, not offering opportunities to, for private initiative, central planning systems, they doomed.
*  They're just, you know, they, uh, they cannot be driving force for innovation. So they,
*  in the history timeline, I mean, they could cause certain, you know, distortion of, of, of, uh,
*  the concept of progress. Uh, they, by the way, they may call themselves progressive, but we know
*  that is this, the damage that they cost to, to humanity is just, it's, it's, it's yet to be measured.
*  But at the end of the day, they fail. They fail. And it's, uh, and the end of the cold war was a
*  great triumph of the free world. It's not that the free world is perfect. It's very important to
*  recognize the fact that I always like to mention, you know, one of my favorite books, the Lord of
*  the Rings, that the, there's no, there's no absolute good, but there is an absolute evil.
*  Good, you know, comes in many forms, but we all, you know, it's being humans or being even, you
*  know, humans from fairy tales or just some sort of mythical creatures. It's the, you can always find,
*  uh, spots on the sun. So this is conducting war and just, and, and fighting for justice.
*  There are always things that, you know, can be easily criticized and human history is the,
*  is a never ending quest for perfection. Uh, but we know that there is absolute evil. We know it's,
*  for me, it's no clear, it's, I mean, it's nobody argues about Hitler being absolute evil,
*  but I think it's very important to recognize Stalin was absolute evil. Communism caused more damage
*  than any other ideology, uh, in the 20th century. And unfortunately, while we all know that fascism
*  was condemned, but there was no nurburg for communism. And that's why we could see,
*  you know, still is the, uh, this, the successors of Stalin are feeling far more comfortable.
*  So you, you, as one of them, you highlight a few interesting connections actually between
*  Stalin and Hitler. I mean, they're, they're in, in terms of the, uh, adjusting or clarifying
*  the, the history of war war two, which is very interesting. Of course we don't have time. So let
*  me ask you, you can ask it. I just, I just recently delivered a speech in Toronto at 80th anniversary
*  of Molotov-Ribbentrop pact. It's something that I believe, you know, just, you know, has,
*  must, must be taught in the schools that the world war two, uh, uh, had been started by two
*  dictators by signing these, these, uh, criminal, criminal treaty collusion of two tyrants in August
*  1939, that led to the beginning of the world, world war two. And the fact is that eventually
*  Stalin had no choice but to join allies because Hillary attacked him. So it just doesn't, you know,
*  eliminated the fact that Stalin helped Hitler to start world war two. And he was one of the
*  beneficiaries at early, at early stage by annexing a part of Eastern Europe. And as a result of the
*  world war two, he annexed almost entire Eastern Europe. And for many Eastern European nations,
*  the end of the world war two was the beginning of, of communist occupation. So Putin,
*  you've talked about as a man who stands between Russia and democracy, essentially today,
*  you've been a strong opponent and critic of Putin. Let me ask again, how much does fear
*  enter your mind and heart? So in 2007, there's this interesting comment from
*  Oleg Kalugin, KGB general. He said that I do not talk details. People who knew them are all
*  dead now because they were vocal. I'm quiet. There's only one man who's vocal and he may be
*  in trouble. World chess champion Kasparov. He has been very outspoken in his attacks on Putin.
*  And I believe he's probably next on the list. So clearly your life has been and perhaps continues
*  to be in danger. How do you think about having the views you have, the ideas you have being in
*  opposition as you are in this kind of context when your life could be in danger?
*  That's the reason I live in New York. So it was not my first choice, but I knew I had to
*  live in Russia at one point and among other places, New York is the safest. Is it safe?
*  No. I mean, it's just, it's the, I know what happens, what happened, what is happening with
*  many of Putin's enemies. But at the end of the day, I mean, what can I do? I could be very proactive
*  by trying to change things I can influence, but here are the facts. I cannot stop doing what I've
*  been doing for a long time. It's the right thing to do. I grew up with my family teaching me the
*  wisdom of self-dissidence. Do what you must and so be. I could try to be cautious by not
*  traveling to certain places where my security could be at risk. There are so many invitations
*  to speak at different locations in the world. And I have to say that many countries are just now,
*  are not destinations that I can afford to travel. My mother still lives in Moscow. I meet her a few
*  times a year. She was devastated when I had to leave Russia because since my father died in 1971,
*  so she was 33 and she dedicated her entire life to her only son. But she recognized in just a year
*  or so since I left Russia that it was the only chance for me to continue my normal life. So just
*  I mean to be relatively safe and to do what she taught me to do, to make the difference.
*  Do you think you will ever return to Russia? Or let me ask a different one.
*  When? Sooner than many people think because I think Putin regime is facing unsolvable
*  difficulties. And again, I read enough historical books to know that dictatorships they end
*  suddenly. It's just on Sunday dictator feels comfortable. He believes he's popular on Monday
*  morning. He's bust. The good news and bad news. I mean, the bad news is that I don't know when and
*  how Putin rule ends. The good news he also doesn't know.
*  Okay, well put. Let me ask a question that seems to preoccupy the American
*  mind from the perspective of Russia. One, did Russia interfere in the 2016 US election,
*  government sanction and future to will Russia interfere in the 2020 US election?
*  And what does that interference look like?
*  It's very old, you know, we had such an intelligent conversation
*  and you are ruining everything by asking such a stupid question.
*  It's been going downhill the entire way.
*  But it's it's it's it's insulting for my intellect.
*  Okay. Of course they did interfere. Of course they did absolutely everything to elect Trump.
*  I mean, they said it many times. It is this, you know, I met enough KGB colonels in my life to tell
*  you that, you know, just the way Putin looks at Trump. Yeah, this is the way looks and I don't have
*  to hear what he says what Trump says, you know, just is, I don't need to go through congressional
*  investigations. The way Putin looks at Trump is the way the KGB officers looked at the assets.
*  It's just and I think it's a very interesting question. I mean, I think it's a very interesting
*  question. It's just and falling to 2020, of course, they will do absolutely everything to help Trump
*  to survive because I think the damage that Trump's reelections could cause to America and to the free
*  world, it's just it's beyond one's imagination. I think basically if Trump is reelected, he will
*  ruin NATO because he's already heading in this direction. But now he's just he's still limited
*  by the reelection hurdles. If he's still in the office after November 2020, okay, January 2021,
*  I don't think about it. My problem is not just Trump because Trump is basically a symptom.
*  But the problem is that I don't see it's just it's the in American political horizon,
*  uh, politicians who could take on Trump, uh, for for all damage that he's doing for the free world,
*  not just things that just happened that went wrong in America. So there's the it seems to me that
*  the campaign political campaign on the democratic side is is fixed on certain important but still
*  secondary issues. Because when you have the foundation of the Republican Jeopardy,
*  you cannot talk about health care. I mean, understand how important it is,
*  but it's still secondary because the entire framework of American political life is at risk.
*  And you have Vladimir Putin just, you know, just, it's having free hands by by his by attacking
*  America and other free countries. And by the way, we have so much evidence about Russian interference
*  in Brexit in elections in almost every European country. And thinking that they will be shy of
*  attacking America in 2020. Now with with Trump in the office. Yeah, I think it's um,
*  yeah, it definitely diminishes the intellectual quality of our conversation.
*  I do what I can. Last question. If you can go back, just look at the entirety of your life,
*  you accomplished more than most humans will ever do. If you can go back and relive a single moment
*  in your life, what would that moment be? There are moments in my life when I think about
*  what could be done differently. But no experience, happiness, and joy and pride,
*  just just just to touch on it. It's the it's look, I made many mistakes in my life. So I just it's
*  the I know that at the end of the day, it's I believe in the butterfly effect. So it's the it's
*  the I knew moments where I could now if I'm there at that point in 89 and 93, you pick up a year,
*  I could improve my actions by not doing this stupid thing. But then how do you know that I
*  will have all other accomplishments? Yeah, I just I'm, I'm afraid that, you know, we just have to
*  just follow this, if you may call wisdom before is gum, you know, it's the life is this, you know,
*  it's this, it's a box of chocolate, and you don't know what's inside, but you have to go one by one.
*  So it's the I'm, I'm happy with who I am and where I am today. And I am very proud, not only with my
*  chess accomplishments, but that I made this transition. And since I left chess, you know,
*  I built my own reputation that had some influence on the game of chess, but not it's not, you know,
*  directly derived from from the game. I'm grateful for my wife, so help me to build this life. We
*  actually married in 2005. It was my third marriage that was that made mistakes in my life. But
*  and by the way, I'm close with two kids from my previous marriages. So that's that's the I'm,
*  you know, I managed to sort of to balance my life and, and here I live in New York. So we have two
*  kids born here in New York. It's, it's new life. And it's, you know, it's, it's busy. Sometimes I
*  wish I could, you know, I could limit my engagement in many other things that are still, you know,
*  taking time and energy. But life is exciting. And as long as I can feel that I have energy,
*  I have strengths, I have passion to make the difference. I'm happy.
*  I think that's a beautiful moment to end on Gary's placebo by sure. Thank you very much
*  for talking to me. Thank you.
