---
Date Generated: October 31, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 8051s
Video Keywords: ['michael mina', 'artificial intelligence', 'agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence podcast', 'lex fridman', 'lex podcast', 'lex mit', 'lex ai', 'lex jre', 'mit ai']
Video Views: 154227
Video Rating: None
Video Description: Michael Mina is an immunologist, epidemiologist, and physician at Harvard. Please support this podcast by checking out our sponsors:
- Brave: https://brave.com/lex
- Athletic Greens: https://athleticgreens.com/lex and use code LEX to get 1 month of fish oil
- ExpressVPN: https://expressvpn.com/lexpod and use code LexPod to get 3 months free
- Cash App: https://cash.app/ and use code LexPodcast to get $10

EPISODE LINKS:
Michael's Twitter: https://twitter.com/michaelmina_lab
Michael's Time article: https://time.com/5912705/covid-19-stop-spread-christmas/
Rapid Tests: https://www.rapidtests.org/

PODCAST INFO:
Podcast website: https://lexfridman.com/podcast
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/2lwqZIr
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/2nEwCF8
RSS: https://lexfridman.com/feed/podcast/
Full episodes playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLrAXtmErZgOdP_8GztsuKi9nrraNbKKp4
Clips playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLrAXtmErZgOeciFP3CBCIEElOJeitOr41

OUTLINE:
0:00 - Introduction
2:32 - Interacting between viruses and bacteria
6:45 - Deadlier viruses
10:17 - Will COVID-19 mutate?
11:51 - Rapid testing
29:15 - PCR vs rapid antigen tests
38:59 - Medical industrial complex
42:51 - Lex takes COVID test
49:35 - FDA and cheap tests
52:21 - Explanation of Elon Musk's positive COVID tests
59:29 - Role of testing during vaccine deployment 
1:02:58 - Public health policy
1:12:38 - A weather system for viruses
1:29:30 - Can a virus kill all humans?
1:35:09 - Engineering a deadly virus
1:39:51 - AlphaFold 2 and viruses
1:45:46 - Advice for young people
1:53:54 - Time as a buddhist monk
1:59:58 - Meditation
2:07:36 - Meaning of life

CONNECT:
- Subscribe to this YouTube channel
- Twitter: https://twitter.com/lexfridman
- LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/lexfridman
- Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/LexFridmanPage
- Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/lexfridman
- Medium: https://medium.com/@lexfridman
- Support on Patreon: https://www.patreon.com/lexfridman
---

# Michael Mina Rapid Testing, Viruses, and the Engineering Mindset  Lex Fridman Podcast #146
**Lex Fridman:** [December 18, 2020](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L-RuvUkcyJI)
*  The following is a conversation with Michael Mina. He's a professor at Harvard doing research
*  on infectious disease and immunology. The most defining characteristic of his approach to science
*  and biology is that of a first principles thinker and engineer focused not just on defining the
*  problem, but finding the solution. In that spirit, we talk about cheap rapid at home testing,
*  which is a solution to COVID-19 that to me has become one of the most obvious, powerful,
*  and doable solutions that frankly should have been done months ago and still should be done now.
*  As we talk about its accuracy is high for detecting actual contagiousness and hundreds of
*  millions can be manufactured quickly and relatively cheaply. In general, I love engineering solutions
*  like these even if government bureaucracies often don't. It respects science and data,
*  it respects our freedom, it respects our intelligence and basic common sense.
*  A quick mention of each sponsor, followed by some thoughts related to the episode. Thank you to
*  Brave, a fast browser that feels like Chrome but has more privacy preserving features. Athletic
*  Greens, the all-in-one drink that I start every day with to cover all my nutritional bases.
*  ExpressVPN, the VPN I've used for many years to protect my privacy on the internet. And Cash App,
*  the app I use to send money to friends. Please check out these sponsors in the description
*  to get a discount and to support this podcast. As a side note, let me say that I've always been
*  solution oriented, not problem oriented. It saddens me to see that public discourse disproportionately
*  focuses on the mistakes of those who dare to build solutions rather than applaud their attempt to do
*  so. Teddy Roosevelt said it well in his The Man in the Arena speech over 100 years ago. I should say
*  both the critic and the creator are important, but in my humble estimation, there are too many now
*  of the former and not enough of the latter. So while we spread the derisive words of the critic
*  on social media making it viral, let's not forget that this world is built on the blood,
*  sweat and tears of those who dare to create. If you enjoy this thing, subscribe on YouTube,
*  review it with 5 stars on Apple Podcasts, follow on Spotify, support on Patreon,
*  or connect with me on Twitter at Lex Friedman. And now here's my conversation with Michael Mina.
*  What is the most beautiful, mysterious or surprising idea in the biology of humans or viruses
*  that you've ever come across in your work? Sorry for the overly philosophical question.
*  Wow, well, that's a great question. You know, I love the pathogenesis of viruses. And
*  one of the things that I've worked on a lot is trying to understand how viruses interact with
*  each other. And so pre all this COVID stuff, I was really, really dedicated to understanding
*  how viruses impact other pathogens. So how if somebody gets an infection with one thing
*  or a vaccine, does it either benefit or harm you from other things that appear to be unrelated
*  to most people? And so one system which is highly detrimental to humans, but what I think is just
*  immensely fascinating is measles. And measles gets into a kid's body, the immune system picks it up
*  and essentially grabs the virus and does exactly what it's supposed to do, which is to take this
*  virus and bring it into the immune system so that the immune system can learn from it,
*  can develop an immune response to it. But instead, measles plays a trick, it gets into the immune
*  system, serves almost as a Trojan horse. And instead of getting eaten by these cells,
*  it just takes them over. And it ends up proliferating in the very cells that were supposed to
*  kill it. And it just distributes throughout the entire body gets into the bone marrow kills off
*  children's immune memories. And so it essentially what I found and what my research has found is
*  that this one virus was responsible for as much as half of all the infectious disease deaths in kids
*  before we started vaccinating against it because it was just wiping out
*  children's immune memories to all different pathogens, which is, you know, I think just
*  astounding. It's just amazing to watch it spread throughout bodies. We've done the studies in
*  monkeys and you can watch it just destroy and obliterate people's immune memories in the same
*  way that, you know, some parasite might destroy somebody's brain. Is that evolutionary just
*  coincidence? Or is there some kind of advantage to this kind of interactivity between pathogens?
*  Oh, I think in that sense, it's just coincidence. It probably is a good way for measles to
*  essentially be able to survive long enough to replicate in the body. It just replicates in the
*  cells that are meant to destroy it. So it's utilizing our immune cells for its own replication,
*  but in so doing, it's destroying the memories of all the other immunological memories. But there
*  are other viruses. So a different system is influenza and flu predisposes to severe bacterial
*  infections. And that I think is another coincidence. But I also think that there are
*  there are some evolutionary benefits that bacteria may hijack and sort of piggyback
*  on viral infections. Viruses can, they just grow so much quicker than bacteria. They replicate
*  faster. And so there's the system with viruses with flu and bacteria where the influenza has
*  these proteins that cleave certain receptors. And the bacteria want to cleave those same receptors,
*  they want to cleave the same molecules that gave entrance to those receptors.
*  So instead, the bacteria find found out like, hey, you know, we could just piggyback on these
*  viruses. They'll do it 100 or 1000 times faster than we can. And so then they just piggyback on
*  and they let flu cleave all these sialic acids. And then the bacteria just glom on and in the
*  wake of it. So there's all different interactions between pathogens that are just remarkable.
*  So does this whole system of viruses that interact with each other and so damn good
*  at getting inside our bodies, does that fascinate you or terrify you?
*  I'm very much a scientist. And so it fascinates me much more than it terrifies me. But knowing
*  enough, I know just how well, you know, we get the wrong virus in our population, whether it's
*  through some random mutation or whether it's this same COVID-19 virus. And it, you know, these things
*  are tricky. They're able to mutate quickly. They're able to find new hosts and rearrange
*  in the case of influenza. So what terrifies me is just how easily this particular pandemic could
*  have been so much worse. This could have been a virus that is much worse than it is. You know,
*  same thing with H1N1 back in 2009. That terrifies me if a virus like that was much more detrimental.
*  You know, that would be, it could be much more devastating. Although it's hard to say, you know,
*  the human species were worth, well, I hesitate to say that we're good at responding to things
*  because there are some aspects that were this particular virus, SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 has
*  found a sweet spot where it's not quite serious enough on an individual level that humans just
*  don't, we haven't seen much of a useful response by many humans. A lot of people even think it's a
*  hoax. And so it's led us down this path of, it's not quite serious enough to get everyone to respond
*  immediately and with the most urgency, but it's enough, it's bad enough that, you know, it's caused
*  our economies to shut down and collapse. And so I think, I know enough about virus biology to be
*  terrified for humans that, you know, it can, it just takes one virus, just takes the wrong one
*  to just obliterate us or not obliterate us, but really do much more damage than we've seen.
*  It's fascinating to think that COVID-19 is a result of a virus evolving together with like Twitter,
*  like figuring out how we can sneak past the defenses of the humans. So it's not bad enough.
*  And then the misinformation, all that kind of stuff together is operating in such a way that
*  the virus can spread effectively. I wonder, I mean, obviously a virus is not intelligent, but
*  there's a rhyme and a rhythm to the way this whole evolutionary process works and creates these
*  fascinating things that spread throughout the entire civilization.
*  Absolutely. It's, yeah, I'm completely fascinated by this idea of
*  a social media in particular, how it replicates, how it grows. You know, I've been, how it
*  inner, how it actually starts interacting with the biology of the virus, masks, who's going to get
*  vaccinated, politics, like these seem so external to virus biology, but it's become so intertwined
*  and it's interesting. And I actually think we could find out that, you know, the virus actually
*  becomes obviously not intentionally, but, you know, we could find that choosing people,
*  choosing not to wear masks, choosing, choosing not to counter this virus in a regimented and sort of
*  organized way effectively gives the virus more opportunity to escape. We can look at vaccines,
*  you know, we're about to, we're about to have one of the most aggressive vaccination programs the
*  world has ever seen, but we are unfortunately doing it right at the peak of viral transmission
*  when millions and millions of people are still getting infected. And when we do that, that just
*  gives this virus so many more opportunities. I mean, orders of magnitude more opportunity to
*  mutate around our immune system. Now, if we were to vaccinate everyone when there's not a lot of
*  virus, then there's just not a lot of virus. And so there's not going to be as many, you know,
*  I don't even know how many zeros are at the end of however many viral particles there are in the
*  world right now, you know, more than quadrillions, you know, and so if you assume that at any given
*  time, somebody might have trillions of virus in them and any given individual. So then, you know,
*  multiply trillions by millions and you know, you get a lot of viruses out there. And if you start
*  applying pressure, ecological pressure to this virus that, you know, when it's that abundant,
*  God, the opportunity for a virus to sneak around immunity, especially when all the vaccines are
*  identical, essentially, it's takes us one to mutate and then jumps takes one takes one in the
*  whole world, you know, and we have to, we have to not forget that this particular virus was one,
*  it was one opportunity and it has spread across the globe and there's no reason that can't happen
*  tomorrow. I knew, you know, it's scary. I have a million other questions in this direction,
*  but I'd love to talk about one of the most exciting aspects of your work, which is testing or rapid
*  testing. You wrote a great article in time on November 17th. This is like a month ago
*  about rapid testing titled how we can stop the spread of COVID-19 by Christmas. Let's
*  jot down the fact that this is a month ago. So maybe your timeline would be different,
*  but let's say in a month. So you've talked about this powerful idea for quite a while throughout
*  the COVID-19 pandemic. How do we stop the spread of COVID-19 in a month? Well, we, we use tests like
*  these, you know, so, so the only reason the virus continues spreading is because people spread it
*  to each other. This isn't, this isn't magic. Yes. And so there's a few ways to stop the virus
*  from spreading to each other. And that is you either can vaccinate everyone and vaccinating
*  everyone is a way to immunologically prevent the virus from growing inside of somebody and
*  therefore spreading. We don't know yet actually if this vaccine, if any of these vaccines are going to
*  prevent onward transmission. So, so that may or may not serve to be one opportunity. Certainly,
*  I think it will decrease transmission. But the other idea that we have at our disposal now,
*  we had it in May, we had it in June, July, August, September, October, November,
*  and now it's December. We still have it. We still choose not to use it in this country and in much
*  of the world. And that's rapid testing that is giving, it's empowering people to know
*  that they are infected and giving them the opportunity to not spread it to their loved
*  ones and their friends and neighbors and whoever else. We could have done this. We still can.
*  Today we could start. We have millions of these tests. These tests are simple paper strip tests.
*  They are inside of this thing is just a little piece of paper.
*  Now I can actually open it up here. There we go. So this, this is how we do it right here.
*  We have this little paper strip test. This is enough to let you know if you're infectious
*  with somewhere around the order of 99% sensitivity, 99% specificity. You can know
*  if you have infectious virus in you. If we can get these out to everyone's homes, build these,
*  make 10 million, 20 million, 30 million of them a day. You know, we make more bottles of Dasani
*  water every day. We can make these little paper strip tests. And if we do that and we get these
*  into people's homes so that they can use them twice a week, then we can know if we're infectious,
*  you know, is it perfect? Absolutely not. But is it near perfect? Absolutely. You know, and so if we
*  can say, hey, the transmission of this is, you know, for every hundred people that get infected
*  right now, they go on to infect maybe 130 additional people. And that's exponential growth. So 100
*  becomes 130. A couple days later, that 130 becomes another 165 people have now been infected.
*  And, you know, go over three weeks and 100 people become 500 people infected. Now it doesn't take
*  much to have those 100 people not infect 130, but infect 90. All we have to do is remove, say, 30,
*  40% of new infections from continuing their spread. And then instead of exponential growth,
*  you have exponential decay. So this doesn't need to be perfect. We don't have to go from 100 to 0.
*  We just have to go and have those 100 people infect 90. And those 90 people infect, you know, 82,
*  whatever it might be. And you do that for a few weeks and boom, you have now gone instead of 100
*  to 500, you've gone from 100 to 20. Yes, it's not very hard. And so the way to do that is to let
*  people know that they're infectious. I mean, I were perfect example right now, I this morning,
*  I use these tests to make sure that I wasn't infectious. Is it perfect? No, but it reduced
*  my odds 99%. I already was at extremely low odds because I spend my life quarantining these days.
*  Well, the interesting thing with this test, with the testing in general, which is why I love what
*  you've been espousing, and it's really confusing to me that this has not been taken on is it's one
*  an actual solution. That's those available for a long time. There's there doesn't seem to have been
*  solutions proposed at a large scale. And a solution that it seems like a lot of people
*  would be able to get behind. There's some politicization or fear of other solutions
*  that people have proposed, which is like lockdown. And there's a worry, you know,
*  especially in the American spirit of freedom, like you can't tell me what to do. The thing about tests
*  is it like empowers you with information, essentially. So like you it's it gives you
*  more information about your like your role in this pandemic. And then you can do whatever the hell
*  you want. Like it's all up to your ethics and so on. So like, and it's obvious that with that
*  information, people would be able to protect their loved ones and also do do their sort of
*  quote unquote duty for their country, right? This protect the rest of the country.
*  That's exactly right. I mean, it's just it's empowerment. But you know, this is a problem.
*  We have not put these into action in large part because we have a medical industry that doesn't
*  want to see them be used. We have a political and a regulatory industry that doesn't want to see them
*  be used. That sounds crazy. Why wouldn't they want them to be used? We have a very paternalistic
*  approach to everything in this country. You know, despite this country kind of being founded on
*  this individualistic ideal, pull yourself up from your bootstraps, all that stuff.
*  When it comes to public health, we have a bunch of ivory tower academics who want data, you know,
*  they want to see perfection. And we have this issue of letting perfection get in the way of actually
*  doing something at all, you know, doing something effective. And so we keep comparing these tests,
*  for example, to the laboratory based PCR test. And sure, this isn't a PCR test, but this doesn't
*  cost $100. And it doesn't take five days to get back, which means in every single scenario,
*  this is the more effective test. And we have, unfortunately, a system that's not about public
*  health. We have entirely eroded any ideals of public health in our country for the biomedical
*  complex, you know, this medical industrial complex, which overrides everything. And that's why,
*  you know, I'm just, can I swear on this part? Yes. I'm just so fucking pissed that these tests
*  don't exist. Meanwhile, and everyone says, you know, oh, we couldn't make these, you know,
*  that we could never do it. That would be such a hard, a difficult problem. Meanwhile, the vaccine
*  gets, we have, at the same time that we could have gotten these stupid little paper strip tests out
*  to every household, we have developed a brand new vaccine. We've gone through phase one, phase two,
*  phase three trials, we've scaled up its production. And now we have UPS and FedEx and all the logistics
*  in the world, getting freezers out to where they need to be. We have this immense, we see with when
*  it comes to sort of medicine, you know, something you're injecting into somebody, then all of a
*  sudden people say, oh, yes, we can. But you say, oh, no, that's too simple a solution, too cheap a
*  solution. No way could we possibly do that. It's this faulty thinking in our country, which, you
*  know, frankly is driven by big money, big, you know, the only time when we actually think that
*  we can do something that's maybe aggressive and complicated is when there's billions and billions
*  of dollars in it. You know, and I mean, on a difficult note, because this is part of your work
*  from before the COVID, it does seem that I saw a statistic currently that 40% would not be taken,
*  of Americans would not be taken a vaccine, some number like this. So you also have to acknowledge
*  that all the money that's been invested, like there doesn't appear to be a solution to deal with like
*  the fear, distrust that people have. I bet, I don't know if you know this number, but for taking
*  a strip like a rapid test like this, I bet you people would say, like the percentage of people
*  that wouldn't take it is in the single digits, probably. I completely think so. And you know,
*  there's a lot of people who don't want to get a test today. And that's because it gets sent to a
*  lab. It gets reported, it has all the stuff and we're a country which teaches people from the time
*  they're babies, you know, to keep their medical data close to them. We have HIPAA, we have all
*  these we have immense rules and regulations to ensure the privacy of people's medical data.
*  And then a pandemic comes around and we just assume that all that the average person is going
*  to wipe all that away and say, Oh, no, I'm happy giving out not just my own medical data, but also
*  to tell the authority is everyone who I've spent my time with so that they all get a call and are
*  pissed at me for giving up their names, you know, so people aren't getting tested. And they're
*  definitely not giving up their contacts when it comes to contact tracing. And so for so many
*  reasons that approach is failing. Not to even mention the delays in testing and things like
*  that. And so this is a whole different approach. But it's an approach that empowers people and
*  takes the power a bit away from the people in charge, you know, and that's what's that's
*  what's really grating on on, I think, public health officials who say, No, we need the data.
*  So they're effectively saying, if I can't have the data, I don't want the individuals, I don't
*  want the public to have their own data either. Yeah, which is a terrible approach to a pandemic
*  where we can't solve a public health crisis without actively engaging the public. It just
*  doesn't work. And, you know, and that's what we're trying to do right now, which is a terrible
*  approach. So first of all, there's a you have a really nice informative website, rapid test.org
*  information on this. I still can't believe this is not more popular. It's ridiculous. Okay, but
*  our one of the FAQs you have is a rapid test too expensive. So can can cost be brought down? Like
*  I pay I take a weekly PCR test and I think I pay 160 170 bucks a week. No, I mean, it's criminal.
*  Absolutely, we can get cost this this thing right here, cause less than $1 to make with everything
*  combined plus the swabs, you know, maybe a cost $1.50 could be sold for, frankly, it could be
*  sold for $3 and still make a profit if they want to sell it for five this one here. This is a
*  slightly more complicated one, but you can see, it's just got the exact same paper strip inside.
*  This is really it doesn't look like much, but it's kind of the cream of the crop in terms of
*  these rapid tests. This is the one that the US government bought and it is doing an amazing job.
*  It has a 99.9% sensitivity and specificity. So it's really it's really good. And so essentially,
*  the way it works is you just you use a swab, you put the once you you kind of use a swab in yourself,
*  you put the swab into these little holes here, I put some buffer on and you close it. And,
*  and a line will show up if it's positive and a line won't show up, but it's negative, it takes
*  five, 10 minutes. This whole thing, the this this can be made so cheap that the US government was
*  able to buy them by 150 million of them from Abbott for $5 a piece. You know, so anyone who says
*  that these are expensive, we have the proof is right here. This one edits, you know, it was eat
*  Abbott did not lose money on this deal. You know, they got $750 million for buying for selling 150
*  million of these at five bucks piece. All of these tests can do the same. So anyone who says
*  that these should be, you know, unfortunately, what's happening, though, is the FDA is only
*  authorizing all of these tests as medical devices. So what happens when you, if I'm a medical company,
*  if I'm if I'm a test production company, and I want to make this test, and I go through and the FDA,
*  at the end of my authorization, the FDA says, Okay, you know, you now have a medical device,
*  not a public health tool, but a medical device. And that affords you the ability to charge
*  insurance companies for it. Why would I ever as a, you know, in our capitalistic economy and and
*  sort of infrastructure, why would I ever not sell this for $30 when insurance will pay pay for it
*  or $100? You know, might only cost me 50 cents to make. But but by pushing all of these tests
*  through a medical pathway at the FDA, they what what extrudes out the other side is an expensive
*  medical device that's erroneously expensive, it doesn't need to be inflated in cost. But the
*  companies say, Well, I'd rather make fewer of them, and just sell them all for $30 a piece,
*  then make 10s of millions of them, which I could do, and sell them at a dollar marginal profit,
*  you know, and so it's a problem with our with our whole medical industry that we see tests only as
*  medical devices. And, you know, what I would like to see is for the government in the same way that
*  they bought 150 million of these from Abbott, they should be buying, you know, all of these tests,
*  they should be buying 20 million a day, and getting them out to people's homes, this virus
*  has cost trillions of dollars to the American people. It's closed down restaurants and stores,
*  and you know, obviously, the main streets across America have shut have shuttered.
*  It's killing people, it's killing our economy, it's killing lifestyles.
*  And this is an obvious solution. To me, this is exciting. This is like this is a solution. I wish,
*  like in April or something like that, to launch like the larger scale manufacturing deployment
*  of tests, doesn't matter what test they are. It's obviously the capitalist system would create
*  cheaper and cheaper tests that would be hopefully driving down to $1. So what are we talking about
*  in America? There's I don't know, 300 plus million people. So that means you want to be testing
*  regularly, right? So how many do you think is possible to manufacture? What would be the
*  ultimate goal to manufacture per month? Yep. So if we want to slow this virus and actually stop
*  it from transmitting achieve what I call herd effects, like vaccine herd immunity,
*  herd effects are when you get that R value below one through preventing onward transmission. If we
*  want to do that with these tests, we need about 20 million to 40 million of them every day,
*  which is not a lot in the United States. So we could do it. There's other ways you can have two
*  people in a household swab themselves and then put the swabs into the same tube and onto one test.
*  So you can pool. So you can get a two or three X gain in efficiency through pooling in the household.
*  You could do that in schools or offices too, where everyone just use a swab. There's two people,
*  there's two people, I mean, even if it's just standing in line at a public testing site or
*  something, you can just say, okay, these two are the last people to test or swab themselves. They
*  go into one thing and if it comes back positive, then you just do each person and it's rapid.
*  So you can just say to the people, one of you is positive, let's test you again. So there's
*  ways to get the efficiency gains much better. But let's say I think that the optimal number
*  right now that matches sort of what we can produce more or less today, if we want it,
*  is 20 million a day. Right now, one company that I don't have their test here, but one company is
*  already producing 5 million tests themselves and shipping them overseas. It's an American company
*  based in California called the Nova and they are giving 5 million tests to the UK every day.
*  And this is just because the federal government hasn't authorized these tests.
*  So without the support of the government. So yeah, so essentially if the government just
*  puts some support behind it, then yeah, you can get 20 million probably easy.
*  Oh yeah. I mean, just here I have three different companies. They all look similar. Well,
*  this one's closed, but these are three different companies right here. This is a fourth, Abbott.
*  This is a fifth. This is a sixth. These two are a little bit different.
*  Do you mind if in a little bit, would you take some of these?
*  Yeah, let's do it. We can absolutely do them.
*  So you have a lot of tests in front of you. Could you maybe explain some of them?
*  Absolutely. So there's a few different classes of tests that I just have here. And there's more
*  tests. There's many more different tests out in the world too. These are one class of tests.
*  These are rapid antigen tests that are just the most bare bones, paper strip tests. These
*  are, this is the type that I want to see produced in the tens of millions every day.
*  It's so simple. You know, you don't even need the plastic cartridge. You can just, you can just make
*  the paper strip and you could have a little tube like this that you just dunk the paper strip into.
*  You don't actually need the plastic, which I'd actually prefer because if we start making tens
*  of millions of these, this becomes a lot of waste. So I'd rather not see this kind of waste
*  be out there. And there's a few companies, Quidel is making a test called the quick view,
*  which is just this. It's a, they've gotten rid of all the plastic.
*  And for people who are just listening to this, we're looking at some very small tests that fit in
*  the palm of your hand. And they're basically paper strips fit into different containers.
*  And that's hence the comment about the plastic containers.
*  These are just injection molded, I think. And they're, you know, they can build them
*  at high numbers, but then they have to like place them in there appropriately and all this stuff.
*  So it is a bottleneck or some somewhat of a bottleneck in manufacturing.
*  The actual bottleneck, which the government I think should use the Defense Productions
*  Act to build up is the, there's a nitrocellulose membrane, laminated membrane on this that allows
*  the material, the buffer with the swab mixture to flow across it. So the way these work,
*  they're called lateral flow tests. And you take a swab, you swab the front of your nose,
*  you dunk that swab into some buffer, and then you put a couple of drops of that buffer onto
*  the lateral flow. And just like paper, if you dip a piece of paper into a cup of water,
*  the paper will pull the water up through capillary action. This actually works very similarly.
*  It flows through somewhat of capillary action through this nitrocellulose membrane.
*  And there's little antibodies on there, these little proteins that are very specific,
*  in this case for antigens or proteins of the virus. So these are antibodies similar to how,
*  to the antibodies that our body makes from our immune system, but they're just printed on these
*  lateral flow tests and they're printed just like a little line. So then you slice these all up into
*  individual ones. And if there's any virus on that buffer as it flows across, the antibodies grab
*  that virus and it creates a little reaction with some colloids in here that cause it to turn dark.
*  Just like a pregnancy test, one line means negative, it means a control strip worked,
*  and two lines mean positive. If you get two lines, it just means you have virus there,
*  you're very, very likely to have virus there. And so they're super simple. It is the exact
*  same technology as pregnancy tests. It's the technology, this particular one from Abbott,
*  this has been used for other infectious diseases like malaria. And actually, a number of these
*  companies have made malaria tests that do the exact same thing. So they just co-opted the same
*  form factor and just changed the antibodies so it picks up SARS-CoV-2 instead of other infections.
*  Is it also the Abbott one? Is it also a strip? Yep. Yeah, this Abbott one here is, in this case,
*  instead of being put in a plastic sheath, it's just put in a cardboard thing and literally glued on.
*  I mean, it looks like nothing. It's just the simplest thing you could imagine.
*  The exterior packaging looks very Apple-like. It's nice.
*  It does, yeah. Yeah, so it's nice when it comes in. This is how they're packaged.
*  And they don't have to. These are coming in individual packages, again, because they're
*  really considered individual medical devices, but you could package them in bigger packets.
*  You want to be careful with humidity so they all have a little, one of those
*  humidity-removing things and oxygen-removing things. So this is one class, these antigen tests.
*  If we could just pause for a second, if it's okay. Could you just briefly say what is an antigen test
*  and what other tests there are out there, like categories of tests? Sure. Just really quick.
*  So the testing landscape is a little bit complicated, but I'll break it down. There's
*  really just three major classes of tests. We'll start with the first two. The first two tests are
*  just looking for the virus or looking for antibodies against the virus. So we've heard
*  about serology tests, or maybe some people have heard about it. Those are a different kind of
*  tests. They're looking to see, has somebody in the past, does somebody have an immune response
*  against the virus, which would indicate that they were infected or exposed to it. So we're not
*  talking about the antibody tests. I'll just leave it at that. They actually can look very similar
*  to this or they can be done in a laboratory. Those are usually done from blood, and they're
*  looking for an immune response to the virus. So that's one. Everything I'm talking about here is
*  looking for the virus itself, not the immune response to the virus. And so there's two ways
*  to look for the virus. You can either look for the genetic code of the virus, like the RNA,
*  just like the DNA of somebody's human cells, or you can look for the proteins themselves,
*  the antigens of the virus. So I like to differentiate them. If you were a PCR test
*  that looks for RNA in, let's say if we made it against humans, it would be looking for the DNA
*  inside of our cells, that would be actually looking for our genetic code. The equivalent
*  to an antigen test is sort of a test that actually is looking for our eyes or our nose or physical
*  features of our body that would delineate. Okay, this is Michael, for example. And so
*  you're either looking for a sequence or you're looking for a structure. The PCR tests that a
*  lot of people have gotten now and they're done in labs usually are looking for the sequence of the
*  virus, which is RNA. This test here by a company called Detect, this is one of Jonathan Rothberg's
*  companies. He's the guy who helped create modern day sequencing and all kinds of other things.
*  So this Detect device, that's the name of the company, this is actually a rapid RNA detection
*  device. So it's almost like a PCR like test and we could even do it here. It's really, it's a
*  beautiful test in my opinion, works exceedingly well. It's going to be a little bit more expensive,
*  so I think it could confirm, could be used as a confirmatory test for these.
*  Is there a greater accuracy to it?
*  Yes, I would say that there is a greater accuracy. There's also a downfall though of PCR and tests
*  that look for RNA. They can sometimes detect somebody who is no longer infectious. So you
*  have the RNA test and then you have these antigen tests. The antigen tests look for structures,
*  but they're generally only going to turn positive if people have actively replicating virus in them.
*  And so what happens after an infection dissipates, you have, you've just gone from having sort of a
*  spike. So if you get infected, maybe three days later, the virus gets into exponential growth
*  and it can replicate to trillions of viruses inside the body. Your immune system then kind
*  of tackles it and beats it down to nothing. But what ends up in the wake of that, you just had
*  a battle. You had this massive battle that just took place inside your upper respiratory tract.
*  And because of that, you've had trillions and trillions of viruses go to zero essentially.
*  But the RNA is still there. It's just, it's these remnants in the same way that if you go to a crime
*  scene and blood was sort of spread all over the crime scene, you're going to find a lot of DNA.
*  There's tons of DNA. There's no people anymore, but there's a lot of DNA there. Same thing happens
*  here. And so what's happening with PCR testing is when people go and use these exceedingly high
*  sensitivity PCR tests, people will stay positive for weeks or months after their infection has
*  subsided, which has caused a lot of problems in my opinion. It's problems that the CDC and the FDA and
*  doctors don't want to deal with. But I've tried to publish on it. I've tried to suggest that this
*  is an issue, both to New York Times and others. And now it's unfortunately kind of taken on a life
*  of its own of conspiracy theorists thinking. They call it a case-demic. They say, oh, PCR is
*  detecting people who are false positive. They're not false positives. They're late positives,
*  no longer transmissible. I think the way you, like what I saw in rapid tests,
*  .org, I really like the distinction between diagnostic sensitivity and contagiousness
*  sensitivity. That website is so obvious that it's painful because it's like, yeah, that's what we
*  should be talking about is how accurately is a test able to detect your contagiousness?
*  And you have different plots that show that actually there's, you know, that antigen test,
*  the test we're looking at today, like rapid tests, actually really good at detecting
*  contagiousness. Absolutely. It all mixes back with this whole idea of the medical industrial
*  complex. You know, in this country and in most countries, we have almost entirely defunded
*  and devalued public health, period. You know, we just have. And what that means is that
*  we don't even, we don't have a language for it. We don't have a lexicon for it. We don't have a
*  regulatory landscape for it. And so the only window we have to look at a test today is as a
*  medical diagnostic test. And that becomes very problematic when we're trying to tackle a public
*  health threat and a public health emergency. By definition, this is a public health emergency
*  that we're in. And yet we keep evaluating tests as though the diagnostic benchmark is the gold
*  standard, where if I'm a physician, I am a physician, so I'll put on that physician hat
*  for a moment. And if I have a, if I have a patient who comes to me and wants to know if their symptoms
*  are a result of them having COVID, then I want every shred of evidence that I can get to see,
*  does this person currently or did they recently have this infection inside of them?
*  And so in that sense, the PCR test is the perfect test. It's really sensitive. It will find the
*  RNA if it's there at all, so that I could say, you know, yeah, you have a low amount of RNA left.
*  You might have been, you said your symptoms started two weeks ago. You probably were infectious two
*  weeks ago and you have lingering symptoms from it. But that's a physical, that's a medical
*  diagnosis. It's kind of like a detective recreating a crime scene. They want to go back there and
*  recreate the pieces so that they can assign blame or whatever might be. But that's not public health.
*  In public health, we need to only look forward. We don't want to go back and say, well, was this
*  person, are there symptoms because they had an infection two weeks ago? In public health, we
*  just want to stop the virus from spreading to the next person. And so that's where we don't care
*  if somebody was infected two weeks ago. We only care about finding the people who are infectious
*  today. And unfortunately, our regulatory landscape fails to apply that knowledge to evaluate these
*  tests as public health tools. They're only evaluating the tests as medical tools. And therefore,
*  we get all kinds of complaints that say this test, which detects 99 plus, you know, 99.8%
*  of current infectious people, by the FDA's rubric, they'll say, no, no, that's only 50% sensitive.
*  And that's because when you go out into the world and you just compare this against PCR positivity,
*  most people who are PCR positive in the world right now at any given time
*  are post-infectious. They're no longer infectious because you might only be infectious for five days,
*  but then you'll remain PCR positive for three or four or five weeks.
*  And so when you go and just evaluate these tests and you say, okay, this person's PCR positive,
*  does the rapid antigen test detect that? More often than not, it's no. But that's because those
*  people don't need isolation. You know, they're post-infectious. And this is a, it's become much
*  more of a problem than I think even the FDA themselves is recognizing because they are
*  unwilling at this point to look at this as a public health problem requiring public health tools.
*  We'll definitely talk about this a little bit more because the concern I have is that like
*  a bigger pandemic comes along. What are the lessons we draw from this and how we move forward?
*  Let's talk about that in a bit. But sort of, can we discuss further the lay of the land here of the
*  different tests before us? Absolutely. So I talked about PCR tests and those are done in the lab or
*  they're done essentially with a rapid test like this, the detect, and we can even try this in a
*  moment. It goes into a little heater. So you might have one of these in a household or
*  one of these in a nursing home or something like that, or in an airport. Or you could have one that
*  has a hundred different outlets. This is just to heat the tube up. These are the rapid tests.
*  They are super simple, no frills. You just swab your nose and you put the swab into a buffer
*  and you put the buffer on the test. So we can use these right now if you want.
*  All the tests we're talking about, they're usually swabbing the nose.
*  There are some saliva tests coming about and these can all work potentially with saliva. They just
*  have to be recalibrated. But these swabs are really not bad. This isn't the deep swab that
*  goes way back into your nose or anything. This is just a swab that you do yourself right in the
*  front of your nose. So if you want to do it, do you mind if I... Sure. Yeah. Why don't we start
*  with this one? Because this is Abbott's Binax Now test and it's pretty simple. This is the swab from
*  the Abbott test. That's correct. That's the swab from the Abbott test. So what I'm going to do to
*  start is I'm going to take this buffer here, which is just the buffer that goes onto this test.
*  So this is a brand new one. I just opened this test out. I'm going to just take six drops of
*  this buffer and put it right onto this test here. Two, three, four, five, six.
*  And now you're going to take that swab, open it up. Yep. And now just wipe it around into
*  the front of your nose. Do a few circles on each nostril. That looks good.
*  This always makes me want to sneeze. Yeah. Okay. Now I'm going to have you do it yourself.
*  I'm getting emotional. Hold it parallel to the test. So put the test down on the table. Yep.
*  And then go into that bottom hole. Yep. And push forward so that you can start to see it in the
*  other hole. There you go. Now turn. Once it hits up against the top, just turn it three times. One,
*  two, three, and sort of. Yep. And now you just close to pull off that adhesive sticker there.
*  And now you just close the whole thing.
*  And that's it. That's it. Now what we will see is we will see a line form. What's happening now
*  is the buffer that you put in there is now moving up onto the paper strip test. And it has
*  the material from the swab in there. And so what we'll see is a line will form. And that's going
*  to be the control line. And then we'll also see the, ideally we'll see no line for the actual
*  test line. And that's because you should be negative. So one line will be positive and
*  two lines will be negative. It's very cool. There's this purple thing creeping up onto the
*  control line. That's perfect. That's what you want to be seeing. So you want to see that.
*  So right now you essentially want to see that that blue line turns pink or purple-y color.
*  There's a blue line that's already there, printed. It should turn sort of a purple,
*  pink color. And ideally there will be no additional line for the sample.
*  And if there is, that's the 99 point whatever percent accuracy on that means I have, I'm
*  contagious. That would mean that you're likely contagious or you likely have an infectious virus
*  in you. What we can do because one of the things that my plan calls for is because sometimes these
*  tests can get false positive results. It's rare, maybe 1% or in the case of this Binax now this
*  Abbott test, 0.1%. So one in a thousand, one in 500, something like that can be falsely positive.
*  What I recommend is that when somebody is positive on one of these, you turn around and you
*  immediately test on a different test. You could either do it on the same, but for as good measure
*  you want to use a separate test that is somewhat orthogonal, meaning that it shouldn't turn
*  falsely positive for the same reason. This particular test here, this Detect test,
*  because it is looking for the RNA and not the antigen, this is an amazingly accurate test and
*  it's sort of a perfect gold standard or confirmatory test for any of these antigen tests. So one of the
*  recommendations that I've had, especially if people start using antigen tests before you get
*  onto a plane or as what I call entrance screening, if somebody's positive you don't immediately tell
*  them your positive go isolate for 10 days. You tell them let's confirm on one of these, on a
*  Detect test that is because it's completely orthogonal, it's looking for the RNA instead of
*  the antigen. There is no reason, no biological reason that both of these should be falsely positive.
*  So if one's falsely positive and the other one is negative, especially because this one's more
*  sensitive, then I would trust this as a confirmatory test. If this one's negative then
*  the antigen test would be considered falsely positive. It does look like there's only a
*  single line, so this is very exciting news. That's right, yep. It says wait 15 minutes to see both
*  lines, but in general if somebody's really going to be positive that line starts showing up within
*  a minute or two. So you want to keep the whole, we'll keep watching it for the whole 15 minutes
*  as it's sitting there, but I would say you're knowing that you've had PCR tests recently and
*  all that, you know. The odds are pretty good. The odds are very good. The packaging, very iPhone-like,
*  I'm digging the sexy packaging. I'm a sucker for good packaging. Okay. So then there's this
*  test here which is, you know, this is another, you know, it's funny, let me open this up and show you,
*  this is a really nice test. It's another antigen test. Works the exact same way as this essentially,
*  but what you can see is it's got like lights in it and a power button and stuff. This is called an
*  Allume test which is, you know, fine and it's a really nice test to be honest, but it has to
*  pair with an iPhone and so it's good as a, I think that this is going to become, there's a lot of
*  use for this from a medical perspective, you know, where you want good reporting. This can, because
*  it pairs with an iPhone, it can immediately send the report to a department of health, whereas these
*  paper strip tests that they're just paper, they don't report anything unless you want to report it.
*  Okay, so I'm going to just pick it up and pick it apart. And so you can see is there's like
*  fluorescent readers and little lasers and LEDs and stuff in there. You can actually see the lights
*  going off and there's a paper strip test right inside there, but you can see that there's like
*  a whole circuit board and all this stuff, right? And so this is the kind of thing that, you know,
*  the FDA is looking for, for like home use and things like that because it's kind of foolproof,
*  like you can't go wrong with it. It pairs with an iPhone, so you need Bluetooth, so it's going to be
*  more limited. It's a great test. Don't get me wrong, it's as good as any of these, but you know,
*  when you compare this thing with a battery and a circuit board and all this stuff, it's got its
*  purpose, but you know, it's not a public health tool. I don't want to see this made in the tens
*  of millions a day and thrown away. FDA likes that kind of stuff. FDA loves this stuff, you know,
*  because they can't get it out of their mind that this is a public health crisis. You know, we need,
*  we need, I mean, just look at the difference here. Something with flashing lights is essential.
*  It's got batteries, it's got a Bluetooth thing. It's a great test, but you know, it's, to be honest,
*  it's not any better than this one. And so, you know, I want this one. It's nice and all. The
*  form factor is nice, but, and it's really nice that it goes to Bluetooth. But it goes against
*  the principle of just 20 million a day. Exactly. The easy solution. Everybody has it. You can
*  manufacture and probably, you could have probably scaled this up in a couple of weeks. Oh, absolutely.
*  These companies, I mean, the rest of the world has these. They can be scaled up. They already exist.
*  You know, SD biosensors, one company is making tens of millions a day, not coming to the United
*  States, but going all over Europe, going all over Southeast Asia and East Asia. So they exist. The
*  U.S. is just, you know, we can't get out of our own way. I wonder why somebody, I don't know if
*  you were paying attention, but somebody like an Elon Musk type character. So he was really into
*  doing some like obvious engineering solution. Like this at home rapid test seems like a very Elon Musk
*  thing to do. I don't know if you saw, but I had a little Twitter conversation with Elon Musk.
*  Does he not like what was he? Do you know what his thoughts are on rapid testing?
*  Well, he was using a slightly different one, one of these, but that requires an instrument called
*  the BD Veritor. And he got a false positive or no, I shouldn't say he didn't necessarily get a false
*  positive. He got discrepant results. He did this test four times. He got two positives, two negatives.
*  But then he got a PCR test and it was a very low positive result. So I think what happened is he
*  just tested himself at the tail end of an, this was actually right before he was about to send those.
*  It was the day of essentially that he was sending the astronauts up to the space station the other
*  day. So he used, he was using these rapid tests because he wanted to make sure that he was good
*  to go in and he got discrepant results. Ultimately they were correct, but you know, two were negative,
*  two were positive. But what really happened once he got his, he shared his PCR results and they were
*  very low positive. So really what was happening is my guess is he found himself right at the edge of
*  his positivity, of his infectiousness. And so, you know, the test worked how it was supposed to work.
*  It probably had, he used it two days earlier, it would have been screaming positive. You know,
*  he wouldn't have gotten discrepant results, but he found himself right at the edge by the time he
*  used the test. So the PCR would always pick it up because it's still, because that will still stay
*  positive then for weeks potentially. But the rapid antigen test was starting to falter, not in a bad
*  way, but just he probably was really no longer particularly infectious. And so it was kind of
*  when it gets to be a very low viral load, it becomes stochastic. It's fascinating. This,
*  this duality. So one, you can think from an individual individual perspective, it's unclear
*  when you take four and a half are positive, half a negative, like what are you supposed to do?
*  But from a societal perspective, it seems like if just one of them is positive, just stay home
*  for a couple of days for a while. So when you're a CEO of a company and launching astronauts to
*  space, you may not want to rely absolutely on the antigen test as a, as a thing by which you steer
*  your decisions of like 10,000 plus people companies. But us individuals just living in the world,
*  if you can, if it comes up positive, then you make decisions based on that. And then that scales
*  really nicely to an entire society of hundreds of millions of people. And that's how you get that
*  virus to a stop spreading. That's exactly right. You don't have to catch every single one. And,
*  and the nice thing is that these will, these will catch the people who are most infectious.
*  So with the Elon Musk, it generally that test, we don't have the counterfactual, we don't have
*  his results from three days earlier when he was probably most infectious.
*  But my guess is the fact that it was catching two out of the four, even when he was down at a CT
*  value of really, really very, very low viral load on the PCR test suggests that it was doing its job.
*  And you just want to, and the nice thing is because these can be produced at such scale,
*  getting a pot, getting one positive doesn't immediately have to mean 10 days of isolation.
*  That's the CDC is more conservative stance to say, if you're positive on any test,
*  stay home for 10 days and isolate. But here, people would just have more tests. So the
*  recommendation should be test daily. If you turn positive test daily until you've been negative
*  for 24, 48 hours and then go back to work. And the nice thing there is, you know, right now,
*  people just aren't testing because they don't want to take 10 days off. They're not getting paid for
*  it. So they can't take 10 days off. Do you know what Elon thinks about this idea of rapid testing
*  for everybody? So I understood I need to look at that whole Twitter thread. So I understand his
*  perhaps criticism of he had like a conspiratorial tone from my vague look at it of like, what's
*  going on here with these tests? But what does he actually think about this very practical to me
*  engineering solution of just deploying rapid tests to everybody? It seems like that's a way to open
*  up the economy in April. Well, to be honest, I've been trying to get in touch with them again,
*  I think take somebody like Elon Musk, with the engineering prowess within his ranks, you know, to
*  easily, easily build these at the 10s of millions a day, he could build the machines from scratch,
*  you know, a lot of the companies they buy the machines from South Korea, or Taiwan, I believe,
*  we don't have to like we can build these machines. They're simple to build.
*  Put somebody like Elon Musk on it, you know, take some of his best engineers and say, look,
*  the US needs a solution in two weeks, build these machines, you know, figure it out, he'll do it,
*  he could do it. This is a guy who is literally he has started multiple entirely new industries.
*  He has the capital to do it without the US government if he wanted to. And you know what,
*  it would the return on investment for him would be huge. But frankly, the return on investment in
*  the country would be hundreds of billions of dollars, because it means we could get society
*  open. So I know that he his first experience with these rapid tests was confusing, which is how I
*  ended up having this Twitter kind of conversation with him very briefly. But I think that if he
*  understood sort of a little bit more, and I think he does, I really love to talk to him about it,
*  because I think he could totally change the course of this pandemic in the United States,
*  single handedly, you know, he loves grand things. Yeah, I think out of all the solutions I've seen,
*  this is this is the obvious, like, engineering solution to at least a pandemic of this scale.
*  I love that you say the engineering solution. So this is something I've been really trying to,
*  I'm an engineer, you know, my previous history was all engineering. And that's really how I think.
*  I then went into medicine and PhD world. But, but, but I, I think that the world like one of
*  the major catastrophes or one of the major problems is that we have physicians making
*  the decisions about public health and a pandemic when really we need engineers.
*  This is an engineering problem. And so what I've been trying to do, I actually really want to,
*  you know, start a whole new new field called public health engineering.
*  You know, and so I've been, I love that eventually, I want to try to bring it to MIT and get MIT to
*  want to start a new department or something. That's a doubly awesome idea.
*  That is really okay. I love this. I love every aspect. I love everything you're talking about.
*  A lot of people believe because vaccines started being deployed currently that, you know, we are
*  no longer in need of a solution. We're no longer in need of slowing the spread of the virus.
*  To me, as I understand it, it seems like this is the most important time
*  to have something like a rapid testing solution. Can you kind of break that apart?
*  What's the role of rapid testing currently in the next, you know, what is it? Three,
*  four months maybe is even more. This, the vaccine rollout isn't going to be as peachy as everyone
*  is hoping, you know, and I hate to be the Debbie Downer here, but
*  there's a lot of unknowns with this vaccine. You've already mentioned one, which is there's
*  a lot of people who just don't want to get the vaccine. You know, I hope that that might change
*  as things move forward and people see their neighbors getting it and their family getting
*  it and it's safe and all. We don't know how effective the vaccine is going to be after two
*  or three months. We've only measured it in the first two or three months, which is a massive
*  problem, which we can go into biologically because there's reasons to, very good reasons to believe
*  very good reasons to believe that the efficacy could fall way down after two or three months.
*  We don't know if it's going to stop transmission and if it doesn't stop transmission,
*  then we're not, then there's, you know, herd immunity is much, much more difficult to get
*  because that's all based on transmission blockade. And, and frankly, we don't know how easily
*  we're going to be able to roll it out. Some of the vaccines need really significant cold chains,
*  have very short half-lives outside of that cold chain. We need to organize massive
*  numbers of people to be able to distribute these. Most hospitals today are saying that they're not
*  equipped to hire the right people to be even administering enough of these vaccines. And
*  then a lot of the hospitals are frustrated because they're getting much smaller allocations than they
*  were expecting. So I think right now, like you say, right now is the best time, you know,
*  besides three or four or five or six months ago, right now is the best time to get these rapid
*  tests out. And we need to, I mean, the country has the capacity to build them. We have, we're
*  shipping them overseas right now. We just need to flip a switch, get the FDA to recognize that
*  there's more important things than diagnostic medicine, which is the effectiveness of the
*  public health program when we're dealing with a pandemic. They need to authorize these as
*  public health tools or, you know, frankly, the president could. You know, there's a lot of other
*  ways to get these tests to not have to go through the normal FDA authorization program, but maybe
*  have the NIH and the CDC give a stamp of approval. And if we could, we could get these out tomorrow.
*  And that's where that article came from, you know, how we can stop the spread of this virus by
*  Christmas. We could, you know, now it's getting late. And so we have to keep updating that time
*  frame, maybe putting Christmas in the title wasn't, I should have said how we can stop the spread of
*  this virus in a month. It would be a little bit more timeless, but we could do it. You know,
*  we really could do it. And that's the most frustrating part here is that we're just
*  choosing not to as a country. We're choosing to bankrupt our society because some people
*  at the FDA and other places just can't seem to get their head around the fact that this is a
*  public health problem, not a bunch of medical problems. Is there a way to change that policy
*  wise? So this is, this is a much bigger thing that you're speaking to, which I, I love in terms of the
*  the MIT engineering approach to public health. Is there a way to push this? Is this, is this a
*  political thing like where some Andrew Yang type characters need to like start screaming about it?
*  Is it more of an Elon Musk thing where people just need to build it and then on Twitter start
*  talking crap to politicians for not doing it? What, what, what, what are the ideas here?
*  I think it's a little both. I think it's political on the one hand, and I've certainly been talking
*  to Congress a lot, talking to senators. Are they receptive? Oh yeah. I mean, that's the crazy
*  thing. Everyone but the FDA is receptive. I mean, it's, it's astounding. I mean, I advise, you know,
*  informally, I advise the president and the president elects teams. I talk to Congress,
*  I talk to senators, governors, you know, and then all the way down to, you know, mayors of towns and
*  things. And I held, I mean, months ago, I held a roundtable discussion with mayor Garcetti,
*  who's the mayor of LA. And I brought all the, all the companies who make these things. This
*  was in like July or August or something. I brought all the companies to the table and said, okay,
*  how can we get these out? And unfortunately, it went nowhere because the FDA won't authorize
*  them as public health tools. The nice thing is that this is one of the nice and frustrating
*  things. This is one of the few bipartisan things that I know of. And like you said, it's,
*  it's a real solution. Lockdowns aren't a solution. They're, they're a, a, a emergency
*  bandaid to a catastrophe that's currently happening. They're not a solution. And they're
*  definitely not a public health solution. If we're taking a more holistic view of public health,
*  which includes people's wellbeing, includes their psychological wellbeing, their financial wellbeing,
*  you know, just stopping a virus, if it means that all those other things get thrown under the bus,
*  is not a public health solution. It's a, it's a, it's a myopic or very tunnel visioned approach
*  to a viral virus that's spreading. This is a simple solution with essentially no downfall.
*  You know, there is no, nothing bad about this. It's just giving people
*  a result and it's bipartisan. You know, the most conservative and the most liberal people,
*  everyone just wants to know their status. You know, nobody wants to have to wait in line for
*  four hours to find out their status on Monday, a week later on Saturday, you know, it just doesn't
*  make any sense. It's a useless test at that point. And everyone recognizes that. So why, why do you
*  think like the mayor of LA, why do you think politicians are going for these,
*  from my perspective, like kind of half-assed lockdowns, which is not, so I have seen good
*  evidence that like a complete lockdown can work, but that's in theory, it's just like communism in
*  theory can work. Like theoretically speaking, but it just doesn't, at least in this country,
*  we don't, I think it's just impossible to have complete lockdown. And still politicians are going
*  for these kind of lockdowns that everybody hates. That's really, really hurting small businesses.
*  Like why are they going for that? And big businesses. Yeah, all businesses. But like
*  basically not just hurting, they're destroying small businesses, right? Which is going to have
*  potentially, I mean, yeah, I've been reading as I don't shut up about the rise and fall of the
*  third Reich and you know, there's economic effects that take a decade to, you know, there's going to
*  be long lasting effects that may, may be destructive to the very fabric of this nation. So why are they
*  doing it and why are they not using the solution? Is there, is there any intuition? I mean, you've
*  said that FDA has a stranglehold, I guess, on this whole public health problem. Is that, is that all
*  it is? That's honestly, it's pretty much all it is. The companies, so the somebody like Mayor Garcetti
*  or Governor Baker, Cuomo, Newsom, any of these, DeWine, I've talked to, you know, I've talked to a
*  lot of governors in this country at this point. And the, and of course the federal government,
*  including, including the president's own teams, you know, and, and the heads of the NIH, the heads
*  of the CDC about this. The problem is the tests don't exist in this country at the level that we
*  need them to right now to make that kind of policy, to make that kind of program. They could, but they
*  don't. And so what that means is that when Mayor Garcetti says, okay, what are my actual options
*  today? Despite these sounding like a great idea, he looks around and he says, well, they're not
*  authorized. You know, they don't exist right now for at-home use. And from his perspective, he's
*  not about to pick that fight with the FDA. And it turns out nobody is. Why, why are people afraid of,
*  it seems like an easy struggle, strong fight. It's like, well, it's not a, so they don't see it as a
*  fight. They think that the FDA is the end all be all. Everyone thinks the FDA is the end all be all.
*  And, and so they just defer, everyone is deferential, including the heads of all the
*  other government agencies, because that is their role. But what everyone is failing to see is that
*  the FDA doesn't even have a mandate or a remit to evaluate these tests as public health tools. So
*  they're just falling in this weird gray zone where the FDA is saying, look, we evaluate medical
*  products. That's the only thing that I meant. Like Tim Stenzel, head of in vitro diagnostics at the
*  FDA, he's doing what he's, what his job is, which is to evaluate public, which is to evaluate
*  medical tools. Unfortunately, this is where I think the CDC has really blundered. They haven't made
*  the right distinction to say, look, okay, the FDA is evaluating these for doctors to use and all that.
*  But, you know, we're the CDC and we're the public health agency of this country. And we recognize
*  that these tools require a different authorization pathway and a different use, not for the
*  difference to medical devices and public health. And I guess FDA is not designed for this public
*  health, especially in emergency situations. And they actually explicitly say that. I mean,
*  when I go and talk to Tim, you know, he's a very reasonable guy. But when I talk to him, he says,
*  look, we don't, we just do not evaluate a public health tool. If you're telling me this is a public
*  health tool, great, go and use it. And so I say, okay, great, we'll go and use it. And then the
*  comment is, but, you know, does it give a result back to somebody? I say, well, yes, of course,
*  it gives a result back to somebody. It's being done in their home. So then it's defined as a medical
*  tool. Can't use it. So it's stuck in this gray zone where we, unfortunately, there's this weird
*  definition that any tool, any, any test that gives a result back to an individual is defined by
*  CMS, Centers for Medicaid Services, as a medical device requiring medical authorization. But then
*  you go and ask, it gets crazier because then you go and ask Seema Verma, the head of CMS, you know,
*  okay, can these be authorized as, as public health tools and not fall under your definition of a
*  medical device? So then the FDA doesn't have to be the ones authorizing it as a public health tool.
*  And Seema Verma says, oh, well, we don't, we don't have any jurisdiction over, over point of care
*  and, and sort of rapid devices like this. We only have jurisdiction over lab devices.
*  So it's like nobody has ownership over it, which means that they just keep, they stay in this
*  purgatory of, of not being approved. And so this is where I think, frankly, it needs a president,
*  it needs a presidential order to just unlock them to say, this is more important than
*  you know, having a prescription. And in fact, I mean, really what's happening now, because there
*  is this sense that tests are public health tools, even if they're not being defined as such,
*  the FDA now is pretty much, not only are they not authorizing these as public health tools,
*  what they're doing by, by authorizing what are effectively public health tools as medical devices,
*  they're just diluting down the practice of medicine. Right. I mean, his answer right now,
*  unfortunately is, well, I don't know why you, you want these to be sort of available to everyone
*  without a prescription. We've already said that a doctor can write a whole prescription for a,
*  for a whole college campus. It's like, well, if you're going in that direction, then that's
*  no longer medicine. Having a doctor write a prescription for a college campus, for everyone
*  on the campus to have repeat testing. Now, now we're just in the territory of, of eroding medicine
*  and eroding all of the legal rules and reasons that we have prescriptions in the first place.
*  So it's just everything about it is just destructive instead of just making a simple
*  solution, which is these are okay as public health tools, as long as they meet X and Y metrics
*  go and CDC can put their stamp of approval on them. Well, what do you think? Sorry, if I'm stuck on
*  this, your mention of MIT and public health engineering, right? I mean, it has a sense of,
*  I talked to competition biology folks. It's always exciting to see computer scientists
*  start entering the space of biology. And there's actually a lot of exciting things that happened
*  because of that, trying to understand the fundamentals of biology. So from the engineering
*  approach to public health, what kind of problems do you think can be tackled? What kind of disciplines
*  are involved? Like, do you have ideas on this in the space? Oh, yeah. I mean, I can speak to, to
*  one of the major activities that I want to do. So what I normally do in my research lab is develop
*  technologies that can take a drop of somebody's blood or some saliva and profile for hundreds of
*  thousands of different antibodies against every single pathogen that somebody could be possibly
*  exposed to. So this is all new technology that we've been developing more from a,
*  from a bioengineering perspective. But then I use a lot of the mathematics
*  tools to A, interpret that. But what I really want to do, for example, to kind of kick off this new
*  field of what I consider public health engineering is to create, maybe it's a little ambitious, but
*  create a weather system for viruses. I want us to be able to open up our iPhones, plug in our zip
*  code and get a better sense, get a probability of why my kid has a runny nose today. Is it COVID?
*  Is it a rhinovirus and adenovirus or is it flu? And, you know, we can do that. We can start building
*  the rules of virus spread across the globe, both for pandemic preparedness, but also for
*  just everyday use in the same way that people used to think that predicting the weather was
*  going to be impossible. Of course, we know that's not impossible now. Is it always perfect? No. But
*  does it offer, does it completely change the way that we go about our days? Absolutely.
*  You know, I envision, for example, right now, we open up our iPhone, we plug in a zip code,
*  and if it tells us it's going to rain today, we bring an umbrella. So, you know, in the future,
*  it tells us, hey, you know, there's a lot of SARS-CoV-2 in your community. Instead of grabbing
*  your umbrella, you grab your mask. You know, we don't have to have masks all the time. But if we
*  know the rules of the game that these viruses play by, we can start preparing for those. And,
*  you know, every year, we go into every flu season blindfolded with our hands tied behind our back,
*  just saying, I hope this isn't a bad flu season this year. I mean, this is, you know, we're in the
*  21st century. You know, it's becoming, you know, I mean, we have the tools at our disposal now to
*  not have that attitude. This isn't like 1920s. You know, we can just say, hey, this is going to
*  be a bad flu season this year. Let's act accordingly and with a targeted approach.
*  Now, we don't, for example, we don't just use our umbrellas all day long every single day
*  in case it might rain. We don't board up our homes every single day in case there's a hurricane.
*  We wait. And if we know that there's one coming, then we act for a small period of time accordingly.
*  And then we go back and we've prepared ourselves in like these little bursts
*  to not have it ruin our days. I can't tell you how exciting that vision of the future is. I think
*  that's incredible. And it seems like it should be within our reach. The just these like weather maps
*  of viruses floating about the earth. And it seems obvious. It's one of those things where
*  right now it seems like maybe impossible. And then looking back like 20 years from now,
*  we'll wonder like, why the hell this hasn't been done way earlier, though, one difference in
*  weather. I don't know if you have interesting ideas in this space, the difference in weather
*  and viruses is it includes the collection of the data includes the human body potentially. And
*  that means that there is some as with the contact tracing question, there's some concern about
*  privacy. There seems to be this dance that's really complicated. You know, with Facebook
*  getting a lot of flack for basically misusing people's data or, you know, just whether it's
*  perception or reality, there's certainly a lot of reality to it to where they're not good stewards
*  of our private data. So there's this weird place where it's like obvious that if we do if we
*  collect a lot of data about human beings, and maintain privacy and maintain all like basic
*  respect for that data, just like honestly, common sense respect for the data, that we can do a lot
*  of amazing things for the world like a weather map for viruses. Is there a way forward to gain
*  trust of people? Or to do this? To do this? Well, do you have ideas here? How big is this problem?
*  I think it's it's a central problem. There's a couple central problems that need to be solved.
*  One, how do you get all the samples? That's not actually too difficult. I'm actually I have a
*  pilot project going right now with getting samples from across all the United States.
*  Tens of thousands of samples every week are flowing into my lab, and we process them.
*  So it's taking the it's taking like one of the basically the biology here in chemistry
*  and converting that into numbers. That's exactly right. So what we're doing, for example, there's a
*  lot of people who go to the hospital every day, a lot of people who donate blood, people who donate
*  plasma. So one of the projects that I have, I'll get to the privacy question in a moment, but this,
*  so what I want to do is the name that I've given this is global, a global immunological observatory.
*  You know, there's no reason not to have that. Good name. I've said, you know, instead of saying,
*  well, how do we possibly get enough people on board to send in samples all the time? Well,
*  just go to the source, you know, so there's a company in Massachusetts that makes 80% of all
*  the instruments that are used globally to collect plasma from plasma donors. So I went to this
*  company, Heminetics, and said, you know, is there a way you have 80% of the global market on plasma
*  donations? Can we start getting plasma samples from healthy people that use your machines?
*  So that hooked me up with this company called Octo Pharma, and Octo Pharma has a huge reach
*  and sat in offices all over the country where they're just collecting people's plasma,
*  they actually pay people for their plasma, and then that gets distributed to hospitals.
*  And all this stuff is anonymous plasma. So I've just been collecting anonymous samples.
*  And we're processing them in this case for COVID antibodies to watch from January up through
*  December, we're able to watch how the virus entered into the United States and how it's
*  transmitting every day, you know, across the US. So we're getting those results organized now,
*  and we're going to start putting them publicly online soon to start making at least a very rough
*  map of COVID. But that's the type of thinking that I have in terms of like, how do you actually
*  capture huge numbers of specimens? You can't ask everyone to participate on sort of a, I mean,
*  maybe could if you have the right tools, and you can offer individuals something in return like 23
*  and me does. You know, that's a great way to get people to give specimens and they get results back.
*  So with these technologies that I've been building, along with some collaborators at Harvard,
*  we can come up with tools that people might actually want. So I can offer you your immunological
*  history, I can say, give me a drop of your blood on a filter paper, mail it in, and I will be able
*  to tell you every infectious disease you've ever encountered. And maybe even when you encountered
*  it roughly, I could tell you, do you have COVID antibodies right now? Do you have Lyme disease
*  antibodies right now? Flu, EEE, you know, all these different viruses. Also peanut allergies,
*  you know, milk allergies, anything. You know, if your immune system makes a response to it,
*  we can detect that response. So all of a sudden, we have this very valuable technology that on the
*  one hand gives people maybe information they might want to know about themselves, but on the other
*  hand becomes this amazingly rich source of big data, you know, to enter into this global immunological
*  observatory sort of mathematical framework to start building these maps, these epidemiological
*  tools. But you asked about privacy. And absolutely, that's essential to keep in mind, first and
*  foremost. So privacy can be, you can keep these samples 100% anonymous. They're just when I get
*  them, they show up with nothing. They're literally just tubes. I know a date that they were collected
*  and a zip code that they're collected from or even just sort of a county level ID. With an IRB and
*  with ethical approval and with the people's consent, we can maybe collect more data, but that would
*  require consent. But then there's this other approach, which I'm really excited about, which
*  is certainly going to gain some scrutiny, I think. But we'll have to figure out where it comes into
*  play. But I've been recognizing that we can take somebody's immunological profile and we can make a
*  biological fingerprint out of it. And it's actually stable enough so that I could take your blood.
*  Let's say I don't know who you are, but you sent me a drop of blood a year ago, and then you sent
*  me a drop of blood today. I don't know that those two blood spots are coming from the same person.
*  They're just showing up in my lab. But I can run our technology over that and it just gives me
*  your immunological history. But your immunological history is so unique to you and the way that your
*  body responds to these pathogens is so unique to you that I can use that to tether your two samples.
*  I don't know who you are. I know nothing about you. I only know when those samples came out of a
*  person. But I can say, oh, these two samples a year apart actually belong to the same person.
*  Yeah, so there's sufficient information in that immunological history to match the samples.
*  Or from a privacy perspective, that's really exciting. Does that generally hold for humans?
*  So you're saying there's enough uniqueness to match?
*  Yeah, because it's very stochastic, even twins. So this, I believe, we haven't published this yet.
*  We will soon.
*  You have a twin too, right?
*  I do have a twin. I have an identical twin brother, which makes me interested in this.
*  He looks very much like me.
*  Oh, is that how that works?
*  And, you know, DNA can't really tell us apart. But this tool is one of the only tools in the
*  world that could tell twins apart from each other. It could still be accurate enough to say this
*  blood, you know, it's like 99.999% accurate to say that these two blood samples came from the same
*  individual. And it's because it's a combination both of your immunological history, but also how
*  your unique body responds to a pathogen, which is random. The way that we make antibodies is,
*  is by and large, it's got an element of randomness to it. How the cells when they make an antibody,
*  they chop up the genetic code to say, okay, this is the antibody that I'm going to form for this
*  pathogen. And you might form, if you get a coronavirus, for example,
*  you might form hundreds of different antibodies, not just one antibody against the spike protein,
*  but hundreds of different antibodies against all different parts of the virus. So that gives this
*  really rich resolution of information that when I then do the same thing across hundreds of different
*  pathogens, some of which you've seen, some of which you haven't, it gives you an exceedingly
*  unique fingerprint that, that is sufficiently stable over years and years and years to
*  essentially give you a barcode, you know, and, and I don't have to know who you are,
*  but I can know that these two specimens came from the same person somewhere out in the world.
*  It's so fascinating that there's this trace, your life story in the space of viruses,
*  in the space of pathogen, like, like these, or, you know, because there's this entire universe
*  of these organisms that are trying to destroy each other. And then your little trajectory
*  through that space leaves a trace. And then you can look at that trace. That's fascinating. And
*  I mean, there's, okay, that data period is just fascinating. And the vision of making that data
*  universally connected to where you can make, like infer things and just like with the weather is
*  really fascinating. And there's probably artificial intelligence applications there,
*  start making predictions, start finding patterns. Exactly. We're doing a lot of that already. And,
*  and that's how, how do we have this going? You know, I've been trying to get this funded for years
*  now and I've spoken to governments, you know, everyone says cool idea, not going to do it.
*  You know, why do we need it? Oh, really? The why do you need it? Why do you need it? And, and of
*  course, now, you know, I've been I've wrote in 2015 about this. Why we would why this would be
*  useful. And of course, now we're seeing why it would be useful. Had we had this up and running
*  in 2019, had we had it going, we were drawing blood from, you know, or getting blood samples
*  from hospitals and clinics and blood donors from New York City, let's just say, you know, that
*  could have we didn't run the first PCR test for Coronavirus until probably a month and a half or
*  two months after the virus started transmitting in New York City. So it's like with the rain,
*  we didn't start wearing umbrella or taking out umbrellas. Exactly. For two months,
*  but different than the rain, we couldn't actually see that it was spreading. Right. Now.
*  And so Andrew Cuomo had no choice but to leave the city open. You know, there were hints that
*  maybe the virus was spreading in New York City. But you know, he didn't have any data to back it
*  up. No data. And so it was just week on week and week. And he didn't have any information to really
*  go by to allow him to have the firepower to say we're closing down the city. This is an emergency,
*  we have to stop spread before it starts. And so they waited until the first PCR test were coming
*  about. And then the moment they started running PCR tests, they find out it's everywhere. You know,
*  and so that was a disaster because of course, New York City, you know, was just hit so bad because
*  nobody was, you know, we were blind to it. We didn't have to be blind to it. And the nice thing
*  about this technology is we wouldn't have with the exact same technology we had in 2017. We could have
*  detected this novel coronavirus spreading in New York City in 2020. Not because we changed, not
*  because we are actually actively looking for this novel coronavirus. But because we would see,
*  we would have seen patterns in people's immune responses using AI or just frankly using our
*  just the raw data itself. We could have said, hey, it looks like there's something that looks like
*  known coronaviruses spreading in New York, but there's gaps, you know, there's for some reason,
*  people aren't developing an immune response to this coronavirus that seems to be spreading to
*  these normal things that, you know, and it just looks, the profile looks different.
*  And we could have seen that and immediately, especially since we had an idea that there was
*  a novel coronavirus circulating in the world, we could have very quickly and easily seen, hey,
*  clearly we're seeing a spike of something that looks like a known coronavirus, but people are
*  responding weirdly to it. Our AI algorithms would have picked it up. And just our basic heck, you
*  could have put it in an Excel spreadsheet, we would have seen it. So.
*  Some basic visualization would have shown.
*  Exactly. We would have seen spikes and they would have been kind of like off, you know,
*  immune responses that the shape of them just looked a little bit different,
*  but they would have been growing and we would have seen it and it could have
*  saved tens of thousands of lives in New York City.
*  So to me, the fascinating question, everything we've talked about, so both the huge collection
*  of data at scale, just super exciting. And then the kind of obvious at scale solution
*  to the current virus and future ones is the rapid testing. Can we talk about the future
*  of viruses that might be threatening the, our very existence? So do you think like a future
*  natural virus can have an order of magnitude greater effect on human civilization than anything
*  we've ever seen? So something that either kills all humans or kills, I don't know, 60, 70% of humans.
*  So some like something, something we can't even imagine. Is that, is that something that you think
*  is possible because it seems to have not have happened yet. So maybe like the entirety, whoever
*  the programmer is of the simulation that sort of launched the evolution for the big bang seems to
*  not want to destroy us humans, or maybe that's the natural side effect of the evolutionary process that
*  humans are useful. But do you think it's possible that the evolutionary process will produce
*  a virus that will kill all humans? I think it could. I don't think it's likely.
*  And the reason I don't think it's likely is, well, on the one hand, it hasn't happened yet.
*  In part because mobility is a recent phenomena. People weren't particularly mobile
*  until fairly recently. Now, of course, now that we have people flying back and forth across the
*  globe all the time, the chances of global pandemics has escalated exponentially, of course. And so
*  on the one hand, that's part of why it hasn't happened yet. We can look at things like Ebola.
*  Now Ebola, we don't, we haven't generally had major Ebola epidemics in the past, not because Ebola
*  wasn't transmitting and infecting humans, but because they were, it was largely affecting and
*  infecting humans in disconnected communities. So you see in rural parts of Africa, for example,
*  in Western Africa, you might end up having isolated Ebola outbreaks, but there weren't
*  connections that were fast enough that would allow people to then spread it into the cities. Of course,
*  we saw back in 2014-15, a massive Ebola outbreak that wasn't because it was a new strain of Ebola,
*  but it was because there's new inroads and connections between the communities and people
*  got it to the city. And so we saw it start to spread. So that should be a little bit for,
*  you know, foreshadowing of what's to come. And now we have this pandemic, we had 2009,
*  we have this. There is a benefit or there is sort of a natural check. And this is a kind of
*  Latke-Voltaire predator-prey dynamic kind of systems, ecological systems and mathematics that
*  if you have something that's so deadly, people will respond more, maybe with a greater panic,
*  greater sense of panic, which alone could, you know, destroy humanity. But at the same time,
*  we now know that we can lock down. We know that that's possible. And so if this was a worse virus
*  that was actually killing 60% of people as infecting, we would lock down very quickly.
*  My biggest fear, though, is let's say that was happening. You need serious lockdowns if you're
*  going to keep things going. So the only reason we were able to keep things going during our lockdowns
*  is because it wasn't so bad that we were still able to have people work in the grocery stores,
*  still have people work in the shipping to get the food onto the shelves. So on the one hand,
*  we could probably figure out how to stop the virus. But can we stop the virus without starving?
*  You know, and I'm not sure that that if this was another acute respiratory virus that say had a
*  slightly say it transmitted the same way, but say it actually did worse damage to your heart,
*  but it was like a month later that people start having heart attacks in mass, you know, it's like
*  not just one offs but really severe. Well, that could be a serious problem for humanity.
*  So in some ways, I think that there are lots of ways that we could end up dying at the hand of
*  virus. I mean, we're already seeing it just I mean, my fear is still I think coronaviruses have
*  demonstrated a keen ability to destroy or to create outbreaks that can potentially be deadly
*  to large numbers of people. Flu strains that were still by and large my concern.
*  So you think the bad one might come from the flu, the influenza?
*  Yeah, they the replication cycle, they're able to genetically recombine in a way that
*  coronaviruses aren't. They have segmented genomes, which means that they can just swap out whole
*  parts of their genomes, no problem, repackage them. And then boom, you have a whole antigenic shift,
*  not a drift. What that means is that any on any occasion any day of the year, you can have
*  boom, a new whole new virus that didn't exist yesterday. And now with farming and industrial
*  livestock, we're seeing animals and humans come into contact much more, just the the
*  opportunities for an influenza strain that is unique and deadly to humans increases all the
*  while transmission and mobility has increased. It's just a matter of time, in my opinion.
*  What about from immunology perspective of the idea of engineering a virus? So not just the virus
*  leaking from a lab or something, but actually being able to understand the protein, like the
*  everything about what makes a virus enough to be able to figure out ways to
*  maybe targeted or untargeted attack by our community. Yeah. Yeah. Is there is that something,
*  obviously, that's somewhere on the list of concerns. But is that anywhere close of the like the top 10
*  highlights along the nuclear weapons and so on that we should be worried about? Or is the natural
*  pandemic the really the one that's much greater concern? I would say that the former, the
*  former that manmade viruses and genetically engineered viruses should be right up there with
*  the greatest concerns for humanity right now. You know, we know that the tools for better or worse,
*  the tools for creating a virus are there, you know, we can do it. I mean, heck, you know,
*  the human the human species is no longer vaccinated against smallpox. I didn't get
*  a smallpox vaccine. You didn't get a smallpox vaccine, at least I don't think. And, you know,
*  so if somebody wanted to make smallpox and, and distribute it to the world in some way, it could be
*  exceedingly deadly and and detrimental to humans. And that's not even that's not even sort of using
*  your imagination to create a new virus. That's one that we already have. Unlike the past,
*  when smallpox would circulate, you had large fractions of the community that was already
*  immune to it. And so it wouldn't spread or it would spread a little bit slower. But now we have
*  essentially in a few years, we'll have a whole global population that is susceptible. Let's look
*  at measles, we have an entire I mean, measles. I have, you know, there are some researchers in
*  the world right now, which for various reasons are working on creating a measles strain that evades
*  immunity. It's not for bioterrorism, at least that's not the expectation. It's for using measles
*  as an oncolytic virus to kill cancer. And the only way you can really do that is if your immune
*  system doesn't just you know, if you if you take a measles virus, and there's, you know, we don't
*  have to go into the details of why it would work, but it could work. Measles likes to target
*  potentially cancer cells. But to get your immune system not to kill off the virus, if you're trying
*  to use the virus to target it, you may want to make it blind to the immune system. But now imagine
*  we took some virus like measles, which has an R naught of 18 transmits extremely quickly. And
*  now we have essentially let's say we had a whole human race that is susceptible to measles. And
*  this is a virus that spreads orders of magnitude easier than this current virus. Imagine if you
*  were to plug something toxic or detrimental into that virus and release it to the world.
*  So it's possible to be both accidental and intentional. Absolutely. Yeah, and accident.
*  So Mark Lipsitch, he's a good colleague of mine at Harvard. We're both in the he's the director
*  of the Center for communicable disease dynamics from a faculty member. He's spoken very, very
*  forcefully and and and he's very outspoken about the dangers of gain of function testing,
*  where in the lab we are intentionally creating viruses that are exceedingly deadly under the
*  auspices of trying to learn about them so that if the idea is that if we kind of accelerate evolution
*  and make these really deadly viruses in the lab, we can be prepared for if that virus ever comes
*  about naturally or through unnatural means. The concern though is, okay, that that's one thing,
*  but what if that virus got out on somebody's shoe? Just what if, you know, if the if the
*  death if the effects of an accident are potential, potentially catastrophic, is it worth taking the
*  chances just to be prepared a little bit for something that may or may not ever actually
*  develop? And so it's a serious ethical quandary wherein how to both be prepared, but also not
*  cause a catastrophic mistake. As a small tangent, there's a recent really exciting breakthrough of
*  Alpha two of Alpha Fold two solving protein folding or achieving state of the art performance on
*  protein folding. And then I thought proteins have a lot to do with viruses. It seems like
*  being able to use machine learning to design proteins that achieve certain kinds of functions
*  will naturally allow you to use maybe down the line, not yet, but allow you to use machine
*  learning to design basically viruses, maybe like measles, like for good, which is like to attack
*  cancerous cells, but also for bad. Is that is that is that is that a crazy thought? Or is this a
*  natural place where this technology may go? I suppose is all technologies can, which is for good
*  and for bad. Do you think about the role of machine learning in this? Oh, yeah, absolutely. I mean,
*  Alpha Fold is amazing. You know, it's an amazing algorithm, a series of algorithms, and it does
*  demonstrate to me, it demonstrates just just how powerful you know, everything in the world has
*  rules. We just don't know the rules. You know, we often don't know them. But, you know, our brain
*  has rules, how it works. Everything is plus and minus. There's nothing in the world that's really
*  not at its most basic level, positive negative, you know, it's all obviously it's all just charge.
*  And, and that means everything you can figure it out with enough computational power and enough.
*  In this case, I mean, machine learning and AI is just one way to learn
*  rules. It's an empirical way to learn rules and it's but it's a profoundly powerful way.
*  And certainly now now that we are getting to a point where we can take a protein and know how it
*  folds, given its sequence, we can reverse engineer that we can say, okay, we want a protein to fold
*  this way, what is the sequence need to be? We haven't done that yet, so much. But it's just the
*  next iteration of all of this. So let's say somebody wants to develop a virus, and they want to
*  let's say somebody wants to develop a virus, it's going to start with somebody wanting to develop a
*  virus to defeat cancer, something good, you know, and so it will start with a lot of money
*  from the federal government, you know, for all the positives that will come out of it.
*  But we have to be really careful, because that will come about, there's no doubt in my mind,
*  that we will develop, we're already doing it, we engineer molecules all the time,
*  for specific uses, oftentimes, we take them from nature and then tweak them.
*  But now we can supercharge it, we can accelerate the pace of discovery, to not have it just be
*  discovery, we have it be true ground up engineering. Let's say you're trying to
*  make a new molecule to stabilize somebody with some retinal disease, right? So we come up with
*  some molecule that can improve the stability of somebody with retinal degeneration.
*  Just a small tweak to that, to say make a virus that causes the human race to become blind.
*  I mean, it sounds really conspiracy theory-ish, but it's not, you know, we're learning so much
*  about biology, and there's always an aphorism, I mean, heck, look at how AI and just Google searches,
*  those can be, you know, they are every single day, being leveraged by nefarious actors to
*  take advantage of people, to steal money, to do whatever it might be, eventually, probably,
*  to create wars, or already to create wars. And I mean, I don't think there's any question at this
*  point, behind disinformation campaigns. And so it's being leveraged, this thing that could
*  be wholly good, you know, is always going to be leveraged for bad. And so how do you balance that
*  as a species? I'm not quite sure. The hope is, as you mentioned previously, that there's some
*  that we're able to also develop defense mechanisms. And there's something about the
*  human species that seems to keep coming up with ways to just like on the deadline,
*  just at the last moment, figuring out how to avoid destruction. I think I'm like eternally
*  optimistic about the human race not destroying ourselves. But you could do a lot of things that
*  would be very painful. Yes. Well, we're doing it already, you know, just, I mean, we are seeing
*  how our regulation today, right, we did this thing, it started as a good thing, regulation
*  of medical products. But now it is, you know, unwillingly and unintentionally harming us,
*  our regulatory landscape, which was developed wholly for good in our country is getting in the
*  way of us deploying a tool that could stop our economies from having to be sort of sputteringly
*  closed, that could stop deaths from happening at the rate that they are. And it's, you know,
*  I think we will come to a solution, of course, now we're going to get the vaccine, and it's going to
*  make people lose track of like, why we even bother testing, which is a bad idea. But we're already
*  seeing that we have this amazing capacity to, to both do damage when we don't intend to do damage,
*  and then also to pull up when we need to pull up and, you know, stop complete catastrophe. And so,
*  it's, we are an interesting species in that way, that's for sure.
*  So there's a lot of young folks, undergrads, grads, they're also young, listen to this. So
*  is there, you've talked about a lot of fascinating stuff that's like, there's ways that things are
*  done, and there's actual solutions, and they're not always like intersecting. Do you have advice for
*  undergraduate students or graduate students, or even people in high school now, about a life,
*  about career, of how they might be able to solve real big problems in the world, how they should
*  live their life, in order to have a chance to solve big problems in the world?
*  It's hard. I struggle a little bit sometimes to give advice, because the advice that I give
*  from my own personal experience is necessarily distinct from the advice that would make other
*  people successful. I have unending ambitions to make things better, I suppose. And I don't see,
*  I don't see barricades where other people sometimes see barricades. Now, even just little
*  things, like when this virus started, I'm a medical director at Brigham and Women's Hospital,
*  and so I oversee, or help to oversee molecular virology diagnostics. So when this virus started,
*  wearing my epidemiology hat, and wearing my sort of viral outbreak hat, I recognized that this is
*  going to be a big virus that was important at a global level, even if the CDC and WHO weren't
*  ready to admit that it was a pandemic. It was obvious in January that it was a pandemic.
*  So I started trying to get a test built at the Brigham, which is one of Harvard's teaching
*  hospitals. The first encounters I had with the upper administration of the hospital were pretty
*  much no, why would we do that? That's silly. Who are you? And I said, well, okay, don't believe me,
*  sure. But I kept pushing on it. And then eventually I got them to agree. It was really only a couple
*  of weeks before the Biogen conference happened. We started building the test. I think they started
*  looking abroad and saying, okay, this is happening, sure. Maybe he was right. But then I went a step
*  further and I said, we're not going to have enough tests at the hospital. And so my ambition was to
*  get a better testing program started. And so I figured what better place to scale up testing
*  than the Broad Institute. Broad Institute is amazing, very high throughput, high efficiency
*  research institute that does a lot of genomic sequencing, things like that.
*  So I went to the Broad and I said, hey, there's this coronavirus that's obviously going to impact
*  our society greatly. Can we start modifying your high efficiency instruments and robots for
*  coronavirus testing? Everyone in my orbit, in the hospital world, just said, that's ridiculous.
*  How could you possibly plan to do that? It's impossible. And to me, it was the most dead
*  simple thing to do. But the higher ups and the people who think about... I think one of the most
*  important things is to recognize that most people in the world don't see solutions. They just see
*  problems. Because it's an easy thing to do. Thinking of problems and how things will go wrong
*  is really easy because you're not coming up with a brand new solution. And this to me was just a
*  super simple solution. Hey, let's get the Broad to help build tests. Every single hospital director
*  told me no, like it's impossible. My own superiors, the ones I report to in the hospital,
*  said, Mike, you're a new faculty member. Your ideas probably would be right, but you're too
*  naive and young to know that it's impossible. Obviously now the Broad is the highest
*  throughput laboratory in the country. And so I think my recommendation to people is as much
*  as possible, get out of the mode of thinking about things as problems. Sometimes you piss people off.
*  I could probably use a better filter sometimes to try to be not so upfront with certain things.
*  But it's just so crucial to always just see, to just bring it... Think about things in new ways
*  that other people haven't. Because usually there's something else out there. And one of the things
*  that has been most beneficial to me is that my education was really broad. It was engineering
*  and physics. And well, and then I became a Buddhist monk for a while. And so that gave me
*  a different perspective. But then it was medicine and immunology. And now I've brought all of it
*  together from a mathematics and biology and medicine perspective and policy and public health.
*  And I think that I'm not the best in any one of these things. I recognize that there are going
*  to be geniuses out there who are just worlds better than me at any one of these things that I
*  try to work on. But my superpower is bringing them all together and just thinking. And that's,
*  I think, how you can really change the world. I don't know that I'll ever change the world
*  in the way that I hope. But that's how you can have a chance. Yeah, that's how you can have a
*  chance. Exactly. And I think it's also what... To me, this rapid testing program, this is the most
*  dead simple solution in the world. And this literally could change the world. It could change
*  and it is. There's countries that are doing it now. The US isn't, but I've been advising
*  many countries on it. And I would say that some of the early papers that we put out
*  earlier on, a lot of the things actually are changing. Unless you really look hard,
*  you don't know where you're actually having an effect. Sometimes it's more overt than other
*  times. In April, I published a paper that was saying, hey, with the PCR values from these
*  tests, we need to really focus on the CT values, the actual quantitative values of these lab-based
*  PCR tests. At the time, all the physicians and laboratory directors told me that was stupid.
*  Why would you do that? They're not accurate enough. And of course, now it's headline news that
*  Florida, they just mandated reporting out the CT values of these tests because there's a real
*  utility of them. You can understand public health from it. You can understand better clinical
*  management. That was a simple solution to a pretty difficult problem. And it is changing.
*  The way that we approach all of the lab testing in this country is starting to, it's taking a few
*  months, but it's starting to change because of that. And that was just me saying, hey, this is
*  something we should be focusing on. Got some other people involved and other people. And now people
*  recognize, hey, there's actual value in this number that comes out of these lab-based PCR tests. So
*  sometimes it does grow fairly quickly. But I think the real answer, my only answer, I don't know
*  I recognize that everyone, some people are going to be really focused on and have one small,
*  but deep skill set. I go the opposite direction. I try to bring things together. But the biggest
*  thing I think is just don't see barriers. There's always a solution to a barrier. If there's a
*  barrier, that literally means there's a solution to it. That's why it's called a barrier. And just
*  like you said, most people will just present to you, only be thinking about it and present to you
*  with barriers. And so it's easy to start thinking that's all there is in this world. And just think
*  big. I mean, God, there's nothing wrong with thinking big. Elon Musk thought big and then
*  thinking big builds on itself. You get a billion dollars from one big idea and then that allows you
*  to make three new big ideas. And there's a hunger for it. If you think big and you communicate that
*  vision with the world, all the most brilliant and passionate people will just like, you'll attract
*  them and they'll come to you. And then it makes your life actually really exciting. The people I've
*  met at like Tesla and Neuralink, I mean, there's just like this fire in their eyes. They just love
*  life. And it's amazing, I think, to be around those people. I have to ask you about what was the
*  philosophy, the journey that took you to becoming a Buddhist monk and what did you learn about life?
*  What did you take away from that experience? How did you return back to Harvard and the world that's
*  unlike that experience, I imagine? Yeah, well, I was at Dartmouth at the time.
*  Well, I went to Sri Lanka. I was already pretty interested in developing countries and sort of
*  under-resourced areas. And I was doing a lot of engineering work and I went there, but I was also
*  starting to think maybe health was something of interest. And so I went to Sri Lanka because I
*  had a long interest in Buddhism as well, just kind of interested in it as a thing. Which aspect of
*  the philosophy attracted you? I would say that the thing that interested me most was really this idea
*  of kind of a butterfly effect of like, you know, what you do now has ripple effects that extend out
*  beyond what you can possibly imagine, both in your own life and in other people's lives. And in some
*  ways Buddhism has, not in some ways, in a pretty deep way Buddhism has that as part of its
*  underlying philosophy in terms of rebirth and sort of that your actions today propagate to others,
*  but also propagate to sort of what might happen in your circle of what's called samsara and rebirth.
*  And I don't know that I subscribe fully to this idea that we are reborn, which always was a
*  little bit of a debate internally, I suppose, when I was a monk. But it has always been,
*  it was that and then it was also meditation. At the time I was a fairly elite rower, I was,
*  you know, rowing at the national level and rowing to me was very meditative. It was,
*  you know, just there's, even if you're in a boat with other people, it's, I mean, on the one hand,
*  it's like the extreme of like a team sport, but it's also the extreme sort of focus and
*  concentration that requires, that's required of it. And so I was always really into just meditative
*  type of things. I was doing a lot of pottery too, which was also very meditative. And so Buddhism
*  just kind of really, really, there are a lot of things about meditating that just appealed.
*  And so I moved to Sri Lanka, planning to only be there for a couple of months.
*  But then I was shadowing in this medical clinic and there was this physician who was just really,
*  I mean, it's just kind of a horrible situation. Frankly, this guy was trained decades earlier,
*  he was an older physician and he was still just practicing like these fairly barbaric
*  approaches to medicine because he had, you know, as a rural town and he just didn't have a lot of,
*  he didn't have any updated training, frankly. And so, you know, I just remember this like girl
*  came in with like shrapnel in her hand and his solution was to like air it out. And so he was
*  like, without even numbing her hand, he was like cutting it open more with this idea that like the
*  more oxygen and stuff, you know, and it just, I think there was something about all of this.
*  And I was already talking to these monks at the time, I would be in this clinic in the morning
*  and I'd go and my idea was to teach English to these monks in the evening. It turned out I'm a
*  really bad English teacher. So they just taught, they allowed me just to sit with them and meditate
*  and they were teaching me more about Buddhism than I could have possibly taught them about English
*  or being an American or something. And so I just slowly, I just couldn't take, I couldn't handle
*  being in that clinic. So more and more, I just started moving to, you know, spending more and
*  more time at this monastery. And then after about two months, I was supposed to come back to the
*  States and I decided I didn't want to. So I moved to this monastery in the mountains,
*  primarily because I didn't have the money to like just keep living. So living in a monastery is free.
*  And so I moved there and just started meditating more and more and then months went by and
*  and I, it just really gravitated. I gravitated to the whole notion of it. I mean, it became,
*  it sounds strange, but meditating almost just like anything that you've put your mind to
*  became exciting. It became like there weren't enough hours in the day to meditate.
*  And I would do it for 18 hours a day, 15 hours a day, just sit there and like, I mean, I hate
*  sleeping anyway, but I wouldn't want to go to sleep because I felt like I didn't accomplish
*  what I needed to accomplish in meditation that day, which is so strange because there is no end,
*  you know, but it was always, but there are these, there are these steps that happen during meditation
*  that are very prescribed in a way. Buddha talked about them, you know, and these are ancient
*  writings, which exist. I mean, the writings are real, they're thousands of years old now. And,
*  you know, so whether it was Buddha writing them or whoever, you know, there are lots of different
*  people who have contributed to these writings over the years. And, but they're very prescribed
*  and they tell you what you're going to go through. And I didn't really focus too much on them.
*  I read a little bit about them, but your mind really does when you actually start meditating
*  at that level, like not an hour here and there, but like truly just spending your day is meditating.
*  It becomes kind of like this other world where it becomes exciting and, and you're actively
*  working, you're actively meditating, not just kind of trying to quiet things. That's sort of just the
*  first stage of trying to get your mind to focus. Most people never get past that first stage,
*  especially in our culture. Could you briefly summarize what's waiting beyond the stage of
*  just quieting the mind? It's hard for me to imagine that there's something that could be
*  described as exciting on there. Yeah, it's, it's an interesting question. So I would say,
*  so the first thing, the first step is truly just to like be able to close your eyes,
*  focus on your breath and not have other thoughts enter into your mind. That alone is just so hard
*  to do. Like I couldn't do it now if I wanted, but I could then. And, but once you get past that
*  stage, you start entering into like all these other, you go through the kind of, I went through
*  this like pretty trippy stage, which was a little bit euphoric, where you just kind of start,
*  not hallucinating. I mean, it wasn't like some crazy thing that would happen in a movie,
*  but definitely just weird. You start getting into the stage where you're able to quiet your mind for
*  so long, for hours at a time that, like for me, I started getting really excited about this idea
*  of mindfulness, which is part of Buddhism in general, but it's part of Theravada Buddhism
*  in particular for this, in this way, which was you take, you start focusing on your daily activities,
*  whether that's sipping a cup of tea or walking or, you know, sweeping around. I lived in,
*  on this mountainside in this cottage thing, it was built into the rock and, you know, so every
*  morning I would wake up early and sweep around it and stuff, because that's just what we did.
*  And you start to, you meditate on all those activities. And one of the things that was so
*  exciting, which sounds completely ridiculous now, was just almost learning about your daily
*  activities in ways that you never would have thought about before. So what is, what's involved
*  with like picking up this glass of water? You know, if I said, okay, I'm just going to pick,
*  I'm going to take a drink of water, to me right now, it's a single activity. But during meditation,
*  it's not a single activity. It's a whole series of activities of like little engineering feats
*  and feelings. And it's gripping the water and it's feeling that the glass is cold and it's lifting
*  and it's moving and dragging and dragging. And you start to learn a whole new language of life.
*  And that to me was like this really exhilarating thing that, it was an exhilarating component of
*  meditation that there was never enough time. It's kind of like learning a new computer language.
*  Like it gets really exciting when you start coding and all these new things you can do.
*  You learn how to much to experience life in a much richer way. And so you never run out of ways to
*  go deeper and deeper and deeper in the way you experience even just the drinking of the glass
*  of water. That's exactly right. And what becomes kind of exhilarating is you start to be able to
*  predict things that you never, or I don't even have predictions right where, but I always think
*  of the matrix, you know, or where I forget who it was. Somebody was shooting at Neo and he like
*  leans backwards and he dodges the bullets. You know, in some ways when you start breaking every
*  little action that your hands do or that your feet do or that your body does down into all these
*  little actions that make up one what we normally think of as an action, all of a sudden you can
*  start to see things almost in slow motion. I like to think of it very much like language.
*  The first time somebody hears a foreign language, it sounds really fast. Usually you don't hear the
*  spaces between words and it just sounds like just like a stream of conscious and it just sounds like
*  a stream of noises if you've never heard the language before. And as you learn the language,
*  you hear clear breaks between words and it starts to gain context. And all of a sudden like that
*  what once sounded very fast slows down and it has meaning. That's our whole life. There's this
*  whole language happening that we don't speak generally. But if you start to speak it and if
*  you start to learn it and you start to say, hey I'm picking up this glass is actually 18 little
*  movements, then all of a sudden like it becomes extremely exciting and exhilarating to just
*  breathe. You know, breathing alone in the rise and fall of your abdomen or the way the air pushes in
*  and out of your nose becomes almost interesting. And what's really neat is the world just starts
*  slowing down. And I'll never forget that feeling. And if there was one euphoric feeling from
*  meditation I want to gain back, but I don't think I could without really meditating like that again
*  and I don't think I will, was this like slow motion of the world. It was finding the spaces
*  between all the movements in the same way that the spaces between all the words happen.
*  And then it almost gives you this new appreciation for everything. It was really amazing. And so I
*  think it came to an abrupt end though when the tsunami hit. I was there in the Indian Ocean
*  tsunami hit in 2004 and it was like this dichotomy of being a monk and just meditating in this
*  extraordinary place. And then the tsunami hits and kills 40,000 people in a few minutes on the
*  coast of this really small little country in Sri Lanka. And you know, then I, it like my whole
*  world of being a monk came crashing down when I go to the coast. And I mean, that was just a devastating
*  visual sight and emotional sight. But the strangest thing happened, which was that everyone
*  just wanted me to stay as a monk. You know, people in that culture, they wanted to,
*  the monks largely fled from the coastlines. And so then there I was and people wanted me to be a
*  monk. They wanted me to stay on the coast, but be a monk and not help, like not help in the way that
*  I considered helping. They wanted me just to keep meditating so that they could bring me
*  offerings and have their sort of karmic responsibilities attended to as well. And so
*  that was really bizarre to me. It was like, how could I possibly just sit around while all these
*  people, half of everyone's family just died? And so in any case, I stopped being a monk and I moved
*  to this refugee camp and lived there for another six months or so and just stayed there, not as a
*  monk, but tried to raise some money from the US and tried to like, I didn't know what I was doing.
*  Frankly, I was 22. And, and I don't think I appreciated at the time how much of a role I
*  was having in the in that community's life. But it's taken me a lot many years to process all of
*  this since then. But I would say it's what put me into the public health world, living in that
*  refugee camp and that difference that happened, you know, from being a monk to being in this
*  devastating environment just really changed my whole view of what sort of why I was existing,
*  I suppose. Well, so there's this richness of life in a single drink of water that you experienced.
*  And then there's this power of nature that's capable to take the lives of thousands of people.
*  So given all that, the absurdity of that, let me ask you, and the fact that you study things that
*  could kill the entirety of human civilization, what do you think is the meaning of this all?
*  What do you think is the meaning of life? This whole orchestra we got going on,
*  does it have a meaning? And maybe from another perspective,
*  how does one live a meaningful life, if such is possible?
*  Well, you know, from what I've seen, I don't think there's a single answer to that by any stretch.
*  One of the most interesting things about Buddhism to me is that the human existence is part of
*  suffering, which is very different from Judeo-Christian existence, which is that
*  human existence is something to be, is a very different, you know, it's something to,
*  there's a richness to it. In Buddhism, it's just another one of your lives, but it's your opportunity
*  to attain nirvana and become a monk, for example, and meditate to attain nirvana.
*  Else you kind of just go back into this, I'm sorry, the cycle of suffering. And so, you know,
*  when I look at, I mean, in some ways, the notion of life and what the purpose of life is,
*  you know, they're kind of completely distinct, this sort of Western view of life, which is that this
*  life is the most precious thing in the world versus this is just another opportunity to try to
*  get out of life. I mean, the whole notion of nirvana and in Buddhism, it getting out of
*  this sort of cycle of suffering is to vanish, you know, if you could attain nirvana, you know,
*  throughout this life, the idea is that you don't get reborn. And so when I look at these two,
*  you know, on the one hand, you have Christian, you know, Christian faith and other things that
*  want to go to heaven and like live forever in heaven. Then you have this other whole half of
*  humans who want nothing more than to get out of the cycle of rebirth and just poof, you know,
*  not exist anymore. The cycle of suffering. Yeah. And so how do you reconcile those two? And I guess,
*  do you have both of them in you? Do you basically oscillate back and forth? I don't think I think
*  I just, I look at us and I think we're just a bunch of proteins that, you know, we form and we've,
*  they work in this really amazing way and they might work in a bigger scale. Like there might be some
*  connections that we're not really clear about, but they're still biological. I believe that
*  they're biological. How did these proteins become conscious and why do they want to
*  help civilization by having at home rapid tests at scale? Well, I think,
*  I don't have an answer to that one, but I really do believe that it's just, you know,
*  this is just an evolution of consciousness. I don't personally think is, my feeling is that
*  we're a bunch of pluses and minuses that have just gotten so complex that they're able to make rich
*  feelings, rich emotions. And I do believe though, you know, on the one hand, I sometimes wake up
*  some days, my fiance doesn't always love it, but you know, I kind of think we're all just a bunch
*  of robots with like pretty complicated algorithms that we deal with. And you know, in that sense,
*  like, okay, if the world just blew up tomorrow and nothing was lived, you know, nothing existed the
*  day after that, it's just another blip in the universe, you know, but at the same time,
*  I don't know. So that's kind of probably my most core basic feeling about life is like,
*  we're just a blip and we may as well make the most of it while we're here blipping.
*  It's one hell of a fun blip though. It is. It's an amazing, you know, blink of an eye in time.
*  Michael, this is, you're one of the most interesting people I've met, one of the most
*  interesting conversations, important ones now, I'm going to publish it very soon.
*  I really appreciate taking the time. I know how busy you are. It's really fun. Thanks for talking
*  today. Well, thanks so much. This was a lot of fun. Thanks for listening to this conversation
*  with Michael Mina. And thank you to our sponsors, Brave, a fast browser that feels like Chrome,
*  but has more privacy preserving features. A Flight of Greens, the only one drink that I start every
*  day with to cover all my nutritional bases, ExpressVPN, the VPN I've used for many years to
*  protect my privacy on the internet and Cash App, the app I use to send money to friends.
*  Please check out the sponsors in the description to get a discount and to support this podcast.
*  If you enjoy this thing, subscribe on YouTube, review it with five stars on Apple Podcast,
*  follow on Spotify, support on Patreon, or connect with me on Twitter at Lex Friedman.
*  And now let me leave you with some words from Teddy Roosevelt. It is not the critic who counts,
*  not the man who points out how the strong man stumbles or where the doer of deeds could have
*  done them better. The credit belongs to the man who actually is in the arena, whose face is marred by
*  dust and sweat and blood, who strives valiantly, who errors, who comes short again and again,
*  because there is no effort without error and shortcoming, but who does actually strive to do
*  the deeds, who knows great enthusiasms, the great devotions, who spends himself in a worthy cause,
*  who at the best knows in the end the triumph of high achievement, and who at the worst, if he
*  fails, at least fails while daring greatly, so that his place shall never be with those cold and
*  timid souls who neither know victory nor defeat. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next
*  time.
