---
Date Generated: April 14, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 6084s
Video Keywords: ['david eagleman', 'artificial intelligence', 'agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence podcast', 'lex fridman', 'lex podcast', 'lex mit', 'lex ai', 'lex jre', 'mit ai']
Video Views: 160636
Video Rating: None
---

# David Eagleman: Neuroplasticity and the Livewired Brain | Lex Fridman Podcast #119
**Lex Fridman:** [August 26, 2020](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=386s-y1aRRo)
*  The following is a conversation with David Eagleman, a neuroscientist and one of the great
*  science communicators of our time, exploring the beauty and mystery of the human brain.
*  He is an author of a lot of amazing books about the human mind and his new one called LiveWired.
*  LiveWired is a work of 10 years on a topic that is fascinating to me,
*  which is neuroplasticity or the malleability of the human brain.
*  Quick summary of the sponsors, Athletic Greens, BetterHelp, and Cash App. Click the sponsor links
*  in the description to get a discount and to support this podcast. As a side note, let me say
*  that the adaptability of the human mind at the biological, chemical, cognitive, psychological,
*  and even sociological levels is the very thing that captivated me many years ago when I first
*  began to wonder how we might engineer something like it in the machine. The open question today
*  in the 21st century is what are the limits of this adaptability? As new, smarter and smarter
*  devices and AI systems come to life, or as better and better brain-computer interfaces are engineered,
*  will our brain be able to adapt, to catch up, to excel? I personally believe yes, that we are far
*  from reaching the limitation of the human mind and the human brain, just as we are far from
*  reaching the limitations of our computational systems. If you enjoy this thing, subscribe on
*  YouTube, review it with five stars and up a podcast, follow on Spotify, support on Patreon,
*  or connect with me on Twitter at Lex Friedman. As usual, I'll do a few minutes of ads now and no
*  ads in the middle. I try to make these interesting, but I give you timestamps so you can skip.
*  But please do check out the sponsors by clicking the links in the description.
*  It's the best way to support this podcast. This show is brought to you by Athletic Greens,
*  the all-in-one daily drink to support better health and peak performance. Even with a balanced diet,
*  it's difficult to cover all of your nutritional bases. That's where Athletic Greens will help.
*  Their daily drink is like nutritional insurance for your body that's delivered straight to your
*  door. As you may know, I fast often, sometimes intermittent fasting for 16 hours, sometimes 24
*  hours, dinner to dinner, sometimes more. I break the fast with Athletic Greens. It's delicious,
*  refreshing, just makes me feel good. I think it's like 50 calories, less than a gram of sugar,
*  but has a ton of nutrients to make sure my body has what it needs despite what I'm eating.
*  Go to athleticgreens.com slash Lex to claim a special offer of a free vitamin D3K2 for a year.
*  If you listen to the Joe Rogan experience, you might've listened to him rant about how awesome
*  vitamin D is for your immune system. So there you have it. So click the athleticgreens.com slash
*  Lex in the description to get the free stuff and to support this podcast. This show is sponsored
*  by BetterHelp, spelled H-E-L-P-Help. Check it out at betterhelp.com slash Lex. They figure out what
*  you need and match you with a licensed professional therapist in under 48 hours. It's not a crisis
*  line. It's not self-help. It's professional counseling done securely online. I'm a bit from
*  the David Goggins line of creatures and so have some demons to contend with, usually on long runs
*  or all nights full of self-doubt. I think suffering is essential for creation, but you can suffer
*  beautifully in a way that doesn't destroy you. For most people, I think a good therapist can help on
*  this. So it's at least worth a try. Check out their reviews. They're good. It's easy, private,
*  affordable, available worldwide. You can communicate by text and your time and schedule a weekly audio
*  and video session. Check it out at betterhelp.com slash Lex. This show is presented by Cash App,
*  the number one finance app in the app store. When you get it, use code LexPodcast. Cash App lets
*  you send money to friends, buy Bitcoin, invest in the stock market with as little as $1. Since Cash
*  App allows you to buy Bitcoin, let me mention that cryptocurrency in the context of the history of
*  money is fascinating. I recommend A Scent of Money as a great book on this history. Davidson
*  credits on Ledger's started around 30,000 years ago and the first decentralized cryptocurrency
*  released just over 10 years ago. So given that history, cryptocurrency is still very much in
*  its early days of development, but it's still aiming to and just might redefine the nature of money.
*  So again, if you get Cash App from the app store, Google Play and use code LexPodcast,
*  you get $10 and Cash App will also donate $10 to First, an organization that is helping to
*  advance robotics and STEM education for young people around the world. And now here's my
*  conversation with David Eagleman. You have a new book coming out on the changing brain. Can you
*  give a high level overview of the book? It's called LiveWired by the way. Yeah. The thing is,
*  we typically think about the brain in terms of the metaphors we already have, like hardware and
*  software. That's how we build all our stuff. But what's happening in the brain is fundamentally
*  so different. So I coined this new term LiveWare, which is a system that's constantly reconfiguring
*  itself physically as it learns and adapts to the world around it. It's physically changing.
*  So it's LiveWare meaning like hardware, but changing.
*  Yeah, exactly. Well, the hardware and the software layers are blended. And so,
*  typically, engineers are praised for their efficiency and making something really clean
*  and clear. Like, okay, here's the hardware layer, then I'm going to run software on top of it.
*  There's all sorts of universality that you get out of a piece of hardware like that that's useful.
*  But what the brain is doing is completely different. And I am so excited about where
*  this is all going, because I feel like this is where our engineering will go. So currently,
*  we build all our devices a particular way. But I can't tear half the circuitry out of your cell
*  phone and expect it to still function. But you can do that with the brain. So just as an example,
*  kids who are under about seven years old can get one half of their brain removed. It's called a
*  hemisphereectomy. And they're fine. They have a slight limp on the other side of their body, but
*  they can function just fine that way. And this is generally true. Sometimes children are born
*  without a hemisphere. And their visual system rewires so that everything is on the single
*  remaining hemisphere. What thousands of cases like this teach us is that it's a very malleable
*  system that is simply trying to accomplish the tasks in front of it by rewiring itself
*  with the available real estate. How much of that is a quirk or a feature of evolution? Like, how
*  hard is it to engineer? Because evolution took a lot of work. Trillions of organisms had to die
*  for it to create this thing we have in our skull. Because you said you kind of look forward to the
*  idea that we might be engineering our systems like this in the future, creating liveware systems.
*  How hard do you think is it to create systems like that? Great question. It has proven itself to be
*  a difficult challenge. What I mean by that is even though it's taken evolution a really long
*  time to get where it is now, all we have to do now is peek at the blueprints. It's just three pounds,
*  this organ, and we just figure out how to do it. But that's the part that I mean is a difficult
*  challenge because there are tens of thousands of neuroscientists. We're all poking and prodding
*  and trying to figure this out. But it's an extremely complicated system. But it's only
*  going to be complicated until we figure out the general principles. Exactly like if you
*  had a magic camera and you could look inside the nucleus of a cell and you'd see hundreds of
*  thousands of things moving around or whatever. Then it takes Crick and Watson and say,
*  oh, you're just trying to maintain the order of the base pairs and all the rest is details.
*  Then it simplifies it and we come to understand something. That was my goal in livewire,
*  which I've written over 10 years, by the way, is to try to distill things down to the
*  principles of what plastic systems are trying to accomplish. But to even just linger, you said
*  it's possible to be born with just one hemisphere and you still are able to function.
*  First of all, just a pause on that. I mean, that's amazing. I don't know if people quite,
*  I mean, you hear things here and there. This is why I'm really excited about your book is
*  I don't know if there's definitive popular sources to think about this stuff. I mean,
*  there's a lot of, I think from my perspective, what I heard is there's been debates over decades
*  about how much neuroplasticity there is in the brain and so on. People have learned a lot of
*  things and now it's converging towards people who are understanding this much more in Europe,
*  much more plastic than people realize. But just linger on that topic, how malleable is the hardware
*  of the human brain? Maybe you said children at each stage of life.
*  Yeah. So here's the whole thing. I think part of the confusion about plasticity has been that
*  there are studies at all sorts of different ages and then people might read that from a distance
*  and they think, oh, well, Fred didn't recover when half his brain was taken out and so clearly you're
*  not plastic, but then you do it with a child and they are plastic. And so part of my goal here was
*  to pull together the tens of thousands of papers on this, both from clinical work and from all the
*  way down to the molecular and understand what are the principles here. The principles are
*  that plasticity diminishes. That's no surprise. By the way, we should just define plasticity.
*  It's the ability of a system to mold into a new shape and then hold that shape. That's why
*  we make things that we call plastic because they are moldable and they can hold that new shape like
*  a plastic toy or something. And so maybe we use, maybe we'll use a lot of terms that are synonymous.
*  So something is plastic, something is malleable, changing, LiveWire, the name of the book is like-
*  So I'll tell you exactly right, but I'll tell you why I chose LiveWire instead of plasticity. So I
*  use the term plasticity in the book, but sparingly because that was a term coined by William James
*  over a hundred years ago. And he was of course very impressed with plastic manufacturing that you could
*  mold something in shape and then hold that. But that's not what's actually happening in the brain.
*  It's constantly rewiring your entire life. You never hit an end point. The whole point is for it
*  to keep changing. So even in the, you know, few minutes of conversation that we've been having,
*  your brain is changing, my brain is changing. Next time I see your face, I will remember,
*  oh yeah, like that time Lex and I sat together and we did these things.
*  I wonder if your brain will have like a Lex thing going on for the next few months. Like
*  it'll stay there until you get rid of it. Cause it was useful for now.
*  Yeah, no, I'll probably never get rid of it. Let's say for some circumstance,
*  you and I don't see each other for the next 35 years. When I run into you, I'll be like, oh yeah.
*  I'm like, huh, that looks familiar.
*  Yeah. We sat down for a podcast back when there were podcasts.
*  Exactly.
*  Back when we lived outside virtual reality.
*  Exactly. So you chose live wire to hold the plastic.
*  Exactly. Because plastic implies, I mean, it's the term that's used in the field. And so that's why
*  we need to use it still for a while, but yeah, it implies something gets molded in shape and then
*  holds that shape forever. But in fact, the whole system is completely changing.
*  Then back to how malleable is the human brain at each stage of life. So what,
*  just at a high level, is it malleable?
*  So yes, and plasticity diminishes. But one of the things that I felt like I was able to put together
*  for myself after reading thousands of papers on this issue is that different parts of the brain
*  have different plasticity windows. So for example, with the visual cortex, that
*  cements itself into place pretty quickly over the course of a few years. And I argue that's because
*  of the stability of the data. In other words, what you're getting in from the world, you've got a
*  certain number of angles, colors, shapes. It's essentially the world is visually stable. So that
*  hardens around that data. As opposed to, let's say, the somatosensory cortex, which is the part
*  that's taking information from your body, or the motor cortex right next to it, which is what drives
*  your body. The fact is bodies are always changing. You get taller over time, you get fatter, thinner
*  over time, you might break a leg and have to limp for a while, stuff like that. So because the data
*  there is always changing, by the way, you might get on a bicycle, you might get a surfboard, things
*  like that. Because that data is always changing, that stays more malleable. And when you look through
*  the brain, you find that it appears to be this, you know, how stable the data is determines how
*  fast something hardens into place. But the point is, different parts of the brain harden into place
*  at different times. Do you think it's possible that, depending on how much data you get on
*  different sensors, that it stays more malleable longer? So like, you know, if you look at different
*  cultures that experience, like, if you keep your eyes closed, or maybe you're blind, I don't know,
*  but let's say you keep your eyes closed for your entire life, then the visual cortex might be much
*  less malleable. The reason I bring that up is like, you know, well, maybe we'll talk about brain
*  computer interfaces a little bit down the line. But, you know, like, is this, is the malleability
*  a genetic thing? Or is it more about the data, like you said, that comes in?
*  Ah, so the malleability itself is a genetic thing. The big trick that Mother Nature discovered with
*  humans is make a system that's really flexible, as opposed to most other creatures to different
*  degrees. So if you take an alligator, it's born, its brain does the same thing every generation.
*  If you compare an alligator 100,000 years ago to an alligator now, they're essentially the same.
*  We, on the other hand, as humans, drop into a world with a half-baked brain, and what we
*  require is to absorb the culture around us and the language and the beliefs and the customs and
*  so on. That's what Mother Nature has done with us. And it's been a tremendously successful trick
*  we've taken over the whole planet as a result of this. So that's an interesting point. I mean,
*  just to linger on it, that, I mean, this is a nice feature. Like, if you were to design a thing to
*  survive in this world, do you put it at age zero, already equipped to deal with the world
*  in a hard-coded way? Or do you make it malleable and just throw it in, take the risk that you're
*  maybe going to die, but you're going to learn a lot in the process. And if you don't die,
*  you'll learn a hell of a lot to be able to survive in the environment.
*  So this is the experiment that Mother Nature ran. And it turns out that,
*  for better or worse, we've won. I mean, yeah, we put other animals in the zoos and we, yeah,
*  that's right. AI might do better. Okay, fair enough. That's true. And maybe what the trick
*  Mother Nature did is just the stepping stone to AI. So that's a beautiful feature of the human
*  brain that it's malleable. But let's, on the topic of Mother Nature, what do we start with? Like,
*  how blank is the slate? Ah, so it's not actually a blank slate. It's terrific engineering that's
*  set up in there. But much of that engineering has to do with, okay, just make sure that things get
*  to the right place. For example, like the fibers from the eyes getting to the visual cortex, or
*  all this very complicated machinery in the ear getting to the auditory cortex and so on. So
*  first of all, there's that. And then what we also come equipped with is the ability to absorb
*  language and culture and beliefs and so on. So you're already set up for that. So no matter
*  what you're exposed to, you will, you will absorb some sort of language. That's the trick is how do
*  you engineer something just enough that it's then a sponge that's ready to take in and fill in the
*  blanks? How much of the malleability is hardware? How much software is that useful on the brain?
*  So like, what are we talking about? So there's like, there's neurons, there's synapses,
*  and all kinds of different synapses. And there's chemical communication, like electrical signals,
*  and there's chemical communication from this in the synapses. What I would say,
*  the software would be the timing and the nature of the electrical signals, I guess,
*  and the hardware would be the actual synapses. So here's the thing. This is why really, if we can,
*  I want to get away from the hardware and software metaphor, because what happens is as activity
*  passes through the system, it changes things. Now, the thing that computer engineers are really
*  used to thinking about is, is synapses where two neurons connect. Of course, each neuron connects
*  with 10,000 of its neighbors, but at a point where they connect, what we're always thinking about is
*  the changing of the strength of that connection, the synaptic weight. But in fact, everything is
*  changing. The receptor distribution inside that neuron so that you're more or less sensitive to
*  the neurotransmitter, then the structure of the neuron itself and what's happening there,
*  all the way down to biochemical cascades inside the cell, all the way down to the nucleus.
*  And for example, the epigenome, which is the, you know, these little proteins that are attached to
*  the DNA that cause conformational changes, that cause more genes to be expressed or repressed.
*  All of these things are plastic. The reason that most people only talk about the synaptic weights
*  is because that's really all we can measure well. And all this other stuff is really,
*  really hard to see with our current technology. So essentially that just gets ignored.
*  But in fact, the system is plastic at all these different levels. And
*  my way of thinking about this is in analogy to pace layers. So pace layers is a concept that Stewart
*  Brand suggested about how to think about cities. So you have fashion, which changes rapidly in
*  cities. You have governance, which changes more slowly. You have the structure, the buildings of
*  a city, which changes more slowly all the way down to nature. You've got all these different
*  layers of things that are changing at different paces, at different speeds. I've taken that idea
*  and mapped it onto the brain, which is to say you have some biochemical cascades that are just
*  changing really rapidly when something happens, all the way down to things that are more and more
*  cemented in there. And this actually allows us to understand a lot about particular kinds of things
*  that happen. For example, one of the oldest, probably the oldest rule in neurology is called
*  Rybow's law, which is that older memories are more stable than newer memories. So when you get old
*  and demented, you'll be able to remember things from your young life. Maybe you'll remember this
*  podcast, but you won't remember what you did a month ago or a year ago. And this is a very weird
*  structure, right? No other system works this way where older memories are more stable than
*  newer memories. But it's because through time, things get more and more cemented into deeper
*  layers of the system. And so this is, I think, the way we have to think about the brain, not as,
*  okay, you've got neurons, you've got synaptic weights, and that's it.
*  So yeah. So the idea of live where and live wired is that it's like a, it's a gradual,
*  yeah, it's a gradual spectrum between software and hardware. And so the metaphors completely
*  doesn't make sense because like when you talk about software and hardware, it's really hard lines.
*  I mean, of course, software is unlike hard, but even hardware, but like, so there's two groups,
*  but in the software world, there's levels of abstractions, right? There's the operating
*  system, there's machine code, and then it gets higher and higher levels. But somehow that's
*  actually fundamentally different than the layers of abstractions in the hardware. But in the brain,
*  it's all like the same. And I love the city, the city metaphor. I mean, yeah, it's kind of
*  mind blowing because it's hard to know what to think about that. Like if I were to ask the question,
*  this is important question for machine learning is how does the brain learn? So essentially,
*  you're saying that, I mean, it just learns on all of these different levels at all different paces.
*  Exactly right. And as a result, what happens is as you practice something, you get good at something,
*  you're physically changing the circuitry, you're adapting your brain around the thing that is
*  relevant to you. So let's say you take up, do you know how to surf? Nope. Okay, great. So let's say
*  you take up surfing now at this age. What happens is, you'll be terrible at first, you don't know
*  how to operate your body, you don't know how to read the waves, things like that. And through time,
*  you get better and better. What you're doing is you're burning that into the actual circuitry
*  of your brain. You're of course conscious when you're first doing it, you're thinking about,
*  okay, where am I doing? What's my body weight? But eventually when you become a pro at it,
*  you are not conscious of it at all. In fact, you can't even unpack what it is that you did.
*  Think about riding a bicycle. You can't describe how you're doing it. You're just doing it,
*  you're changing your balance when you come, you know, you do this to go to stop. So this is what
*  we're constantly doing is actually shaping our own circuitry based on what is relevant for us.
*  Survival, of course, being the top thing that's relevant, but interestingly, especially with
*  humans, we have these particular goals in our lives, computer science, neuroscience, whatever.
*  And so we actually shape our circuitry around that. I mean, you mentioned this gets slower and
*  slower with age, but is there like I've, I think I've read and spoken offline, even on this podcast,
*  with a developmental neurobiologist, I guess would be the right terminology is like looking at the
*  very early, like from, from embryonic stem cells to like, to the creation of the brain.
*  And like, that's like, what that's mind blowing how much stuff happens there. So it's very malleable
*  at that stage. It's, and then, but after that, at which point does it stop being malleable?
*  So that's the interesting thing is that it remains malleable your whole life. So even when you're an
*  old person, you'll be able to remember new faces and names. You'll be able to learn new sorts of
*  tasks. And thank goodness, because the world is changing rapidly in terms of technology and so on.
*  I just sent my mother and Alexa and she figured out how to go on the settings, do the thing. And
*  I was really impressed by that she was able to do it. So there are parts of the brain that remain
*  malleable their whole life. The interesting part is that really your goal is to make an internal
*  model of the world. Your goal is to say, okay, the brain is trapped in silence and darkness,
*  and it's trying to understand how the world works out there. Right?
*  I love that image. Yeah, I guess it is. Yeah. You forget, you forget. It's like, this, this lonely
*  thing is sitting in its own container and trying to actually throw a few sensors, figure out what
*  the hell's going on. You know what I sometimes think about is the, that movie, The Martian with
*  Matt Damon, the, I mean, it was written in a book, of course, but the movie poster shows Matt Damon
*  all alone on the red planet. And I think, God, that's actually what it's like to be inside
*  your head and my head and anybody's head is that you're essentially on your own planet in there.
*  And I'm essentially on my own planet. And everyone's got their own world where you've
*  absorbed all of your experiences up to this moment in your life that have made you exactly who you
*  are. And same for me and everyone. And, and we've got this very thin bandwidth of communication.
*  And I'll say something like, oh yeah, that tastes just like peaches. And you'll say, oh, I know what
*  you mean. But the experience of course might be, might be vastly different for us. But anyway,
*  yes. So the brain is trapped in silence and darkness, each one of us. And what it's trying
*  to do, this is the important part, is trying to make an internal model of what's going on out
*  there. As in how do I function in the world? How do I, how do I interact with other people?
*  Do I say something nice and polite? Do I say something aggressive and mean? Do I, you know,
*  all these things that it's putting together about the world. And I think what happens when people
*  get older and older, it may not be that plasticity is diminishing. It may be that their internal
*  model essentially has set itself up in a way where it says, okay, I've pretty much got a really good
*  understanding of the world now and I don't really need to change. Right? So when old, when, when,
*  when much older people find themselves in a situation where they need to change, they can
*  actually are able to do it. It's just that I think this notion that we all have that plasticity
*  diminishes as we grow older is in part because the motivation isn't there. But if you were 80 and you
*  get fired from your job and suddenly had to figure out how to program a WordPress site or something,
*  you'd figure it out. Got it. So the capability, the possibility of change is there, but let me ask
*  the highest challenge, the interesting challenge to this plasticity, to this liveware system.
*  If we could talk about brain computer interfaces and Neuralink, what are your thoughts about the
*  efforts of Elon Musk, Neuralink, BCI in general in this regard, which is adding a machine, a computer,
*  the capability of a computer to communicate with the brain and the brain to communicate with a
*  computer at the very basic applications and then like the futuristic kind of thoughts.
*  Yeah. First of all, it's terrific that people are jumping into doing that because it's clearly the
*  future. The interesting part is our brains have pretty good methods of interacting with technology.
*  Maybe it's your fat thumbs on a cell phone or something, or maybe it's watching a YouTube video
*  and getting into your eye that way. But we have pretty rapid ways of communicating with technology
*  and getting data. So if you actually crack open the skull and go into the inner sanctum of the brain,
*  you might be able to get a little bit faster, but I'll tell you,
*  I'm not so sanguine on the future of that as a business and I'll tell you why. It's because
*  there are various ways of getting data in and out and an open head surgery is a big deal.
*  Neurosurgeons don't want to do it because there's always risk of death and infection on the table.
*  And also it's not clear how many people would say, I'm going to volunteer to get something in my head
*  so that I can text faster, 20% faster. So I think it's, Mother Nature surrounds the brain with this
*  armored bunker of the skull because it's a very delicate material. And there's an expression
*  in neurosurgery about the brain is, the person is never the same after you open up their skull.
*  Now, whether or not that's true or whatever, who cares? But it's a big deal to do an open head
*  surgery. So what I'm interested in is how can we get information in and out of the brain without
*  having to crack the skull open? Got it. Without messing with the biological part,
*  directly connecting or messing with the intricate biological thing that we got going on and seems
*  to be working. Yeah, exactly. And by the way, where Neuralink is going, which is wonderful,
*  is going to be in patient cases. It really matters for all kinds of surgeries that a person needs,
*  whether for Parkinson's or epilepsy or whatever. It's a terrific new technology for essentially
*  sewing electrodes in there and getting more higher density of electrodes. So that's great.
*  I just don't think as far as the future of BCI goes, I don't suspect that people will go in and
*  say, yeah, drill a hole in my head and do that. Well, it's interesting because I think there's
*  a similar intuition, but say in the world of autonomous vehicles, that folks know how hard
*  it is and it seems damn impossible. The similar intuition about, I'm sticking on the Elon Musk
*  thing is just a good, easy example. Similar intuition about colonizing Mars. If you really
*  think about it, it seems extremely difficult and almost, I mean, just technically difficult
*  to a degree where you want to ask, is it really worth doing, worth trying? And then the same
*  has applied with BCI. But the thing about the future is it's hard to predict. So the exciting
*  thing to me with, so once it does, once if successful, it's able to help patients.
*  It may be able to discover something very surprising about our ability to directly
*  communicate with the brain. So exactly what you're interested in is figuring out how to
*  play with this malleable brain, but like help assist it somehow. I mean, it's such a compelling
*  notion to me that we're now working on all these exciting machine learning systems that are able
*  to learn from data. And then if we can have this other brain that's a learning system,
*  that's live wired on the human side and them to be able to communicate. It's like a self-playing
*  mechanism was able to beat the world champion ago so that they can play with each other,
*  the computer and the brain. Like when you sleep, I mean, there's a lot of futuristic kind of things
*  that it's just exciting possibilities, but I hear you. We understand so little about the actual
*  intricacies of the communication of the brain that it's hard to find the common language.
*  Well, interestingly, the technologies that have been built
*  don't actually require the perfect common language. So for example, hundreds of thousands
*  of people are walking around with artificial ears and artificial eyes, meaning cochlear implants
*  or retinal implants. So this is, you know, you take a essentially digital microphone,
*  you slip an electrode strip into the inner ear and people can learn how to hear that way. Or you take
*  an electrode grid and you plug it into the retina at the back of the eye and people can learn how
*  to see that way. The interesting part is those devices don't speak exactly the natural biological
*  language. They speak the dialect of Silicon Valley. And it turns out that as recently as
*  about 25 years ago, a lot of people thought this was never going to work. They thought it wasn't
*  going to work for that reason, but the brain figures it out. It's really good at saying,
*  okay, look, there's some correlation between what I can touch and feel and hear and so on.
*  And the data that's coming in or between, you know, I clap my hands and I have signals coming
*  in there and it figures out how to speak any language. Oh, that's fascinating. So like,
*  no matter if it's Neuralink, so directly communicating with the brain or it's a smartphone
*  or Google Glass or the brain figures out the efficient way of communication. Well, exactly.
*  Exactly. And what I propose is the potato head theory of evolution, which is that
*  our eyes and nose and mouth and ears and fingertips, all this stuff is just plug and play.
*  And the brain can figure out what to do with the data that comes in. And part of the reason that I
*  think this is right and I care so deeply about this is when you look across the animal kingdom,
*  you find all kinds of weird peripheral devices plugged in and the brain figures out what to do
*  with the data. And I don't believe that Mother Nature has to reinvent the principles of brain
*  operation each time to say, oh, now I'm going to have heat pits to detect infrared. Now I'm going
*  to have something to detect electro receptors on the body. Now I'm going to detect something to
*  pick up the magnetic field of the earth with cryptochromes in the eye. Instead the brain says,
*  oh, I got it. There's data coming in. Is that useful? Can I use something with it? Oh, great.
*  I'm going to mold myself around the data that's coming in. It's kind of fascinating to think that
*  we think of smartphones and all this new technology is novel. It's totally novel as outside of what
*  evolution ever intended or what nature ever intended. It's fascinating to think that the
*  entirety of the process of evolution is perfectly fine and ready for the smartphone and the internet.
*  It's ready. It's ready to be valuable to that and whatever comes to cyborgs, to virtual reality.
*  We kind of think there's all these books written about what's natural and we're destroying our
*  natural cells by embracing all this technology. It's probably not giving the brain enough credit.
*  This thing is just fine with new tech. Oh, exactly. It wraps itself around. By the way,
*  wait till you have kids. You'll see the ease with which they pick up on stuff. As Kevin Kelly said,
*  technology is what gets invented after you're born. But the stuff that already exists when
*  you're born, that's not even tech. That's just background furniture. The fact that the iPad
*  exists for my son and daughter, that's just background furniture. Because we have this
*  incredibly malleable system, it just absorbs whatever is going on in the world and learns
*  what to do with it. Just to linger for a little bit more, do you think it's possible to co-adjust?
*  We're kind of for the machine to adjust to the brain, for the brain to adjust the machine.
*  I guess that's what's already happening. Sure. That is what's happening. For example,
*  when you put electrodes in the motor cortex to control a robotic arm for somebody who's paralyzed,
*  the engineers do a lot of work to figure out, okay, what can we do with the algorithm here
*  so that we can detect what's going on from these cells and figure out how to best program the
*  robotic arm to move given the data that we're measuring from these cells. But also, the brain
*  is learning too. The paralyzed woman says, wait, I'm trying to grab this thing. By the way, it's
*  all about relevance. If there's a piece of food there and she's hungry, she'll figure out how
*  to get this food into her mouth with the robotic arm because that is what matters.
*  Well, that's okay. First of all, that pain's really promising and beautiful. For some reason,
*  it's a really optimistic picture that our brain is able to adjust to so much.
*  So many things happened this year, 2020, that you think, how are we ever going to deal with it?
*  It's somehow encouraging and inspiring that we're going to be okay.
*  Well, that's right. I actually think so 2020 has been an awful year for almost everybody in many
*  ways. But the one silver lining has to do with brain plasticity, which is to say,
*  we've all been on our gerbil wheels. We've all been in our routines. As I mentioned, our internal
*  models are all about how do you maximally succeed? How do you optimize your operation in this
*  circumstance where you are? Then all of a sudden, bang, 2020 comes. We're completely off our wheels.
*  We're having to create new things all the time and figure out how to do it. That is terrific
*  for brain plasticity. We know this because there are very large studies on older people
*  who stay cognitively active their whole lives. Some fraction of them have Alzheimer's disease
*  physically, but nobody knows that when they're alive. Even though their brain is getting chewed
*  up with the ravages of Alzheimer's, cognitively they're doing just fine. Why? It's because they're
*  challenged all the time. They've got all these new things going on, all this novelty,
*  all these responsibilities, chores, social life, all these things happening. As a result,
*  they're constantly building new roadways, even as parts degrade.
*  The only good news is that we are in a situation where suddenly we can't just operate like
*  automata anymore. We have to think of completely new ways to do things. That's wonderful.
*  I don't know why this question popped into my head. It's quite absurd, but are we going to be okay?
*  You say this is the promising silver lining, just from your own ... Because you've written about
*  this and thought about this outside of maybe even the plasticity of the brain, but
*  just this whole pandemic changed the way it knocked us out of this hamster wheel like that.
*  Of habit, a lot of people had to reinvent themselves. Unfortunately, I have a lot of friends
*  who either are ready or are going to lose their business. It's basically taking the dreams that
*  people have had and said, this particular dream you've had will no longer be possible.
*  You have to find something new. Are we going to be okay?
*  Yeah, we'll be okay in the sense that ... I mean, it's going to be a rough time for
*  many or most people, but in the sense that it is sometimes useful
*  to find that what you thought was your dream was not the thing that you're going to do.
*  This is obviously the plot in lots of Hollywood movies that someone says,
*  I'm going to do this, and then that gets foiled and they end up doing something better.
*  But this is true in life. I mean, in general, even though we plan our lives as best we can,
*  it's predicated on our notion of, okay, given everything that's around me, this is what's
*  possible for me next. But it takes 2020 to knock you off that where you think, oh, well,
*  actually, maybe there's something I can be doing that's bigger, that's better.
*  For me, one exciting thing, and I just talked to Grant Sanderson. I don't know if you know who he
*  is. It's a 3Blue1Brown. It's a YouTube channel. If you see it, you would recognize it. He's a
*  really famous math guy, and he's a math educator, and he does these incredible, beautiful videos.
*  Now I see at MIT, folks are struggling to try to figure out if we do teach remotely,
*  how do we do it effectively? You have these world-class researchers and professors trying
*  to figure out how to put content online that teaches people. To me, a possible future of that
*  is Nobel Prize-winning faculty become YouTubers. That, to me, is so exciting. What Grant said,
*  which is the possibility of creating canonical videos on the thing you're a world expert in,
*  there's so many topics. There's faculty. I mentioned about Tedric. There's all these
*  people in robotics that are experts in a particular beautiful field on which there's only just papers.
*  There's no popular book. There's no clean canonical video showing the beauty of a subject.
*  One possibility is they try to create that and share it with the world.
*  This is the beautiful thing. This, of course, has been happening for a while already.
*  For example, when I go and I give book talks, often what will happen is some 13-year-old will
*  come up to me afterwards and say something, and I'll say, my God, that was so smart. How did you
*  know that? They'll say, oh, I saw it on a TED Talk. Well, what an amazing opportunity. Here you got
*  the best person in the world on subject X giving a 15-minute talk as beautifully as he or she can.
*  The 13-year-old just grows up with that. That's just the mother's milk. As opposed to when we grew
*  up, I had whatever homeroom teacher I had and whatever classmates I had. Hopefully, that person
*  knew what he or she was teaching and often didn't and just made things up. The opportunity now has
*  become extraordinary to get the best of the world. The reason this matters, of course, is because,
*  obviously, back to plasticity, the way our brain gets molded is by absorbing everything from the
*  world, all of the knowledge and the data and so on that it can get, and then springboarding off of
*  that. We're in a very lucky time now because we grew up with a lot of just-in-case learning.
*  Just in case you ever need to know these dates in Mongolian history, here they are.
*  What kids are growing up with now, like my kids, is tons of just-in-time learning. As soon as they're
*  curious about something, they ask Alexa, they ask Google Home, they get the answer right there in
*  the context of their curiosity. The reason this matters is because for plasticity to happen,
*  you need to be curious about something. This is something, by the way, that the ancient Romans
*  had noted. They had outlined seven different levels of learning, and the highest level is
*  when you're curious about a topic. Anyway, kids now are getting tons of just-in-time learning,
*  and as a result, they're going to be so much smarter than we are. We can already see that.
*  My boy is eight years old. My girl is five. The things that he knows are amazing because it's not
*  just him having to do the rote memorization stuff that we did. Yeah. It's just fascinating what the
*  brain, what young brains look like now because of all those TED Talks just loaded in there.
*  A lot of people, there's a sense that our attention span is growing shorter,
*  but it's complicated because, for example, most people, majority of people, it's the 80-plus
*  percent of people, listen to the entirety of these things, two, three hours for a podcast,
*  long-form podcasts are becoming more and more popular. It's all a really giant complicated
*  mess, and the point is that the brain is able to adjust to it and somehow form a world view
*  within this new medium of information that we have. You have these short tweets, and you have
*  these three, four-hour podcasts, and you have Netflix, movies. It's adjusting to the entirety
*  and just absorbing it and taking it all in, and then pops up COVID that forces us all to be home,
*  and it all just adjusts and figures it out. Yeah, exactly. It's fascinating.
*  We've been talking about the brain as if it's something separate from the human that carries
*  it a little bit. Whenever you talk about the brain, it's easy to forget that that's us.
*  Yes. How much is the whole thing predetermined? How much is it already encoded in there?
*  What's the it?
*  How much is it the actions, the decisions, the judgments, the-
*  You mean who you are?
*  Who you are.
*  Great question. There used to be a big debate about nature versus nurture, and we now know that it's
*  always both. You can't even separate them because you come to the table with a certain amount of
*  nature, for example, your whole genome and so on. The experiences you have in the womb,
*  whether your mother is smoking or drinking, things like that, whether she's stressed, so on,
*  those all influence how you're going to pop out of the womb. From there, everything is an interaction
*  between all of your experiences and the nature. What I mean is, I think of it like a space-time
*  cone where you drop into the world and depending on the experiences that you have, you might go
*  off in this direction or that direction or that direction because there's interaction all the way.
*  Your experiences determine what happens with the expression of your genes. Some genes get repressed,
*  some get expressed, and so on. You actually become a different person based on your experiences.
*  There's a whole field called epigenomics, which is about the epigenome, and that is the layer that
*  sits on top of the DNA and causes the genes to express differently. That is directly related to
*  the experiences that you have. Just as an example, they take rat pups and one group is placed away
*  from their parents and the other group is groomed and licked and taken good care of. That changes
*  their gene expression for the rest of their life. They go off in different directions in the space-time
*  cone. This is, of course, why it matters that we take care of children and pour money into things
*  like education and good child care and so on for children broadly because these formative years
*  matter so much. Is there a free will? I apologize for the absurd high-level philosophical questions.
*  No, no, these are my favorite kind of questions. Here's the thing. We don't know. If you ask most
*  neuroscientists, they'll say that we can't really think of how you would get free will in there
*  because as far as we can tell, it's a machine. It's a very complicated machine. Enormously
*  sophisticated, 86 billion neurons, about the same number of glial cells. Each of these things is as
*  complicated as the city of San Francisco. Each neuron in your head has the entire human genome in
*  it. It's expressing millions of gene products. These are incredibly complicated biochemical
*  cascades. Each one is connected to 10,000 of its neighbors, which means you have half a quadrillion
*  connections in the brain. It's an incredibly complicated thing, but it fundamentally appears
*  to just be a machine. Therefore, if there's nothing in it that's not being driven by something else,
*  then it seems it's hard to understand where free will would come from.
*  That's the camp that pretty much all of us fall into, but I will say our science is still quite
*  young. I'm a fan of the history of science. The thing that always strikes me as interesting is
*  when you look back at any moment in science, everybody believes something is true and they
*  simply didn't know about what Einstein revealed. Who knows? At any moment in history,
*  they all feel like we've converged to the final answer. Exactly. All the pieces of the puzzle are
*  there. I think that's a funny illusion that's worth getting rid of. In fact, this is what drives good
*  science is recognizing that we don't have most of the puzzle pieces. As far as the free will question
*  goes, I don't know. At the moment, it seems, wow, it would be really impossible to figure out how
*  something else could fit in there. But 100 years from now, our textbooks might be very different
*  than they are now. Could I ask you to speculate where do you think free will could be squeezed
*  into there? Is it possible that our brain just creates kinds of illusions that are useful for us?
*  Where could it possibly be squeezed in? Well, let me give a speculation answer to your very
*  nice question. The listeners to this podcast, don't quote me on this. Exactly. I'm not saying
*  this is what I believe to be true, but let me just give an example. I give this at the end of my book
*  Incognito. The whole book of Incognito is about all the what's happening in the brain. Essentially,
*  I'm saying, look, here's all the reasons to think that free will probably does not exist.
*  But at the very end, I say, look, imagine that you're a Kalahari Bushman and you find
*  a radio in the sand and you've never seen anything like this. And you look at this radio
*  and you realize that when you turn this knob, you hear voices coming from it. So being a radio
*  materialist, you try to figure out how does this thing operate. So you take off the back cover and
*  you realize there's all these wires. And when you take out some wires, the voices get garbled or
*  stop or whatever. And so what you end up developing is a whole theory about how this connection,
*  this pattern of wires gives rise to voices. But it would never strike you that in distant cities,
*  there's a radio tower and there's invisible stuff beaming. And that's actually the origin of the
*  voices. And this is just necessary for it. So I mentioned this just as a speculation, say, look,
*  how would we know what we know about the brain for absolute certain is that if when you damage
*  pieces and parts of it, things get jumbled up. But how would you know if there's something else
*  going on that we can't see like electromagnetic radiation that is what's actually generating this?
*  Yeah, you paint a beautiful example of how totally because we don't know most of how our universe
*  works, how totally off base we might be with our science until I mean, I mean, yeah, I mean,
*  that's inspiring. That's beautiful. It's kind of terrifying. It's humbling. It's all of the above.
*  And the important and the important part just to recognize is that, of course, we're in the
*  position of having massive unknowns. And, you know, we have, of course, the known unknowns. And
*  that's all the things we're pursuing in our labs and trying to figure out that there's this whole
*  space of unknown unknowns, things we haven't even realized we haven't asked yet.
*  Let me kind of ask a weird, maybe a difficult question. Part of the has to do with I've been
*  recently reading a lot about World War Two. I'm currently reading a book I recommend for people,
*  which is as a Jew has been difficult to read. But the rise and fall of the Third Reich.
*  So let me just ask about like the nature of genius, the nature of evil. If we look at somebody like
*  Einstein, we look at Hitler, Stalin, modern day, Jeffrey Epstein, just
*  folks who through their life have done with Einstein, then works of genius and with the
*  others I mentioned have done evil on this world. What do we think about that in a live wired brain?
*  Like, how do we think about these extreme people?
*  Here's what I'd say. This is a very big and difficult question. But what I would say briefly
*  on it is, you know, first of all, I saw a cover of Time magazine some years ago.
*  And it was a big, you know, sagittal slice of the brain. And it said something like,
*  what makes us good and evil? And there was a little spot pointing to it. There's a picture
*  of Gandhi. There was a little spot was pointing to Hitler. And these time magazine covers always
*  make me mad because it's so goofy to think that we're going to find some spot in the brain or
*  something. Instead, the interesting part is because we're live wired, we are all about the
*  world and the culture around us. So somebody like Adolf Hitler got all this positive feedback about
*  what was going on. And the crazier and crazier the ideas he had, he's like, let's set up death camps
*  and murder a bunch of people and so on. Somehow he was getting positive feedback from that.
*  And all these other people, they're all, you know, spun each other up. And you look at anything like,
*  I mean, look at the, you know, the cultural revolution in China or the, you know, the
*  Russian revolution or things like this, where you look at these things, my God, how do people
*  all behave like this? But it's easy to see groups of people spinning themselves up in particular ways
*  where they all say, well, would I have thought this was right in a different circumstance? I
*  don't know, but Fred thinks it's right and Steve thinks it's right. Everyone around me seems to
*  think it's right. And so part of the maybe downside of having a live wired brain is that you can get
*  crowds of people doing things as a group. So it's interesting to, you know, we would pinpoint
*  Hitler saying that's the evil guy. But in a sense, I think it was Tolstoy who said the king becomes
*  a slave to the people. In other words, you know, Hitler was just a representation of whatever was
*  going on with that huge crowd that he was surrounded with. So I only bring that up to
*  say that it's, you know, it's very difficult to say what it is about this person's brain
*  and that person's brain. He obviously got feedback for what he was doing. The other thing, by the way,
*  about what we often think of as being evil in society is my lab recently published some work on
*  in-groups and out-groups, which is a very important part of this puzzle. So it turns out that we are
*  very, we are very, you know, engineered to care about in-groups versus out-groups. And this seems
*  to be like a really fundamental thing. So we did this experiment in my lab where we brought people
*  and we stick them in the scanner and we, I don't know, it's not if you know this, but we show them
*  on the hand, sorry, we show them on the screen six hands and the computer goes around randomly picks
*  a hand and then you see that hand gets stabbed with a syringe needle. So actually see a syringe
*  needle enter the hand and come out. And it's really what that does is that triggers parts of the pain
*  matrix. This area is in your brain that involved in feeling physical pain. Now the interesting thing
*  is it's not your hand that was stabbed. So what you're seeing is empathy. This is you seeing
*  someone else's hand get stabbed, you feel like, oh God, this is awful, right? Okay. We contrast that,
*  by the way, with somebody's hand getting poked to the Q-tip, which is, you know, looks visually
*  the same, but it's, you don't have that same level of response. Now what we do is we label each hand
*  with a one-word label, Christian, Jewish, Muslim, atheist, Scientologist, Hindu. And now the computer
*  goes around, picks a hand, stabs the hand. And the question is, how much does your brain care
*  about all the people in your out group versus the one label that happens to match you?
*  And it turns out for everybody across all religions, they care much more about their
*  in-group than their out-group. And when I say they care, what I mean is you get a bigger response
*  from their brain. Everything's the same. It's the same hands. It's just a one-word label. You care
*  much more about your in-group than your out-group. And I wish this weren't true, but this is how
*  humans are. I wonder how fundamental that is, or if it's the emergent thing about culture.
*  Like if we lived alone with, like if it's genetically built into the brain, like this
*  longing for tribe. So I'll tell you, we addressed that. So here's what we did. There are two,
*  actually there are two other things we did as part of this study that I think matter for this point.
*  One is, so, okay, so we show that you have a much bigger response. And by the way, this is not a
*  cognitive thing. This is a very low level, basic response to seeing pain in somebody. Okay.
*  Great study, by the way.
*  Thanks. Thanks. What we did next is we next have it where we say, okay, the year is 2025,
*  and these three religions are now in a war against these three religions. And it's all randomized,
*  right? But what you see is your thing, and you have two allies now against these others.
*  And now it happens over the course of many trials. You see everybody gets stabbed at different times.
*  And the question is, do you care more about your allies? And the answer is yes. Suddenly,
*  people who a moment ago, you didn't really care when they got stabbed. Now,
*  simply with this one word thing that you're there now, your allies, you care more about them.
*  But then what I wanted to do was look at how ingrained is this or how arbitrary is it? So we
*  brought new participants in and we said, here's a coin, toss the coin. If it's heads, you're an
*  Augustinian. If it's a tails, you're a Justinian. These are totally made up. Okay. So they tossed
*  it. They get whatever. We give them a band that says Augustinian on it, whatever tribe they're in
*  now. And they get in the scanner and they see a thing on the screen that says the Augustinians
*  and Justinians are two warring tribes. Then you see a bunch of hands. Some are labeled Augustinian,
*  some are Justinian. And now you care more about whichever team you're on than the other team,
*  even though it's totally arbitrary. And you know it's arbitrary because you're the one who tossed
*  the coin. So it's a state that's very easy to find ourselves in. In other words,
*  just before walking in the door, they'd never even heard of Augustinian versus Justinian. And now
*  their brain is representing it simply because they're told they're on this team.
*  You know, now I did my own personal study of this. So once you're an Augustinian,
*  that tends to be sticky because I've been a Packers fan, going back Packers fan my whole life.
*  Boston with the Patriots, it's been tough going from a live wire brain to switch to the Patriots.
*  So once you become, it's interesting, once the tribe is sticky.
*  Yeah, I bet that's true.
*  You know, we never tried that about saying, okay, now you're a Justinian and you were an Augustinian.
*  We never saw how sticky it is. But there are studies of this, of monkey troops
*  on some island. And what happens is they look at the way monkeys behave when they're part of
*  this tribe and how they treat members of the other tribe of monkeys. And then what they do,
*  I've forgotten how they do that exactly, but they end up switching a monkey. So he ends up in the
*  other troop and very quickly they end up becoming a part of the other troop and hating and behaving
*  badly towards the original troop. These are fascinating studies, by the way. This is beautiful.
*  In your book, you have a good light bulb joke. How many psychiatrists does it take to change a
*  light bulb? Only one, but the light bulb has to want to change. I'm sorry. I'm a sucker for a good
*  light bulb joke. Okay. So given, you know, I've been interested in psychiatry my whole life,
*  just maybe tangentially. I've kind of early on dreamed to be a psychiatrist until I understood
*  what it entails. But you know, what, you know, is there hope for psychiatry for somebody else to
*  help this live wired brain to adjust? Oh yeah. I mean, in the sense that, and this has to do with
*  this issue about us being trapped on our own planet, forget psychiatrists, just think of like
*  when you're talking with a friend and you say, Oh, I'm so upset about this. And your friend says,
*  Hey, just look at it this way. You know, all we have access to under normal circumstances,
*  just the way we're seeing something. And so it's super helpful to have friends and communities and
*  psychiatrists and so on to help things change that way. So that's how psychiatrists sort of
*  helped us. But more importantly, the role that psychiatrists have played is that
*  there's this sort of naive assumption that we all come to the table with, which is that everyone
*  is fundamentally just like us. And when you're a kid, you believe this entirely, but as you get
*  older and you start realizing, okay, there's something called schizophrenia and that's a
*  real thing. And to be inside that person's head is totally different than what it is to be inside my
*  head or their psychopathy. And to be inside the psychopath's head, he doesn't care about other
*  people. He doesn't care about hurting other people. He's just doing what he needs to do to
*  get what he needs. That's a different head. There's a million different things going on
*  and it is different to be inside those heads. This is where the field of psychiatry comes in.
*  Now, I think it's an interesting question about the degree to which neuroscience is
*  leaking into and taking over psychiatry and what the landscape will look like 50 years from now.
*  It may be that psychiatry as a profession changes a lot or maybe goes away entirely
*  and neuroscience will essentially be able to take over some of these functions. But
*  it has been extremely useful to understand the differences between how people behave and why and
*  what you can tell about what's going on inside their brain just based on observation of their
*  behavior. This might be years ago, but I'm not sure. There's an Atlantic article you've written
*  about moving away from a distinction between neurological disorders,
*  quote unquote brain problems, and psychiatric disorders or mind problems.
*  On that topic, how do you think about this gray area?
*  Yeah, this is exactly the evolution that things are going. There's psychiatry and then there were
*  guys and gals in labs poking cells and so on. Those were the neuroscientists. But yeah, I think
*  these are moving together for exactly the reason you just cited. Where this matters a lot, the
*  Atlantic article that I wrote was called the Brain on Trial, where this matters a lot is the
*  legal system because the way we run our legal system now, and this is true everywhere in the
*  world, is someone shows up in front of the judge's bench or let's say there's five people in front of
*  the judge's bench and they've all committed the same crime. What we do because we feel like, hey,
*  this is fair, is we say, all right, you're going to get the same sentence. You'll all get three
*  years in prison or whatever it is. But in fact, brains can be so different. This guy's got
*  schizophrenia. This guy's a psychopath. This guy's tweaked out on drugs and so on and so
*  that it actually doesn't make sense to keep doing that. And what we do in this country more than
*  anywhere in the world is we imagine that incarceration is a one size fits all solution.
*  And you may know we have the, America has the highest incarceration rate in the whole world
*  in terms of the percentage of our population we put behind bars. So there's a much more refined
*  thing we can do as neuroscience comes in and changes and has the opportunity to change the
*  legal system, which is to say, this doesn't let anybody off the hook. It doesn't say, oh,
*  it's not your fault and so on. But what it does is it changes the equation. So it's not about,
*  hey, how blame worthy are you? But instead is about, hey, what do we do from here? What's the
*  best thing to do from here? So if you take somebody with schizophrenia and you have them
*  break rocks in the hot summer sun in a chain gang, that doesn't help the schizophrenia.
*  That doesn't fix the problem. If you take somebody with a drug addiction, who's in jail for being
*  caught with two ounces of some illegal substance and you put them in prison, it doesn't actually
*  fix the addiction. It doesn't help anything. Happily, what neuroscience and psychiatry bring
*  to the table is lots of really useful things you can do with schizophrenia, with drug addiction,
*  things like this. And that's why, so I don't know if you know, but I run a national law and profit
*  called the Center for Science and Law. And it's all about this intersection of neuroscience and
*  legal system. And we're trying to implement changes in every county, in every state.
*  Without going down that rabbit hole, I'll just say one of the very simplest things to do is to set
*  up specialized court systems where you have a mental health court that has judges and juries
*  with expertise in mental illness. Because if you go, by the way, to a regular court and the person
*  says, or the defense lawyer says, this person has schizophrenia, most of the jury will say,
*  man, I call bullshit on that. Why? Because they don't know about, they don't know what it's about.
*  And it turns out people who know about schizophrenia feel very differently as a juror than someone who
*  happens not to know anybody with schizophrenia. They think it's an excuse. So you have judges
*  and jurors with expertise in mental illness, and they know the rehabilitative strategies that are
*  available. That's one thing. Having a drug court where you have judges and juries with expertise
*  and rehabilitative strategies and what can be done and so on. A specialized prostitution court
*  and so on. All these different things. By the way, this is very easy for counties to implement
*  this sort of thing. And this is, I think, where this matters to get neuroscience into public policy.
*  What's the process of injecting expertise into this?
*  Yeah, I'll tell you exactly what it is. A county needs to run out of money first. I've seen this
*  happen over and over. So what happens is a county has a completely full jail and they say, you know
*  what? We need to build another jail. And then they realize, God, we don't have any money. We can't
*  afford this. We've got too many people in jail. And that's when they turn to, God, we need something
*  smarter. And that's when they set up specialized court systems. We're all functioned best when
*  our back is against the wall. And that's what COVID is good for. It's because we've all had
*  our routines and we are optimized for the things we do. And suddenly our backs are against the wall,
*  all of us. Yeah, it's really, I mean, one of the exciting things about COVID. I mean, I'm a big
*  believer in the possibility of what government can do for the people. And when it becomes too
*  big of a bureaucracy, it starts functioning poorly, it starts wasting money. It's nice to,
*  I mean, COVID is in reveals that nicely and lessons to be learned about who gets elected.
*  Who goes into government, hopefully this inspires talented young people to go into government,
*  to revolutionize different aspects of it. Yeah. So that's the positive silver lining of COVID.
*  I mean, I thought it'd be fun to ask you, I don't know if you're paying attention to the
*  machine learning world and GPT-3. So the GPT-3 is this language model, this neural network that's
*  able to, it has 175 billion parameters. So it's very large and it's trained in unsupervised
*  way on the internet. It just reads a lot of unstructured texts and it's able to generate
*  some pretty impressive things. The human brain compared to that has about a thousand times more
*  synapses. People get so upset when machine learning people compare the brain. And like we know
*  synapses are different. It was very different, very different. But like, do you, what do you think
*  about GPT-3? Here's what I think. Here's what I think. A few things. What GPT-3 is doing is
*  extremely impressive, but it's very different from what the brain does. So it's a good impersonator,
*  but just as one example, everybody takes a passage that GPT-3 has written and they say,
*  wow, look at this and it's pretty good, right? But it's already gone through a filtering process
*  of humans looking at it and saying, okay, well that's crap. That's crap. Okay. Oh, here's what
*  here's the sentence. It's pretty cool. Now here's the thing. Human creativity is about absorbing
*  everything around it and remixing that and coming up with stuff. So in that sense, we're sort of
*  like GPT-3, you know, we're remixing what we've gotten in before, but we also know, we also have
*  very good models of what it is to be another human. And so, you know, I don't know if you speak
*  French or something, but I'm not going to start speaking in French because then you'll say,
*  wait, what are you doing? I don't understand you. Instead, everything coming out of my mouth is
*  meant for your ears. I know what you'll understand. I know the vocabulary that you know and don't know.
*  I know what parts you care about. That's a huge part of it. And so of all the possible sentences
*  I could say, I'm navigating this thin bandwidth so that it's something useful for our conversation.
*  Yeah. In real time, but also throughout your life. I mean, you're, you're co-evolve,
*  we're co-evolving together. We're learning how to communicate together.
*  Exactly. But this is the, this is what GPT-3 does not do. All it's doing is saying, okay,
*  I'm going to take all these sentences and remix stuff and pop some stuff out.
*  But it doesn't know how to make it so that you, Lex, will feel like, oh yeah, that's exactly what
*  I needed to hear. That's the next sentence that I needed to know about for something.
*  Well, of course it could be all the impressive results we'll see. The question is when,
*  if you raise the number of parameters, whether it's going to be after some-
*  It will not be. It will not be. No, raising more parameters won't. Here's the thing. It's not that
*  I don't think neural networks can't be like the human brain, because I suspect they will be at
*  some point 50 years, you know, who knows? But what we are missing in artificial neural networks is
*  we've got this basic structure where you've got units and you've got synapses, they're connected.
*  And that's great. And it's done incredibly mind-blowing, impressive things, but
*  it's not doing the same algorithms as the human brain. So when I look at my children as little
*  kids, you know, as infants, they can do things that no GPT-3 can do. They can navigate a complex
*  room. They can navigate social conversation with an adult. They can lie. They can do a million
*  things. They are active thinkers in our world and doing things. And this, of course, I mean, look,
*  we totally agree on how incredibly awesome artificial neural networks are right now,
*  but we also know the things that they can't do well, like, you know, like be generally intelligent,
*  do all these different things. Yeah, reason about the world, efficiently learn, efficiently adapt,
*  but it's still the rate of improvement. To me, it's possible they'll be surprised.
*  I agree. We'll be surprised. But what I would assert, and I'm glad I'm getting to say this on
*  your podcast, we can look back at this in two years and 10 years and so on, is that we've got
*  to be much more sophisticated than units and synapses between them. Let me give you an example,
*  and this is something I talk about in LiveWired, is despite the amazing impressiveness, mind-blowing
*  impressiveness, computers don't have some basic things. Artificial neural networks don't have some
*  basic things that we like, caring about relevance, for example. So as humans, we are confronted with
*  tons of data all the time, and we only encode particular things that are relevant to us.
*  We have this very deep sense of relevance that I mentioned earlier is based on survival at the
*  most basic level, but then all the things about my life and your life, what's relevant to you,
*  that we encode. This is very useful. Computers at the moment don't have that. They don't even
*  have a yen to survive and things like that. So we filter out a bunch of the junk we don't need.
*  Really good at efficiently zooming in on things we need. Again, could be argued,
*  let me put on my Freud hat. Maybe it's our conscious mind. There's no reason that neural
*  networks aren't doing the same kind of filtration. In the sense with GPT-3 is doing, so there's a
*  priming step. It's doing an essential kind of filtration when you ask it to generate
*  tweets from an Elon Musk or something like that. It's doing a filtration of throwing away
*  all the parameters it doesn't need for this task, and it's figuring out how to do that successfully.
*  Ultimately, it's not doing a very good job right now, but it's doing a lot better job than we
*  expected. It won't ever do a really good job, and I'll tell you why. Let's say we say, hey,
*  produce an Elon Musk tweet, and we see, oh, wow, it produced these three. That's great. But again,
*  we're not seeing the 3,000 that produced it didn't really make any sense. It's because it
*  has no idea what it is like to be a human. All the things that you might want to say and all the
*  reasons you wouldn't like when you go to write a tweet, you might write something you think,
*  it's not going to come off quite right in this modern political climate or whatever. You know,
*  you change things. It somehow boils down to fear of mortality and all of these human things at the
*  end of the day, all contained with that tweeting experience. Interestingly, the fear of mortality
*  is at the bottom of this, but you've got all these more things like, oh, I want to,
*  just in case the chairman of my department reads this, I want it to come off well there.
*  Just in case my mom looks at this tweet, I want to make sure she, you know, and so on.
*  Those are all the things that humans are able to sort of throw into the calculation.
*  What it requires though is having a model of your chairman, having a model of your mother,
*  having a model of the person you want to go on a date with who might look at your tweet and so
*  on. All these things are, you're running models. What it is like to be them.
*  In terms of the structure of the brain, again, this may be going into speculation land. I hope
*  you go along with me. The brain seems to be intelligent and our AI systems aren't very
*  currently. So where do you think intelligence arises in the brain? Like what, what is it about
*  the brain? So if you mean where location wise, it's no single spot. It would be equivalent to asking,
*  I'm looking at New York City. Where is the economy? The answer is you can't point to anywhere. The
*  economy is all about the interaction of all of the pieces and parts of the city. And that's what,
*  you know, intelligence, whatever we mean by that in the brain is interacting from everything
*  going on in the ones in terms of a structure. So we look humans are much smarter than fish,
*  maybe not dolphins, but dolphins are mammals. Right. I assert that what we mean by smarter has
*  to do with live wiring. So, so what we mean when we say, oh, we're smart is, oh, we can figure out
*  a new thing and figure out a new pathway to get where we need to go. And that's because fish are
*  essentially coming to the table with, you know, okay, here's the hardware go swim, mate, eat,
*  but we have the capacity to say, okay, look, I'm going to absorb. Oh, oh, but you know,
*  I saw someone else do this thing and, and I read once that you could do this other thing and so on.
*  So do you think there's, is there something, I know these are mysteries, but like,
*  architecturally speaking, what feature of the brain of, of the live wire aspect of it
*  that is really useful for intelligence. So like, is it the ability of neurons to reconnect?
*  Like, is there something, is there any lessons about the human brain you think might be inspiring
*  for us in to take into the artificial into the machine learning world? Yeah. I'm actually just
*  trying to write some up on this now called, you know, if you want to build a robot, start with the
*  stomach. And what I mean by that, what I mean by that is a robot has to care. It has to have
*  hunger. It has to care about surviving that kind of thing. Here's an example. So the penultimate
*  chapter of my book, I titled the, the wolf in the Mars Rover. And I just look at this simple
*  comparison of you look at a wolf, it gets its leg caught in a trap. What does it do? It gnaws
*  its leg off and then it figures out how to walk on three legs. No problem. Now the Mars Rover,
*  Curiosity got its front wheel stuck in some Martian soil and it died. This project that
*  cost billions of dollars died because it got its wheels. Wouldn't it be terrific if we could build
*  a robot that chewed off its front wheel and figured out how to operate with a slightly
*  different body plan. That's the kind of thing that we want to be able to build. And to get there,
*  what we need, the whole reason the wolf is able to do that is because its motor and somatosensory
*  systems are live wired. So it says, Oh, you know what? It turns out we've got a body plan.
*  That's different than what I thought a few minutes ago, but I, I have a yen to survive and I care
*  about relevance, which in this case is getting to food, getting back to my pack and so on.
*  So I'm just going to figure out how to operate with this. Oh, whoops, that didn't work. Oh,
*  okay. I'm kind of getting it to work, but the Mars Rover doesn't do that. It just says, Oh geez,
*  I was pre-programmed to have four wheels and I have three. I'm screwed. Yeah. You know, I,
*  I don't know if you're familiar with a philosopher named Ernest Becker. He wrote a book called
*  denial of death. And there's a few psychologists, Sheldon Solomon. I think he, I just spoke with
*  him on his podcast, um, who developed a terror management theory, which is, uh,
*  like Ernest Becker is a philosopher that basically said that, uh, uh, mortality, fear of mortality
*  is at the core of it. Yeah. And so I don't know if it's sounds compelling is an idea that we're,
*  I mean that all of the civilization have constructed is based on this, but it's,
*  I'm familiar with his work. Here's what I think. I think that yes, fundamentally the desire to
*  survive is at the core of it. I would agree with that, but, but how that expresses itself in your
*  life ends up being very different. The reason you do what you do is, I mean, you could list the
*  hundred reasons why you chose to write your tweet this way in that way. And it really has nothing to
*  do with the survival part. It has to do with, you know, trying to impress fellow humans and
*  surprise them and say something. Yeah. So many things built on top of each other, but it's,
*  it's fascinating to think that in artificial intelligence systems, we want to be able to
*  somehow engineer this drive for survival, for immortality. I mean, because as humans,
*  we're not just about survival. We're aware of the fact that we're going to die, which is a very
*  kind of, we're, we're like space time. Aren't. Confucius said, he said each person
*  has two lives. The second one begins when you realize that you have just one.
*  Yeah. But, but most people, it takes a long time for most people to get there.
*  I mean, you could argue this kind of Freudian thing, which is, or as Becker argues is they,
*  they actually figured it out early on. And the terror they felt was like the reason it's been
*  suppressed. And the reason most people, when I ask them about whether they're afraid of death,
*  they basically say, no, they basically say like, um, I'm afraid I won't get like, submit the paper
*  before I die. Like they kind of see, they see death as a kind of, uh, inconvenient deadline for
*  particularly set up like a book you're writing. It's as opposed to like, what the hell this thing
*  ends. It's any moment, like most people as if I have encountered do not meditate on the idea that
*  like right now you could die. Like right now, like it is like it in the next five minutes,
*  it could be all over and you know, meditate on that idea. Um, I think that somehow brings you
*  closer to like the core of the motivations and the core of the human cognition condition.
*  I think it might be the core, but like I said, it is not what drives us day to day.
*  Yeah, there's so many things on top of it, but it is interesting. I mean, as the ancient poet said,
*  uh, death whispers at my ear, live for I come. So it's, it is certainly motivating when we think
*  about that. Okay. I've got some deadline. I don't know exactly what it is, but I better make stuff
*  happen. It is motivating, but I don't think, uh, I mean, I know for just speaking for me personally,
*  that's not what motivates me day to day. It's instead, Oh, I want to get this, you know,
*  program up and running before this, or I want to make sure my coauthor isn't mad at me because I
*  haven't gotten this in, or I don't want to miss this grant deadline or, you know, whatever the
*  thing is. Yeah, it's too, it's too distant in a sense. No, nevertheless, it is good to reconnect,
*  but for the AI systems, none of that is there. Uh, like in neural network does not fear its
*  mortality. Uh, and that, that seems to be somehow fundamentally missing the point.
*  I think that's missing the point, but I wonder, it's an interesting speculation about whether you
*  can build an AI system that is much closer to being a human without the mortality and survival
*  piece, but just the thing of relevance, just, I care about this versus that right now, if you have
*  a robot roll into the room, it's going to be frozen because it doesn't have any reason to go
*  there versus there. It doesn't have any particular set of things about this is how I should navigate
*  my next move because I want something. Yeah. There's a, that's the thing about humans, uh,
*  is they seem to generate goals. They're like, you said live wired. I mean, it is very flexible in
*  terms of the goals and creative in terms of the goals of generate when we enter a room.
*  You show up to a party without a goal usually, and then you figure it out along. Yes. But this
*  goes back to the question about free will, which is when I walk into the party,
*  if you rewound it 10,000 times, would I go and talk to that couple over there versus that person?
*  Like I might do this exact same thing every time because I've got some goal stack and I think,
*  okay, well at this party, I really want to meet these kinds of people or I feel awkward or I,
*  whatever, you know, whatever my goals are, by the way, so there was something that I meant to
*  mention earlier, if you don't mind going back, which is this, when we were talking about BCI,
*  so I don't know if you know this, but what I'm spending 90% of my time doing now is running a
*  company. Do you know about this? Yes. I wasn't sure what the company is involved in. Right. So
*  we can talk about it. Yeah. Yeah. So when it comes to the future of BCI, um, you know, you,
*  you can put stuff into the brain invasively, but my interest has been how you can get data streams
*  into the brain non-invasively. So I run a company called Neo sensory and, uh, what we build is this
*  little, um, wristband. We've built this in many different factors. Yeah, this is it. And it's got
*  these vibratory motors in it. So these things, as I'm speaking, for example, it's, you know,
*  capturing my voice and running algorithms and then turning that into patterns of vibration here.
*  So people who are deaf, for example, learn to hear through their skin. So the information is
*  getting up to their brain this way and they learn how to hear. So it turns out on day one,
*  people are pretty good, like better than you would expect at being able to say, oh, that's weird.
*  It was that, was that a dog barking? Was that a baby crying? Was that a door knock a doorbell?
*  Like people are pretty good at it, but with time they get better and better.
*  And what it becomes is a new qualia. In other words, a new subjective internal experience.
*  So on day one, they say, whoa, what was it? Oh, oh, that was the dog barking. But by, you know,
*  three months later they say, oh, there's a dog barking somewhere. Oh, there's the dog.
*  That's fascinating.
*  And by the way, that's exactly how you learn how to use your ears. So what you, of course,
*  you don't remember this, but when you were an infant, all you have are, you know, your
*  eardrum vibrating causes spikes to go down your auditory nerves and impinge on your,
*  you know, auditory cortex. Your brain doesn't know what those mean automatically,
*  but what happens is you learn how to hear by looking for correlations. You know,
*  you clap your hands as a baby, you know, you look at your mother's mouth moving and that correlates
*  with what's going on there. And eventually your brain says, all right, I'm just going to summarize
*  this as an internal experience, as a conscious experience. And that's exactly what happens here.
*  The weird part is that you can feed data into the brain, not through the ears,
*  but through any channel that gets there. As long as the information gets there,
*  your brain figures out what to do with it.
*  That's fascinating. Like expanding the set of sensors. It could be, could be arbitrarily,
*  could, could, could, yeah, could expand arbitrarily, which is fascinating.
*  Well, exactly. And by the way, the reason I use this skin, you know, there's all kinds of
*  cool stuff going on in the AR world of glass. But the fact is your eyes are overtaxed and your ears
*  are overtaxed and you need to be able to see and hear other stuff. But you're covered with the skin,
*  which is this incredible computational material with which you can feed information. And we don't
*  use our skin for much of anything nowadays. My joke in the lab is that I say we don't call this
*  the waste for nothing. Cause originally we built this the vest and you know, you're passing in all
*  this information that way. And what I'm doing here with, with the deaf community is, is what's
*  called sensory substitution, where I'm capturing sound and sense. I'm just replacing the ears with
*  the skin and that works. One of the things I talk about in LiveWire is sensory expansion.
*  So what if you took something like your visual system, which picks up on a very thin slice of
*  the electromagnetic spectrum and you could see infrared or ultraviolet. So we've hooked that up
*  infrared and ultraviolet detectors and you know, I can feel what's going on. So just as an example,
*  the first night I built the infrared, one of my engineers built that the infrared detector,
*  I was walking in the dark between two houses and suddenly I felt all this infrared radiation. I was
*  like, where does that come from? And I just followed my wrist and I found a, an infrared camera,
*  a night vision camera that was, but like, you know, I immediately, oh, there there's that thing there.
*  That's fascinating.
*  Of course I would have never seen it, but now it's just part of my reality.
*  That's fascinating.
*  Yeah. And then of course, what I'm really interested in is sensory addition. What if you could pick up
*  on stuff that isn't even part of what we normally pick up on, like, you know, like the magnetic
*  field of the earth or Twitter or stock market or things like that.
*  Or the, I don't know, some weird stuff like the moods of other people or something like that.
*  Sure. Now what you need is a way to measure that. So as long as there's a machine that can measure
*  it, it's easy, it's trivial to feed this in here and you come to be, it comes to be part of your
*  reality. It's like you have another sensor.
*  And that kind of thing is without doing like, if you look at Neuralink without,
*  I forgot how you put it, but it was eloquent, you know, without getting, cutting into the brain,
*  basically.
*  Yeah, exactly. Exactly. So this costs at the moment, $399.
*  It's not going to kill you. You just put it on and when you're done, you take it off.
*  Yeah. And so, and the name of the company, by the way, is Neo Sensory for new senses,
*  because the whole idea is, you can, as I said, you know, you come to the table with
*  certain plug and play devices and then that's it. Like I can pick up on this little bit of the
*  electromagnetic radiation, pick up on this little frequency band for hearing and so on.
*  But I'm stuck there and there's no reason we have to be stuck there. We can expand our Umwelt
*  by adding new senses. Yeah.
*  What's Umwelt?
*  Oh, I'm sorry. The Umwelt is the slice of reality that you pick up on. So each animal has its own.
*  Hell of a word.
*  Umwelt. Yeah, exactly. I'm sorry, I forgot to define it before. It's such an important concept,
*  which is to say, for example, if you are a tick, you pick up on butyric gas, you pick up on odor
*  and you pick up on temperature. That's it. That's how you construct your reality is with those two
*  sensors. If you are a blind echolocating bat, you're picking up on air compression waves coming
*  back, you know, echolocation. If you are the black ghost knife fish, you're picking up on
*  changes in the electrical field around you with electro reception. That's how they swim around
*  and tell there's a rock there and so on. But that's all they pick up on. That's their Umwelt.
*  That's the signals they get from the world from which to construct their reality. And they can
*  be totally different Umwelts. And so our human Umwelt is, you know, we've got little bits that
*  we can pick up on. One of the things I like to do with my students is talk about, imagine that you
*  are a bloodhound dog, right? You are a bloodhound dog with a huge snout with 200 million scent
*  receptors in it. And your whole world is about smelling. You know, and you've got slits in your
*  nostril, take big nosefuls of air and so on. Do you have a dog? Nope, used to. Okay, so, you know,
*  you walk your dog around and your dog is smelling everything. The whole world is full of signals
*  that you do not pick up on. And so imagine if you were that dog and you looked at your human master
*  and thought, my God, what is it like to have the pitiful little nose of a human? How could you not
*  know that there's a cat a hundred yards away or that your friend was here six hours ago? And so
*  the idea is because we're stuck in our umbelt, because we have this little pitiful nose, we
*  think, okay, well, yeah, we're seeing reality, but you can have very different sorts of realities
*  depending on the peripheral plug and play devices you're equipped with. It's fascinating to think
*  that like, if we're being honest, probably our umbelt is, you know, some infinitely tiny percent
*  of the possibilities of how you can sense quote unquote reality. Even if you could, I mean, there's
*  a guy named Donald Hoffman. Yeah. He basically says, uh, we're really far away from reality
*  in terms of our ability to sense anything. Like we were very, we're almost like we're floating out
*  there. That's almost like completely detached to the actual physical reality. It's fascinating
*  that we can have extra senses that could help us get a little bit, a little bit closer. Exactly.
*  And by the way, this has been the fruits of science is realizing, like, for example, you
*  open your eyes and there's the world around you. Right. But of course, depending on how you
*  calculate it, it's less than a 10 trillionth of the electromagnetic spectrum that we call
*  visible light. Uh, the reason I say it depends because, you know, it's actually infinite in all
*  directions. Yeah. And so that's exactly that. And then science allows you to actually look into
*  the rest of it. Exactly. Start understanding how big the world is out there. And the same with the
*  world of really small and the world of really large. That's beyond our ability to sense.
*  Exactly. And so the reason I think this kind of thing matters is because we now have an opportunity
*  for that first time in human history to say, okay, well, I'm just going to include other things in
*  my umbell. So I'm going to include infrared radiation and, and have a direct perceptual
*  experience of that. And so I'm very, you know, I mean, so, you know, I've given up my lab and I
*  run this company 90% of my time now. That's what I'm doing. I still teach at Stanford and I'm,
*  you know, teaching courses and stuff like that. But this is like, uh, this is your, your passion.
*  The fire is, is, is on this. Yeah. I feel like this is the most important thing that's happening
*  right now. I mean, I obviously I think that cause that's what I'm devoting my time in my life to,
*  but, um, I mean, it's a brilliant set of ideas. It certainly is like it, um, it's a step in, uh,
*  in a very vibrant future, I would say like the possibilities there are, are endless.
*  Exactly. So if you ask what I think about Neuralink, I think it's amazing what those
*  guys are doing and working on, but I think it's not practical for almost everybody. For example,
*  for people who are deaf, they buy this and you know, every day we're getting tons of emails and
*  tweets and whatever from people saying, wow, I picked up on this and that. And then I had no
*  idea that was a, I didn't even know that was happening out there. And they're coming to hear
*  through this, by the way, this is, you know, less than a 10th of the price of a hearing aid and
*  like 250 times less than a cochlear implant. That's amazing. Uh, people love hearing about,
*  uh, what, you know, brilliant folks like yourself, uh, could recommend in terms of books. Of course,
*  you're an author of many books. So I'll in the introduction mention all the books you've written.
*  People should definitely read live wired. I've gotten a chance to read some of it. It's amazing,
*  but is there three books, technical fiction, philosophical that had an impact on you when
*  you were younger or today and, uh, books, perhaps some of which you would want to recommend that
*  others read. Uh, you know, as an undergraduate, I majored in British and American literature. That
*  was my major because I love literature. I grew up with, um, literature. My father had these extensive
*  bookshelves. And so I grew up in the mountains in New Mexico. And so that was mostly why I spent
*  my time was reading books. But, um, you know, I love, uh, you know, Faulkner, Hemingway, I love
*  many South American authors, Gabriel Garcia Marquez and Italo Calvino. I would actually
*  recommend Invisible Cities. I just, I loved that book by Italo Calvino. Sorry. It's a book of
*  fiction. Um, uh, Anthony Dora wrote a book called All the Light We Cannot See, which actually, uh,
*  was inspired by incognito by exactly what we were talking about earlier about how you can only see
*  a little bit of the, what we call visible light in the electromagnetic radiation. I wrote about
*  this in incognito and then he reviewed incognito for the Washington Post. And then he wrote this
*  book called, the book has nothing to do with that, but that's where the title comes from.
*  Yeah. All the Light We Cannot See is about the rest of the spectrum. But, um,
*  the, that's an absolutely gorgeous book. That's a book of fiction. Yeah. It's a book of fiction.
*  One that people are surprised. What's it about? It takes place during World War II,
*  about these two young people, one of whom is blind. And, uh, yeah. Anything else? So what,
*  any, so you mentioned Hemingway? I mean, Old Man, Old Man in the Sea. What, uh, what's your favorite,
*  uh, um, Snow's a Kilimanjaro. Uh, it's a collection of short stories that I love. Um, as far as not,
*  as far as non-fiction goes, I grew up, uh, with Cosmos, both watching the PBS series,
*  then reading the book. And that influenced me a huge amount in terms of what I do. I,
*  as from the time I was a kid, I felt like I want to be Carl Sagan. Like I just, that's what I loved.
*  And in the end, I just, you know, I studied space physics for a while as an undergrad, but then I,
*  in my last semester, discovered neuroscience last semester. And I just thought, wow, I'm hooked on
*  that. So the Carl Sagan of the brain is the aspiration. I mean, uh, you're doing, you're
*  doing, um, an incredible job of it. So you opened the book LiveWired with a quote by Heidegger.
*  Every man is born as many men and dies as a single one. Uh, well, what do you mean or what?
*  I'll tell you what I meant by it. So he, he had his own reason why he was writing that, but I
*  meant this in terms of brain plasticity in terms of the library, which is this issue that I mentioned
*  before about this, you know, this cone, the space time cone that we are in, which is that when you
*  dropped into the world, you Lex had all this different potential. You could have been a great
*  surfer or a great chess player, or you could have been thousands of different men when you grew up.
*  But what you did is things that were not your choice and your choice along the way, you know,
*  you ended up navigating a particular path and now you're exactly who you are. You still have
*  lots of potential, but the day you die, you will be exactly Lex. You will be that one person. Yeah.
*  So on that, in that context, first of all, it's just a beautiful, it's a humbling picture,
*  but it's a beautiful one because it's, uh, all the possible trajectories and you pick one,
*  you walk down that road and it's the Robert Frost poem. But on that topic, let me ask the,
*  the biggest and the most ridiculous question. So in this live wide brain, when we choose all
*  these different trajectories and end up with one, what's the meaning of it all? What's, uh,
*  is there, is there a why here? What's the meaning of life? David Ingleman.
*  I mean, this is the question that everyone has attacked from their own
*  life point of view, by which I mean, culturally, if you grew up in a religious society,
*  you have one way of attacking that question. So if you grew up in a secular scientific society,
*  you have a different way of attacking that question. Obviously I don't know.
*  There's no abstain on that question. I mean, I think one of the fundamental things, I guess,
*  in that, in all those possible trajectories is, uh, you're always asking. I mean, that's the act
*  of asking what the heck is this thing for is equivalent to, or at least runs in parallel to
*  all the choices that you're making. Cause it's kind of, that's the underlying question.
*  Well, that's right. And by the way, you know, this is the interesting thing about
*  human psychology, you know, we've got all these layers of things at which we can ask questions.
*  And so if you keep asking yourself the question about what is the optimal way for me to be
*  spending my time, what should I be doing? What charity should I get involved with? And so on.
*  If you're asking those big questions that, that steers you appropriately. If you're the type
*  person who never asks, Hey, is there something better I could be doing with my time? Then
*  presumably you won't optimize whatever it is that is important to you. So you've, uh, I think just
*  in your eyes, in your work, there's a passion, uh, that just is obvious and it's inspiring.
*  It's contagious. What, um, if you were to give advice to, uh, a young person today in the crazy
*  chaos that we live today, uh, about life, about how to, how to, um, how to discover their passion,
*  is there some words that you could give? First of all, I would say the main thing for a young
*  person is stay adaptable. And this is back to this issue of why COVID is useful for us,
*  because it forces us off our tracks. The fact is the jobs that will exist 20 years from now,
*  we don't even have names for it. We can't even imagine the jobs that exist. And so when young
*  people that I know go into college and they say, Hey, what should I major in? And so on college
*  is and should be less and less vocational as in, Oh, I'm going to learn how to do this. And then
*  I'm going to do that the rest of my career. The world just isn't that way anymore with the, the
*  exponential speed of things. So the important thing is learning how to learn, learning how to be
*  livewired and adaptable. That's really key. And what I tell, what I advise young people,
*  what I talk to them is, you know, what you digest that that's what gives you the raw storehouse
*  of things that you can remix and be creative with. And so eat broadly and widely. And obviously this
*  is the wonderful thing about the internet world we live in now is you kind of can't help it.
*  You're constantly, well, you know, you go down some mole hole of Wikipedia and you think, Oh,
*  I didn't even realize that was a thing. I didn't know that existed. And so. Embrace that. Embrace
*  that. Yeah, exactly. And what I tell people is just always do a gut check about, okay, I'm reading
*  this paper and yeah, I think that, but this paper, wow, that really, I really cared about that.
*  In some way I tell them just to keep a real sniff out for that. And when you find those things,
*  keep going down those paths. Yeah, don't be afraid. I mean, that's one of the, the challenges and the
*  downsides of having so many beautiful options is that sometimes people are a little bit afraid to
*  really commit, but that's very true. If there's something that just sparks your interest and
*  passion, just run with it. I mean, that's, it goes back to the Heider quote. I mean, we only get this
*  one life and that trajectory, it doesn't last forever. So just if something sparks your
*  imagination, your passion is run with it. Yeah, exactly. I don't think there's a more
*  beautiful way to end it. There is a huge honor to finally meet you. Your work is inspiring. So
*  many people I've talked to so many people who are passionate about neuroscience, about the brain,
*  even outside that read your book. So I hope, I hope you keep doing so. I, I think you're already
*  there with Carl Sagan. I hope you continue growing. Yeah, it was an honor talking with today. Thanks so
*  much. Great. You too, Lex. Wonderful. Thanks for listening to this conversation with David Eagleman
*  and thank you to our sponsors, Athletic Greens, BetterHelp and Cash App. Click the sponsor links
*  in the description to get a discount and to support this podcast. If you enjoy this thing,
*  subscribe on YouTube, review it with Five Stars and Apple Podcasts, follow on Spotify,
*  support on Patreon or connect with me on Twitter at Lex Friedman. And now let me leave you with
*  some words from David Eagleman in his book, Some Forty Tales from the Afterlives. Imagine
*  for a moment there were nothing but the product of billions of years of molecules coming together
*  and ratcheting up through natural selection. There were composed only of highways of fluids
*  and chemicals sliding along roadways within billions of dancing cells. The trillions of
*  synaptic connections hum in parallel that this vast egg-like fabric of micro-thin circuitry runs
*  algorithms undreamt of in modern science. And that these neural programs give rise to our
*  decision-making, loves, desires, fears and aspirations. To me, understanding this would
*  be a numinous experience, better than anything ever proposed in any holy text. Thank you for
*  listening and hope to see you next time.
*  you
