---
Date Generated: October 31, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 3792s
Video Keywords: ['paul krugman', 'economics', 'nobel prize', 'ny times', 'politics', 'ubi', 'andrew yang', 'automation', 'artificial intelligence', 'agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence podcast', 'lex fridman', 'lex podcast', 'lex mit', 'lex ai', 'lex jre', 'mit ai']
Video Views: 185239
Video Rating: None
Video Description: Paul Krugman is a Nobel Prize winner in economics, professor at CUNY, and columnist at the New York Times. His academic work centers around international economics, economic geography, liquidity traps, and currency crises.

This episode is presented by Cash App. Download it & use code "LexPodcast":
Cash App (App Store): https://apple.co/2sPrUHe
Cash App (Google Play): https://bit.ly/2MlvP5w

PODCAST INFO:
Podcast website:
https://lexfridman.com/podcast
Apple Podcasts:
https://apple.co/2lwqZIr
Spotify:
https://spoti.fi/2nEwCF8
RSS:
https://lexfridman.com/feed/podcast/
Full episodes playlist:
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLrAXtmErZgOdP_8GztsuKi9nrraNbKKp4
Clips playlist:
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLrAXtmErZgOeciFP3CBCIEElOJeitOr41

EPISODE LINKS:
Paul Twitter: https://twitter.com/paulkrugman
NY Times: https://www.nytimes.com/column/paul-krugman
Arguing with Zombies (book): https://amzn.to/2RBZoSb

OUTLINE:
0:00 - Introduction
3:44 - Utopia from an economics perspective
4:51 - Competition
6:33 - Well-informed citizen
7:52 - Disagreements in economics
9:57 - Metrics of outcomes
13:00 - Safety nets
15:54 - Invisible hand of the market
21:43 - Regulation of tech sector
22:48 - Automation
25:51 - Metric of productivity
30:35 - Interaction of the economy and politics
33:48 - Universal basic income
36:40 - Divisiveness of political discourse
42:53 - Economic theories
52:25 - Starting a system on Mars from scratch
55:11 - International trade
59:08 - Writing in a time of radicalization and Twitter mobs

CONNECT:
- Subscribe to this YouTube channel
- Twitter: https://twitter.com/lexfridman
- LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/lexfridman
- Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/LexFridmanPage
- Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/lexfridman
- Medium: https://medium.com/@lexfridman
- Support on Patreon: https://www.patreon.com/lexfridman
---

# Paul Krugman Economics of Innovation, Automation, Safety Nets & UBI  Lex Fridman Podcast #67
**Lex Fridman:** [January 21, 2020](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OJQepiqSWvg)
*  The following is a conversation with Paul Krugman, Nobel Prize winner in economics,
*  professor at CUNY, and columnist at the New York Times. His academic work centers around
*  international economics, economic geography, liquidity traps, and currency crises. But he
*  also is an outspoken writer and commentator on the intersection of modern-day politics and economics,
*  which places him in the middle of the tense, divisive, modern-day political discourse.
*  If you have clicked dislike on this video and started writing a comment of derision before
*  listening to the conversation, I humbly ask that you please unsubscribe from this channel
*  and from this podcast. Not because you're conservative, a libertarian, a liberal, a socialist,
*  an anarchist, but because you're not open to new ideas, at least in this case, especially at its
*  most difficult, from people with whom you largely disagree. I do my best to stay away from politics
*  of the day because political discourse is filled with a degree of emotion and self-assured certainty
*  that to me is not conducive to exploring questions that nobody knows the definitive right answer to.
*  The role of government, the impact of automation, the regulation of tech, the medical system,
*  guns, war, trade, foreign policy are not easy topics and have no clear answers despite the
*  certainty of the so-called experts, the pundits, the trolls, the media personalities, and the
*  conspiracy theorists. Please listen, empathize, and allow yourself to explore ideas with curiosity
*  and without judgment and without derision. I will speak with many more economists and political
*  thinkers trying to stay away from the political battles of the day and instead look at the long
*  arc of history and the lessons it reveals. In this, I appreciate your patience and support.
*  This is the Artificial Intelligence Podcast. If you enjoy it, subscribe by YouTube, give it 5 stars
*  on Apple Podcasts, follow on Spotify, support it on Patreon, or simply connect with me on Twitter
*  at Lex Friedman, spelled F-R-I-D-M-A-N. I recently started doing ads at the end of the introduction.
*  I'll do one or two minutes after introducing the episode and never any ads in the middle
*  that can break the flow of the conversation. I hope that works for you and doesn't hurt the
*  listening experience. This show is presented by Cash App, the number one finance app in the
*  App Store. Cash App lets you send money to friends, buy bitcoin, and invest in the stock
*  market with fractional share trading, allowing you to buy one dollar's worth of the stock no
*  matter what the stock price is. Broker services are provided by Cash App Investing, a subsidiary
*  of Square and member SIPC. Get Cash App from the App Store and Google Play and use the code
*  LexPodcast. You'll get 10 dollars and Cash App will also donate 10 dollars to the first,
*  one of my favorite organizations that is helping to advance robotics and STEM education for young
*  people around the world. Since Cash App does fractional share trading, let me say that to me,
*  it's a fascinating concept. The order execution algorithm that works behind the scenes to create
*  the abstraction of fractional orders for the investor is an algorithmic marvel. So big props
*  to the Cash App engineers for that. I like it when tech teams solve complicated problems to provide,
*  in the end, a simple effortless interface that abstracts away all the details of the underlying
*  algorithm. And now, here's my conversation with Paul Krugman.
*  What does a perfect world, a utopia, from an economics perspective look like?
*  Wow, I don't really believe in perfection. I mean, somebody once said that his ideal was
*  slightly imaginary Sweden. I mean, I like an economy that has a really high safety net for
*  people, good environmental regulation, and something that's kind of like
*  some of the better run countries in the world, but with fixing all of the smaller things that
*  are wrong with them. What about wealth distribution? Well, obviously, totally quality is neither
*  possible nor, I think, especially desirable. But I think you want one where, basically one where
*  nobody is hurting and where everybody lives in the same material universe. Everybody
*  is basically living in the same society. So I think it's a bad thing to have people who are
*  so wealthy that they're really not in the same world as the rest of us.
*  What about competition? Do you see the value of competition? What may be its limits?
*  Oh, competition is great when it can work. I mean, there's a,
*  I remember, I'm old enough to remember when there was only one phone company and there was
*  really limited choice. And I think the arrival of multiple phone carriers and all that has actually
*  been a really good thing. And that's true across many areas, but not every industry is,
*  not every activity is suitable for competition. So there are some things
*  like healthcare where competition actually doesn't work. And so it's not one size fits all.
*  That's interesting. Why does competition not work in healthcare?
*  Oh, there's a long list. I mean, there's a famous paper by Kenneth Arrow from 1963,
*  which still holds up very well, where he kind of runs down the list of things you need for
*  competition to work well. Basically, both sides to every transaction being well informed,
*  having the ability to make intelligent decisions, understanding what's going on,
*  and healthcare fails on every dimension. Healthcare, so not health insurance,
*  healthcare. Well, both healthcare and health insurance, health insurance being part of it.
*  But no, health insurance is really the idea that there's effective competition between health
*  insurers is wrong and healthcare. I mean, the idea that you can comparison shop for major surgery is
*  just, you know, it to when people say things like that, do you, you wonder, are you living in the
*  same world I'm living in? You know, that the piece of well informed, that was always an interesting
*  piece for me, just observing as an outsider, because so much beautiful, such a beautiful world
*  is possible and everybody's well informed. A question for you is how hard is it to be well
*  informed about anything, whether it's healthcare, or any kind of purchasing decisions or just
*  life in general in this world? Oh, information, you know, it varies hugely. I mean, there's more
*  information at your fingertips than ever before in history. The trouble is, first of all, that
*  some of that information isn't true. So it's really hard. And then some of it's just too hard
*  to understand. So if I'm if I'm buying a car, I can actually probably do a pretty good job of
*  looking up, you know, going to consumer reports, reviews, you can get a pretty good idea of what
*  you're getting when you get a car. If I'm going in for surgery. First of all, fairly often it
*  happens when without your ability being able to plan it. But also, there's a medical school takes
*  many, many years and going on the internet for some advice is not usually a very good substitute.
*  So speaking about news and not being able to trust certain sources of information,
*  how much disagreement is there about I mentioned utopia perfection in the beginning, but how much
*  disagreement is there about what utopia looks like? Or is most of the disagreement simply about
*  the path to get there? Oh, I think there's two levels of disagreement. One, maybe not utopia,
*  but justice. What is a just society? And that's there are different views. I mean, I teach my
*  students that there are, you know, broadly speaking, two views of justice. One focuses on,
*  on outcomes. You ask yourself, it's a just society is the one you would choose if you were trying to
*  the one that you would choose to live in if you didn't know who you're going to be. That's kind
*  of John Rawls. And the other focuses on process. That just society is one in which there is no,
*  no coercion, except we're absolutely necessary. And there's no, there's no objective way to choose
*  between those. I'm pretty much a Rawlsian. And I think many people are, but anyway, there's,
*  so there's a legitimate dispute about what, what we mean by a just society anyway. But then there's
*  also a lot of disputes about what actually works. There, there's a range of legitimate dispute. I
*  mean, any card carrying economist will say that incentives matter, but how much do they matter?
*  How much does a higher tax rate actually deter people from working? How much does a,
*  a stronger safety net actually lead people to, to, to get lazy? I have a pretty strong view that the
*  evidence is, points to conclusions that are considerably to the left of, of where most of
*  our politicians are, but, but that there is legitimate room for disagreement on those things.
*  So you've mentioned outcomes. What are some metrics you think about that you keep in mind,
*  like the Gini coefficient, but really anything that measures how good we're doing, whatever
*  we're trying to do? What are the metrics you keep an eye on? Well, I'm actually, I'm not a fan of
*  the Gini coefficient, not because what is the Gini coefficient? Yeah. The Gini coefficient is a,
*  is a measure of inequality and it is commonly used because it's a single number. It usually
*  tracks with other measures, but the trouble is there's no sort of natural interpretation of it.
*  You asked me what, you know, what, what does a society with a Gini of 0.45 look like as opposed
*  to a society with a Gini of 0.25? And well, I can kind of tell you, you know, when the 0.25 is
*  Denmark and 0.45 is Brazil, but it's, that's a really, there's no sort of easy way to do that
*  mapping. I mean, I look at things like what is, first of all, things like what is the income of
*  the median family? What is the income of the top 1%? How many people are in poverty by
*  various measures of poverty? And then I think you want to look at questions like
*  how healthy are people? How, how is life expectancy doing and how satisfied are
*  people with their lives? Cause there is, you know, it's, that's a, that sounds like a squishy number,
*  not so much happiness. It turns out that life satisfaction is a better measure than the
*  happiness. But life satisfaction, that varies quite a lot. And I think it, I think it's meaningful,
*  if not too rigorous to say, look, according to that kind of, according to polling,
*  people in Denmark are pretty satisfied with their lives and people in the United States,
*  not so much so. And of course Sweden wins every time. No, actually Denmark wins these things.
*  Denmark.
*  Denmark and Norway tend to win these days. Sweden doesn't do badly, but
*  they're, they're, they're, it's, none of these are, are perfect. But look, I think by and large,
*  there's a bit of a pornography test. If you, how do you know a decent society? Well, you kind of
*  know it when you see it. Right. Where does America stand on that?
*  We are, have a remark, our society, I mean, it's, there are a lot of virtues to America,
*  but there's a level of harshness, brutality, an ability for somebody who just has bad luck
*  to fall off the edge that is really, shouldn't be happening in a country as rich as ours.
*  So we, we, we have somehow managed to produce a, a, a crueller society than
*  almost any other wealthy country for no good reason.
*  What do you think is lacking in the safety net that the United States provides? You said
*  there's a harshness to it. And what, what are the benefits and maybe limits of a safety net in,
*  in a country like ours? Well, every other advanced country has some universal guarantee
*  of adequate healthcare. The only, the United States is the only place where citizens can
*  actually fail to get basic healthcare because they can't afford it. That's, that's, that's,
*  we, it's not hard to do. Everybody else does it, but we don't. We've gotten a little bit better
*  at it than we were, but still that's, that's a big deal. We have remarkably weak support for,
*  um, for children. We, most countries have a substantial safety, you know, parents of,
*  of young children get much more support elsewhere. They get, uh, often nothing in the U S. Um,
*  we have limited, uh, care for people, long-term care for, for the elderly
*  is a very hit and miss thing. But I think that the really big issues are that, uh,
*  we don't take care of children who make the mistake of having the wrong parents and we don't
*  take care of people who make the mistake of getting sick. And, uh, those are,
*  those are things that a country, a rich country should be doing.
*  Sorry for sort of a difficult question, but what you just said kind of, um, feels like the right
*  thing to do in terms of a just society, but is it also good for the economic health of society to
*  take care of, to care the people who are the unfortunate members of society?
*  By and large, it looks like the, the, doing the right thing in terms of justice is also the
*  right thing in terms of economics. If we're talking about a society that has extremely high
*  tax rates that deter, you know, remove all incentives to provide a safety net that is so
*  generous that why bother working or striving? Uh, that could be a problem, but that's the,
*  I don't actually know any society that looks like that. Even, even in European country with very
*  generous safety nets, people work and, uh, and innovate into all of these things. And there's a
*  lot of evidence now that, um, lacking those basics is actually destructive that, uh, children who
*  grow up without adequate healthcare, without adequate nutrition, uh, are developmentally
*  challenged. They don't live up to their potential as adults. So the, the United States actually
*  probably pays a price. You know, we're, we're, we're harsh, we're cruel, and we actually make
*  ourselves poorer by, uh, as a society, not just the individuals by, by being so harsh and cruel.
*  Okay. So invisible hand Smith, where does that fit in the power of just people acting selfishly
*  and somehow everything taking care of itself to where, you know, uh, the economy grows,
*  uh, nobody, there's no cruelty, no injustice that the markets themselves regulate themselves. What,
*  is, is there power to that idea and where, what are its limits?
*  There's a lot of power to that. I mean, there's a reason why, uh, I don't think sensible people
*  want the government running steel mills or they want the government to own the farms, right? Uh,
*  the, um, the markets are, are a pretty effective way of, uh, getting incentives aligned of inducing
*  people to do stuff that works. And the invisible hand is saying that, you know, people, farmers
*  aren't growing crops because they want to feed people. They're growing crops because they can
*  make money by it, but it actually turns out to be a pretty good way of getting, of getting, uh,
*  agricultural products grown. Uh, so the invisible hand is an important part, but it's not, there's
*  nothing mystical about it. It's a, it's a mechanism. It's a way to organize economic activity,
*  which works well given a bunch of preconditions, um, which means that it actually works well for
*  agriculture. It works well for manufacturing. Uh, it works well for many services. It doesn't
*  work well for healthcare. It doesn't work well for education. So there are, yeah, we having a
*  society, which is kind of three quarters, uh, invisible hand and one quarter visible hand seems
*  to be something, something on that order seems to be the balance that works best. It's just don't
*  want to, um, you don't want to romanticize or Mr. Uh, you know, uh, make something mystical out of
*  it. It's just, uh, this is, is one way to organize stuff that happens to have broad, but not
*  universal application. So then forgive me for romanticizing it, but it does seem pretty magical
*  that it, you know, that I kind of have an intuitive understanding of what happens when you have like
*  five, 10, maybe even a hundred people together, the dynamics of that, but the fact that these large
*  society of people for the most part acting in a self-interested way and maybe electing representatives
*  for themselves, they all kind of seems to work. It's pretty magical. The fact that there's, uh,
*  you know, that right now there's, uh, uh, a wide assortment of fresh fruit and vegetables, uh,
*  uh, in, you know, in, in, at the, uh, in the local markets up and down the street, uh, you know,
*  who's, who's planning that? And the answer is nobody. That's the, that's the invisible hand at
*  work. And that's great. And, um, and that's a lesson that's that Adam Smith figured out
*  more than 200 years ago. And, um, it's, um, it continues to apply in the, the, but, you know,
*  even Adam Smith, uh, has a section in his book about why it's important to regulate banks.
*  So the invisible hand has its limits. Yeah. And that example is actually a powerful one in terms
*  of the supermarket fruit. That was my experience coming from Russia, from the Soviet union
*  is, uh, when I first entered a supermarket and just seeing the assortment of fruit,
*  bananas, I don't think I've seen bananas before, first of all, but just the selection of fresh
*  fruit was just mind blowing it, it, uh, beyond words. And the fact that like, like you said,
*  I don't know what made that happen. Well, that there is some magic to the market, but the, uh,
*  uh, there's as, uh, showing my age, but you know, the old movie quotes, sometimes the magic works
*  and sometimes it doesn't. And you have to have some idea of when it doesn't. So how do you get
*  regulation, right? How do, what can government at its best to government strangely enough in this
*  country today, uh, seems to get a bad rap. Like everyone seems to, everybody's against the
*  government. Yeah. Well, a lot of money has been spent on making people hate the government,
*  but the reality is government does some things pretty well. I mean, we, uh, uh,
*  government does health insurance pretty well. Uh, so much so I mean, given our anti-government bias,
*  it really is true that there are people out there saying, don't let the government get its hands on
*  Medicare. Um, so government people actually love the government health insurance program far more
*  than they love private health insurance. Um, uh, basic education, uh, it turns out that, uh, your,
*  your local public high school is the right place to have students trained and, and private for
*  certainly for-profit education is a, is a, by and large, a nightmare, uh, of, of, uh, rip offs and,
*  and, and grift and, and people, uh, uh, not getting what they thought they were paying for. Um,
*  it's a judgment case. And it's funny. There are things, I mean, everybody talks,
*  there's a, talks about the DMV as being, you know, how do you want the economy? Actually,
*  my experience is that the DMV have always been positive. Maybe I'm just going to the right DMVs,
*  but, uh, in fact, uh, there, a lot of government works pretty well. So it, you'd have to, to some
*  extent, you can do these things on a priori grounds. You can talk about the logic of why
*  healthcare is not going to be handled well by the market, but partly it's just experience.
*  We tried, or at least some countries have tried nationalizing their steel industries. That didn't
*  go well. Uh, but we've tried privatizing education and that didn't go well. So you,
*  you find out what works. What about this new world of tech? How do you see,
*  what do you think works for tech? Is it more regulation or less regulation?
*  There are some things that need more regulation. I mean, we're finding out that, uh, you know,
*  the world of social media is, is one in which, uh, competitive, competitive forces aren't
*  working very well and trusting the companies to regulate themselves. Isn't working very well.
*  But I'm on the whole a tech skeptic, not in the sense that I think the tech doesn't work
*  and it doesn't do stuff, but the idea that we're living through greater technological
*  change than ever before is really an illusion. Uh, we've ever since the beginning of the
*  industrial revolution, we've had a series of ethical shifts in the nature of work and, and,
*  and the kinds of jobs that are available. Uh, and it's not at all clear that what we're ha what's
*  happening now is any bigger or faster or harder to cope with than past shocks.
*  It is a popular notion in today's sort of public discourse that automation is going to have a huge
*  impact on the job market now. Yeah. There is something, something transformational happening
*  now. Can you talk about that? Maybe elaborate on a little bit more. Do you not see the software
*  revolutions happening now with, uh, with machine learning, availability of data, that kind of
*  automation, being able to sort of process clean, find patterns in data. And, you know, do you don't
*  see that disrupting any one sector to a point where there's a huge loss of jobs?
*  There may be some things. I mean, actually, you know, translators, there's really reduced
*  demand for translators because, uh, we've machine translation ain't perfect, but it ain't bad. Um,
*  there are some kinds of things that are changed, but, uh, uh, it's not overall productivity growth
*  has actually been slow in recent years. Now it's been much slower than, than in some past periods.
*  So the idea that automation is taking away all the jobs, the counterpart would be that we would
*  be able to produce stuff with many fewer workers than before. And that's not happening. There are
*  a few isolated sectors. There are some kinds of, uh, of, of jobs that, that are going away, but that
*  keeps on happening. I mean, they, uh, New York city used to have thousands and thousands of long
*  shoremen taking stuff off, off ships and putting them on ships. Uh, they're almost all gone now.
*  Now you have these, the giant cranes taking containers on and off ships in Elizabeth,
*  New Jersey. Um, that's not robots. It's doesn't, it doesn't sound high tech, but it actually
*  pretty much destroyed an occupation. Um, well, you know, that was, it wasn't fun for the long
*  shoremen to say the least. And, uh, but it, it's not, uh, we coped, we moved on and that,
*  that sort of thing happens all the time. You mean farmers. We, uh, we, we used to be a nation,
*  which was mostly farmers. There are now very few farmers left. Uh, the, and the reason is not that,
*  uh, we've stopped eating. It's that farming has become so efficient that we don't need a lot of
*  farmers and we coped with that too. So the idea that there's something, uh, qualitatively different
*  about what's happening now so far isn't true. So yeah, your intuition is there is going to be a
*  loss of jobs, but it's just the thing that just continues. So, you know, there's nothing
*  qualitatively different about this moment. Some jobs will be lost. Others will be created as,
*  has always been the case so far. Maybe there's a singularity. Maybe there's a moment when,
*  the, when the machines get smarter than we are and sky tech kills us all or something, right? But the,
*  but, um, that's not visible in anything we're seeing now.
*  You mentioned the metric of productivity. Could you explain that a little bit? Cause
*  it's a really interesting one. I've heard you mentioned that before, uh, the connection with,
*  with automation. So what, what is that metric? And if there is something qualitatively different,
*  what should we see in that metric? Well, okay. Productivity, first of all, production.
*  We do have a measure of the total, the economy's total production, you know, real GDP, uh, which is
*  itself, it's a little bit of a construct because it's quite literally, it's adding apples and
*  oranges. So we, we have to add together various things, which we basically do by using, uh,
*  market prices, but we try to adjust for inflation. Um, but it's kind of, it's a reasonable measure
*  of how much the economy is producing. Is it goods and sorry to interrupt. Is it goods and services?
*  It's services. It's everything. Okay. Productivity is divide that total output by the number of,
*  of hours worked. So we're basically asking how much, how much stuff, uh, does the average worker
*  produce an hour of work? And if you're seeing really rapid technological progress, then you'd
*  expect to see productivity rising at a rapid clip, uh, which we did, you know, for the generation
*  after World War II productivity rose, uh, you know, 2% a year on a sustained basis. Then it
*  dropped down for a while. Then there was a kind of a decade of fairly rapid growth from the mid
*  nineties to the mid two thousands. Um, and then it's, it dropped off again and it's not,
*  it's not impressive right now. So you're just not seeing an ethical shift in, in, in the economy.
*  So let me then ask you about the psychology of blaming automation. A few months ago, you
*  wrote in the New York times quote, the other day I found myself as I often do at a conference
*  discussing lagging wages and soaring inequality. There was a lot of interesting discussion,
*  but one thing that struck me was how many of the participants just assumed that robots are a big
*  part of the problem, that machines are taking away the good jobs or even jobs in general.
*  For the most part, this wasn't even presented as a hypothesis, just as part of what everyone knows.
*  Yeah. So why is, uh, maybe can you psychoanalyze our, the public, uh, the public intellectuals or
*  economists or us actually in the general public, why this is happening,
*  why this assumption is just infiltrated public discourse.
*  There's a couple of things. One is that the particular technologies that are advancing now
*  are ones that are a lot more visible to, uh, you know, the chattering class. Uh, the, you know,
*  when you had a, when, when containerization did away with the jobs of longshoremen, well,
*  not a whole lot of college professors are close friends with longshoremen, right? And, uh, so,
*  so we see this one. Then there's a second thing, which is, you know, we just went through
*  severe financial crisis in a period of very high unemployment. It's finally come down.
*  Okay. The, there's really no question that that high unemployment was about macroeconomics.
*  It was about a failure of demand, but macroeconomics is really not intuitive. I mean,
*  people just have a hard time wrapping their minds around it. And among other things,
*  people have a hard time believing that something as trivial as, well, people just aren't spending
*  enough can lead to the kind of mass misery that we saw in the 1930s or the not quite so severe,
*  but still serious misery that we saw after 2008. And there's always a tendency to say,
*  it must be something big. It must be technological change. That means we don't need workers anymore.
*  That was a lot of that in the thirties. And that same thing happened after 2008,
*  the assumption that it has to be something, uh, some deep cause, not something as trivial as,
*  uh, a failure of investor confidence and inadequate monitoring and fiscal response.
*  Um, and the last thing on wages, um, a lot of what's happened on wages is at some level
*  political. It's the collapse of the union movement. It's the, it's policies that have squeezed workers
*  bargaining power. Uh, and for kind of obvious reasons, there are a lot of influential people
*  who don't want to hear that story. They want it to be an inevitable force of nature. Technology
*  has made it impossible to have people earn middle-class wages. And, uh, they, so they don't,
*  they don't like, they, they don't like the story that says actually, no, it's kind of the political
*  decisions that we made that have caused this, this income stagnation. And so there are a receptive
*  audience for technological determinism. So what comes first in your view of the economy or politics
*  in terms of what has impact on the other? Oh, well, they look, they, it, everything interacts
*  actually. That's one of the rules of, uh, that I was taught in economics. Everything, everything
*  affects everything else in at least two ways, but the, um, the, um, I mean, clearly the economy
*  drives a lot of political stuff. Uh, but also clearly politics has a huge impact on, on,
*  on the economy there. Uh, you know, we, we look at the decline of unions in America and say, well,
*  you know, the world has changed and unions don't have a role, but, uh, you know, two-thirds of
*  workers in Denmark are unionized and Denmark face has the same technology and faces the same global
*  economy that we do. It's just a difference in political choices that leads to that difference.
*  So, uh, I actually teach a course here at CUNY on called economics of the welfare state, which is
*  about things like healthcare and retirement and to some extent wage policy and so on. And
*  the message I keep on trying to drive home is that look, all advanced countries have got roughly
*  equal competence. We all have the same technology, uh, but we make very different choices. Not that
*  America always makes the wrong choices. We do some things pretty well. Our retirement system is,
*  is one of the better ones, but, uh, but the point is that there's a huge amount of political choice
*  involved in the, in the shape of the economy. So what is, what is a welfare state? Well,
*  welfare state is the old term, uh, that, but it basically refers to all the programs that are there
*  to mitigate, if you like, the, uh, the, uh, risks and injustices of the market economy. So in the
*  U S the welfare state is social security, Medicare, Medicaid, minimum wages, uh, food stamps. When you
*  say welfare state, my first sort of feeling is a negative one. Well, I like all, I probably, uh,
*  generally, at least theoretically like all the welfare programs. Well, that's, it's been
*  demonized and, uh, to some extent I'm being a little, doing a little bit of a thumbing my
*  nose at all of that by just using the term welfare state. Uh, uh, although it's not, I see. Yeah,
*  I got you. But everybody, every advanced country actually has a lot of, of, of welfare state,
*  even the U S I mean, we, uh, uh, that's fundamental part of the fabric of our society.
*  Social security, Medicare, Medicaid, uh, are just things we take for granted as part of the scene.
*  And, um, uh, so if you, uh, you know, there, there's a lot of, there's, uh, people on the
*  right wing who are, you can say, oh, it's, it's, it's all socialism and, uh, well, you know,
*  words, I guess, mean what you want them to mean. Uh, and we, uh, just, just today, I, I told my
*  class about the, uh, the, um, record that Ronald Reagan made in 1961 warning that Medicare would
*  destroy American freedom. And, uh, but it sort of didn't happen on the topic of welfare state.
*  What are your thoughts on universal basic income and that sort of, uh, uh, a g not a generic, but
*  a universal safety net of this kind. There's always a trade-off. When we talk about social
*  safety net programs, there's always a trade-off between universality, uh, which is clean, but
*  means that you're giving a lot of money to people who don't necessarily need it. Um, and some kind
*  of targeting, which makes it easier to get to, to deal with the crucial problems with limited
*  resources, but, but both has incentive problems and, and kind of political and I would say even
*  psychological issues. So, um, the great thing about social security and Medicare is no questions
*  asked. You don't, you don't have to prove that you need them. Uh, it just comes, you know, I didn't,
*  I'm on Medicare. I mean, it's, it's run through my, my, uh, my, my New York Times health insurance,
*  but I didn't have to file an application with the Medicare office to prove that I needed it. It just
*  happened when I turned 65. Um, there's, that's good for dignity and it's also good for the political
*  support because everybody gets Medicare. Um, on the other hand, uh, if you, uh, and, and we can do
*  that with healthcare, um, to give everybody a guarantee of an income that's enough to live on
*  comfortably, what that's a lot of money. What about enough income to carry you over, uh,
*  through difficult periods, like if you lose a job or that kind of thing? Well, we have unemployment
*  insurance and I think our unemployment insurance is too short-lived and too stingy. It would be
*  better to have a more comprehensive unemployment insurance benefit. Um, but the trouble with,
*  with something like universal basic income is that either the bar is set too low. So it's really not
*  something you can live on or it's an enormously expensive program. And so at this point, I think
*  that we can do far better by building on the kinds of safety net programs we have. I mean,
*  food stamps, earned income tax credit, uh, we should have a lot more family support policies.
*  Those things can deal with, can do a lot more to really diminish the amount of misery in this
*  country. Um, UBI is something that is being, I mean, it, it goes kind of hand in hand with,
*  with this belief that the robots are going to take all of our jobs. And if that was really
*  happening, then I might reconsider my views on UBI, but I don't see that happening.
*  So are you happy with this course that's going on now in terms of politics? So you mentioned a few
*  political candidates is, is the kind of thing going on and on both on Twitter and debates and
*  the media through the written words, there's a spoken word. How do you assess the public
*  discourse now in terms of politics? We're in a fragmented world. So more so than ever before.
*  So at this point, the public discourse, uh, that you see if, um, if you're,
*  if Fox news is your principal news source is, is very different from the one you get if you read
*  the New York times on the whole, my sense is that mainstream political reporting policy reporting
*  is a not too great, but be better than it's ever been.
*  Cause when I first got into the, you know, the pundit business, it was just awful. Lots of things
*  just never got covered. And if things did get covered, it was always both sides. I mean, it's
*  the line that comes back from me writing during the 2000 campaign was that if,
*  if one of the candidates said that the earth was flat, uh, uh, the headline would be views
*  differ on shape of planet. I mean, it's, uh, uh, and, and it's, that's less true. There's still a
*  fair bit of that out there, but it's less true than there used to be. And there are more people,
*  um, reporting writing on, on policy issues who actually understand them than ever before.
*  Um, so though that's good. Uh, but I still, I have how much the
*  typical voter is actually informed unclear. I mean, the, the, uh, the democratic debates,
*  uh, I think we, I'm hoping that we finally get down to having a, not having, uh, uh,
*  27 people on the stage or whatever it is they have, but, um, but you know, they're reasonably
*  substantive, uh, certainly better than before. And while there's a lot of still, you know,
*  theater criticism instead of actual analysis and the reporting it's, it's not as totally
*  dominant as in the past. Can I ask a, maybe a dumb question, but, um, from an open-minded perspective,
*  when, uh, you know, people on the left and people on the right, I think view the other,
*  the others as sometimes complete idiots. Yeah. What do we do with that? You know, is it possible
*  that the people on the right are correct about their, what they currently believe? Uh,
*  is that kind of open-mindedness helpful or is this division long-term productive for,
*  for us to sort of have this food fight? Well, the trouble you have to confront is that
*  there's a lot of stuff that just is false out there and, but commands extensive political allegiance.
*  So the idea, well, both sides need to listen to each other respectfully. I'm happy to say
*  respectfully, I'm happy to do that when there's a view that is worthy of respect, but a lot of
*  stuff is not. And, um, so take economics, um, is something where I think I know something
*  and I'm not sure that I'm always right. In fact, I know I'm, I've been wrong plenty of times. Um,
*  but I think that there is a difference between, uh, economic views that are within the realm of
*  we can actually have an interesting discussion. Uh, and those that are just crank doctrines or
*  things that, that are, are purely being disseminated because people are being paid to disseminate them.
*  So there are, there are plenty of good serious center-right economists that I'm happy to,
*  to talk to. Uh, none of those center-right economists has any role in the Trump administration.
*  Trump administration and by and large Republicans in Congress only want to listen to people who are
*  cranks. And so I, I, I think it's being dishonest with my readers to, to pretend otherwise. There's
*  no way I can reach out to people who think that, um, uh, that reading Ayn Rand novels is, is, is
*  how you learn about monetary economics. Let me linger on that point. So if you look at Ayn Rand,
*  okay. So you said center, right? What about extreme people who have like radical views?
*  You think they're not grounded in, um, in any kind of data, any kind of reality. I'm just sort of,
*  um, curious about how open we should be to ideas that seem radical.
*  Oh, radical ideas is fine, but then you have to ask, have to ask, is there some basis for the
*  radicalism? And if it's, if it's a, uh, if it's something that is not, uh, grounded in anything,
*  uh, then, and particularly by the way, if it's something that's been refuted by evidence again
*  and again, and the people just keep saying it, if it's a zombie idea and there's a lot of those out
*  there, then there comes a point when it's not worth, uh, trying to fake respect for it.
*  I see. So there's a, through the scientific process, you've shown that this idea does not
*  hold water, but I like the idea, zombie ideas, but they live on through, it's like the idea that the
*  earth is flat, for example, uh, has been, uh, for the most part disproven, but it lives on actually
*  growing in popularity, uh, currently. Yeah. And there's a lot of that out there and there,
*  you can't, uh, you can't wish it away and it's, you're not being fair to either yourself or if
*  you're somebody who writes for the public, you're not being fair to your readers to pretend otherwise.
*  So quantum mechanics is a strange theory, but it's testable. And so while being strange,
*  it's widely accepted amongst physicists. How robust and testable are economics theories
*  if we compare them to quantum mechanics and physics and so on?
*  Okay. Economics, look, it's a complex system and it's also one in which by and large you don't get
*  to do experiments. And so economics is never going to be like quantum mechanics. That said,
*  you get natural experiments, you get, uh, tests of, of rival doctrines, you know, in the immediate
*  aftermath of the financial crisis. Uh, there was one style, one, one basic theory of macroeconomics,
*  which ultimately goes back to John Maynard Keynes that made a few predictions. It said,
*  under these circumstances, uh, printing money will not be inflationary, running big budget
*  deficits will not cause a rise in interest rates, slashing government spending, austerity policies
*  will lead to, uh, to depressions if, if tried. Other people had, you know, exactly the opposite
*  predictions and we got a fairly robust test and, you know, one, one theory one interest rates
*  stayed low, inflation stayed low, austerity countries that implemented harsh austerity
*  policies suffered severe economic downturns. Uh, you don't get much, you know, that's, that's pretty
*  clear and that's not going to be true on everything, but there's a lot of empirical,
*  I mean, the younger economists, uh, these days are very heavy, heavily data based and it's,
*  and that's great. And I, I'm, uh, I think that's, that's the way to go.
*  What theories of economics are, is there currently a lot of disagreement about what you said?
*  Oh, um, first of all, there's just a lot less disagreement really among serious researchers
*  in economics than people imagine. I mean, we actually, we can track that the, uh, Chicago
*  Booth School has a panel, an ideologically diverse panel and they pose, uh, regularly pose questions
*  and on most thing there, there's a huge, uh, there's remarkable consensus. There are a lot of,
*  of, of things where there, people imagine that there's dispute, but the, the, the illusion of
*  dispute is something that's basically being fed by political forces and there isn't really. Um,
*  I mean, there are, I think we re questions about, uh, what are effective ways to regulate
*  technology industries. We really don't know, uh, uh, uh, the answers there. Um, there's a, or look,
*  um, I don't follow every part. Minimum wages. I think there's, there's, uh, pretty overwhelming
*  evidence that, that a modest increase in the minimum wage from current levels would be, uh,
*  would not have any noticeable adverse effect on, on jobs. But if you ask how high can it go,
*  $12 seems pretty safe, given what we know. 15 is 15. Okay. There's some legitimate disagreement
*  there. I think probably, but, but I can, people have a point, uh, 20 where, where is the line
*  at which it starts to become a problem? And the answer is truly, we don't know. It's fascinating
*  to try to such a cool economics is cool in that sense. Cause you're trying to predict something
*  that hasn't been done before the impact, the effects of something that hasn't been done before.
*  Yeah. You're trying, you're going out of sample and we have good reason to believe that, that there
*  are, you know, that it's nonlinear, that there comes a point at which it doesn't work the way it has,
*  uh, in the past. So as an economist, how do you see science and technological innovation? When I
*  took various economics courses in college, technological innovation seemed like a no-brainer
*  way of growing an economy and we should invest in it aggressively. I may be biased, but it seemed
*  like the various ways to grow an economy, it seems like the easiest way, especially long-term.
*  Is that correct? And if so, why aren't we doing it more? Well, that's okay. The first question is,
*  yeah, I mean, all it's pretty much overwhelming. We think we can more or less measure this,
*  although there are some assumptions involved, but it's something like 70 to 80% of the growth
*  in per capita income is, is basically the advance of knowledge. It's not just, it's not just the
*  crude accumulation of capital. It is, it is the fact that we get, get smarter. A lot of that,
*  by the way, is more prosaic kinds of technology. So, you know, we, um, uh, I, I like to talk about
*  things like containerization or, you know, an earlier period, the, uh, uh, uh, you know,
*  the invention of the, uh, flat pack cardboard box that had to be invented. And, uh, and now all of
*  your deliveries from Amazon are made possible by the existence of that technology. The web stuff is,
*  is important too, but, but what would we do without cardboard boxes? So, but all of that stuff is
*  really important in driving economic progress. Well, why don't we invest more? Uh, why don't we
*  invest more in, uh, again, more prosaic stuff? Why aren't, why haven't we built another goddamn
*  rail tunnel under the Hudson river? Uh, which is the, for which the need is, is so totally
*  overwhelmingly obvious. How do you think about, first of all, I don't even know what the word
*  prosaic means, but I inferred it, but how do you think about prosaic? Is it, uh, the really most
*  basic dumb technology innovation, or is it just like the lowest hanging fruit of where benefit
*  can be gained? Uh, when I say prosaic, I mean stuff that is not sexy and fancy and high tech.
*  It's, uh, uh, building bridges and tunnels, uh, having, uh, uh, inventing the cardboard box or,
*  uh, the, uh, I don't know where, where do we put, uh, uh, easy pass in there? That's a, uh,
*  it is, it is actually using some modern technology and all that, but it, it's not going to have,
*  I don't think you're going to make a movie about, uh, uh, about the, the, the guy, whoever was it
*  invented easy pass, but, uh, but it's actually a pretty significant, uh, productivity booster.
*  To me, it always seemed like it's something that everybody should be able to agree on
*  and just invest. So like in the same way, there's the investment in the military
*  and, um, the DOD is huge. So everyone kind of, not everyone, but there's a, there's a,
*  there's an agreement amongst people that somehow that a large defense is important.
*  It always seemed to me like you should, that should be shifted towards if you want to grow
*  prosperity of the nation, you should be investing in knowledge. Yes. Prosaic stuff,
*  investing in infrastructure and so on. I mean, sorry to linger on it, but do you have any intuition?
*  Do you have a hope that that changes? And do you have intuition why it's not changing?
*  I'm more than intuition. I have a theory. I'm reasonably certain that I understand why,
*  why we don't do it. Uh, and it's, it's because, um, because we have a real values dispute about,
*  the welfare state, about how much the government should do to help the unfortunate.
*  And politicians believe, uh, probably rightly that there's a kind of halo effect that surrounds
*  any kind of government intervention that, uh, even though providing people with, uh,
*  enhanced social security benefits is really very different from building a tunnel
*  under the Hudson river. Um, politicians of both parties seem to believe that it's,
*  the government has seen to be successful at doing one kind of thing. It will make people
*  think more favorably on it, doing other kinds of things. And so we have conservatives tend to be
*  opposed to any kind of increase in government spending, except military, uh, no matter how,
*  uh, obviously a good idea it is because they fear that it's the thin end of the wedge for
*  bigger government in general. Uh, and to some extent, liberals tend to favor spending on
*  these things, uh, uh, partly because they see it as a, a way of proving that government can do
*  things well and therefore it can turn to, uh, broader social goals. It's clearly con- there's a,
*  if you like the, the, what you might've thought would be a technocratic discussion about
*  government investment, both in research and in infrastructure, um, is contaminated by the
*  fact that government is government and people link it to other government actions.
*  Perhaps silly question, but as a species, we're currently working on venturing out into space,
*  one day colonizing Mars. So when we started society on Mars from scratch,
*  uh, what political and economic system should it operate under?
*  Oh, I'm a big believer in, first of all, I don't think we're actually going to do that,
*  but let's, uh, let's imagine hypothesize that we colonize Mars or something. Um,
*  look, representative democracy, uh, is, uh, versus pure democracy.
*  Well, yeah, pure democracy where people vote directly on everything is, is really problematic
*  because people don't have time to, uh, to, uh, to try and master every issue. I mean, we, we,
*  we can see what government by referendum looks like. There's a lot of that in,
*  in California and it's, uh, it doesn't work so good because it's hard to explain to people
*  the various things they vote for may conflict. So representative democracy, uh, is, uh,
*  it's got lots of problems. Um, and I, I kind of the Winston Churchill thing, right? It's
*  the worst system we know, except for all the others.
*  But so, yeah, sticking with the representative and basically the American system of, uh, regulation
*  and markets and the economy we have going on is a pretty, pretty good one for Mars.
*  If we start from scratch. If you're going to start from scratch, you wouldn't,
*  you wouldn't want a Senate where 16% of the population has half the seats. Uh,
*  you probably would want one, which is more actually more representative than what we have.
*  Um, and the details, it's unclear. I mean, the, uh, we,
*  when times are good, all of the various representative democracy systems, whether it's,
*  um, um, parliamentary democracies or a U S style system, uh, whether you have a prime minister
*  or the head of state as an elected president, they all kind of work well. And they all,
*  when times are good and they all have different modes of breakdown. So I'm not sure I know what
*  the answer is, but, uh, but something like that, uh, is given what we've seen through history,
*  it, it, it's the least bad system out there. I mean, I don't know. Uh, uh,
*  I don't know if you, uh, I'm a big fan of, of the TV series, the expanse. And,
*  and it's kind of gratifying that, uh, out there, the, uh, the, uh, it's the Martian congressional
*  Republic. Okay. In a brief sense. So amongst many things, you're also an expert at international
*  trade. What do you make of the, the complexity? So I can understand trade between two people,
*  say two neighboring farmers. Uh, it seems pretty straightforward to me. Uh, but international,
*  when you start talking about nations and nations trading, it seems to be very complicated.
*  So from a high level, why is it so complicated? What are all the different factors that way
*  that objectives need to be considered in international trade? And maybe feeding that
*  into a question of, um, do you have concerns about the two giants right now of the U S and China
*  and the, and the tension that's going on with, uh, international trade there with the trade war?
*  Well, first of all, international trade is not really that different from trade among individuals.
*  It's, it, it's vastly more complex and there are, there are many more players, but in the end,
*  the reasons why countries trade are pretty much the same as the reasons why individuals trade.
*  Countries trade because they're different and they can, um, derive mutual advantage from
*  concentrating on the things they do relatively well. And, um, also there are
*  economies of, uh, scale, you know, you don't not, uh, individuals have to decide whether to be a
*  surgeon or a, uh, uh, or an accountant. It's probably not a good idea to try and be both
*  and countries, uh, benefit from specializing, uh, just because of the inherent advantages
*  of specialization. And that's so now the fact that it's a big world and, um, the,
*  we're talking about millions of products being traded and in today's world often, uh, trade
*  involves many stages. So that, uh, made in China iPhone is actually assembled from components that
*  are made all over the world. Uh, and, uh, but it doesn't really change the fundamentals all that
*  much. Um, there's a recurrent, I mean, the, the, the bake, the big,
*  the dirty little secret of international trade conflict is that actually it's not conflicts
*  among countries are really not that important. Um, most trade is beneficial to both sides and, uh,
*  to both countries. Uh, but it has big impacts on the distribution of income within countries.
*  So, um, the growth of us trade with China has made both us and China richer, but it's been pretty bad
*  for people who were employed in the North Carolina furniture industry, uh, who did find that their
*  jobs were displaced by a wave of imports from China. And so that's where the complexity comes in.
*  Um, not at all clear to me, I mean, they, we have some real problems with China, though they don't
*  really involve trade so much as, as things like, um, respect for intellectual property. Uh,
*  not clear that those real problems that we do have with China have anything to do with the
*  current trade war. The current trade war seems to be driven instead by a, a fundamentally, uh, wrong
*  notion that when we sell goods to China, that's good. And when we buy goods from China, that's
*  bad. And that's, that's misunderstanding the whole point. Is, uh, is trade with China in
*  both directions a good thing? Yeah, we would be poorer if it wasn't for it, but it, but there are,
*  there are downsides as there are for any economic change. It's like any new technology makes us
*  richer, but often hurts some, some people. Uh, trade with China makes us richer, but
*  hurts some people. And, uh, uh, I wouldn't undo what has happened, but I, I wish we had had a
*  better policy for, uh, supporting and compensating the losers from that growth.
*  So we live in a time of radicalization of political ideas, Twitter mobs and so on.
*  And yet here you are in the midst of it, both tweeting and writing in New York Times articles
*  with strong opinions, writing this chaotic wave of public discourse. Do you ever hesitate or, uh,
*  feel a tinge of fear for exploring your ideas publicly and unapologetically?
*  Oh, I feel fear all the time. Uh, it's not too hard to imagine scenarios in which this is,
*  you know, I might personally find myself, uh, kind of in the, in the crosshairs.
*  And, uh, uh, I mean, I'm the, I am the king of hate mail. I get them amazing correspondence. Uh,
*  um, does it affect you? It did. It did when it started these days, I've, I've developed a very
*  thick skin. Uh, so I know I don't usually get, in fact, if I, if I don't get a wave of hate mail
*  after a column, then, then I probably wasted the, the, that, that day. So what do you make of that
*  as a, as a person who's putting ideas out there? If you look at the history of ideas,
*  the way it works is you write about ideas, you put them out there, but now when there's so much
*  hate mail, so much division, what advice do you have for yourself and for others trying to
*  have a discussion about ideas, difficult ideas? Well, I don't know about advice for others. I
*  mean, if, if, you know, for most economists, you know, just do your research. That's, uh, um,
*  we can't all be public intellectuals and we shouldn't try to be. And in fact, I,
*  I, I'm glad that I didn't get into this business until I was, uh, until I was in my late forties.
*  I mean, this is, uh, it's probably best to spend, uh, uh, the, the, your decades of greatest
*  intellectual flexibility addressing deep questions, not, not confronting Twitter mobs. Um, and the,
*  um, and as for the rest, when I think when you're writing about stuff, the, uh, um,
*  sort of, you know, uh, dances like no one's watching, right? Like nobody's reading,
*  right? Right? What you're then what you think is right. I'm trying to make it obviously trying to
*  make it, it comprehensible and persuasive, but, uh, don't let yourself get intimidated by the fact
*  that some people are going to, uh, say, say, uh, nasty things. It's, uh, you can't,
*  you can't do, you can't, uh, do your job if you are worried about criticism.
*  Well, I think I speak for a lot of people and saying that I hope that you keep dancing like
*  nobody's watching on Twitter and New York times and, and books. So Paul is been an honor. Thank
*  you so much for talking to me. Great. Thanks for listening to this conversation with Paul Krugman
*  and thank you to our presenting sponsor, Cash App. Download it and use code LexPodcast. You'll get
*  $10 and $10 will go to FIRST, an organization that inspires and educates young minds to become
*  science and technology innovators of tomorrow. If you enjoy this podcast, subscribe on YouTube,
*  give it five stars on Apple podcast, follow on Spotify, support on Patreon, or simply connect
*  with me on Twitter at Lex Friedman. And now let me leave you some words from Adam Smith
*  in The Wealth of Nations, one of the most influential philosophers and economists in our
*  history. It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker that we expect
*  our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest. We address ourselves not to their
*  humanity, but to their self love and never talk to them of our necessities, but of their advantages.
*  Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
