---
Date Generated: April 13, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 7870s
Video Keywords: ['jason calacanis', 'artificial intelligence', 'agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence podcast', 'lex fridman', 'lex podcast', 'lex mit', 'lex ai', 'lex jre', 'mit ai']
Video Views: 380837
Video Rating: None
---

# Jason Calacanis: Startups, Angel Investing, Capitalism, and Friendship | Lex Fridman Podcast #161
**Lex Fridman:** [February 15, 2021](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d2bYwYxqJCM)
*  The following is a conversation with Jason Calacanis, who's an entrepreneur,
*  investor, author of Angel, How to Invest in Technology Startups.
*  And as many people may know, he's a fun, brilliant,
*  longtime podcast host of This Week in Startups and cohost
*  of the All In podcast with Chamath Palahapitiya, David Sacks
*  and David Friedberg, who all happen to be poker buddies and self-proclaimed
*  besties. The result is always a great listen due to both the love
*  and the heated disagreements.
*  Quick mention of our sponsors, Brave Browser,
*  Linode Linux Virtual Machines, Four Sigmatic Mushroom Coffee
*  and Rev Speech to Text Service.
*  Click the sponsor links to get a discount and to support this podcast.
*  As a side note, let me say that I've been learning a lot about real
*  world finance in the past few months.
*  To give you a bit of context on the side, I've studied trading
*  from an algorithmic trading perspective as a machine learning
*  and a game theory problem off and on for a few years in undergrad and grad school.
*  I found the distributed complex system aspect of finance
*  and economics in general fascinating.
*  But now I find even more fascinating the human side of the whole thing.
*  Ideas of greed, power, freedom and truth.
*  Wall Street bets Robin Hood and the whole beautiful mess around this topic
*  allows us to have great conversations about human nature
*  and the systems that underlie the rise and fall of civilizations.
*  If you enjoy this thing, subscribe on YouTube, review it on Apple Podcasts,
*  follow on Spotify, support on Patreon, connect with me on Twitter
*  at Lex Friedman.
*  And now here's my conversation with Jason Kulakanis.
*  I have a million things to talk to you about, but we do happen
*  to be living through what I would think of as a historic event
*  in terms of its impact, in terms of like almost philosophically
*  thinking about the role of people and how they can fight power
*  with this whole Wall Street bets and GameStop situation.
*  I was wondering, you've covered in your amazing all in podcasts.
*  You guys have been having fascinating battles over this whole situation.
*  I was wondering if you could tell maybe from your perspective
*  as it's unrolling the the saga of Wall Street, best in GameStop.
*  What are some interesting insights?
*  Yeah, that you have about this whole set of events.
*  In full disclosure, I was an angel investor in Robin Hood before they launched.
*  And when I met the founder, Vlad and his partner,
*  you know, they pitched me at a bar not too far from where we are right now
*  in Palo Alto called Antonio's Nut House.
*  And my friend, Deo, it's a really good story.
*  My friend, Deo, had asked me to speak at his Founders Institute,
*  which is kind of like an accelerator for people who were thinking
*  about starting a company.
*  And so I gave a talk and then he said, hey, let's go to Antonio's Nut House
*  and we'll meet Elon for a drink.
*  And so Elon met us for a drink there.
*  And it's the divest of dive bars.
*  Like you'll take a beer.
*  I love the image of all of this.
*  You hang out with Elon at a crappy bar.
*  Yeah, I mean, it is the worst bar in the peninsula.
*  Like just garbage on the floor and like cheap beer and warm beer.
*  And like you pick up your pine glass and be lipstick on it.
*  It's brutal. Classy.
*  Not your lipstick.
*  You understand somebody else's lipstick. Yes.
*  And so we're sitting there and Vlad walks up with
*  his partner and he says, you're Jason Calacanis.
*  And I said, tell me about your startup.
*  He said, how do you know I have a startup?
*  I said, you recognize me.
*  And I mean, that's the only way.
*  And he goes, is that Elon Musk?
*  I said, yes, Elon, come say hi.
*  And he came over and said hi.
*  I said, tell me what you do.
*  He said, well, I'm a quant.
*  I said, what's that?
*  And he said, quantitative analysis.
*  And I was like, oh, yeah, yeah, I know about that.
*  That's like you guys make algorithms and then try to beat the market.
*  Right. He's like, yeah.
*  I was like, so you're going to pitch me on a startup
*  and you're going to sell your algorithm to other people.
*  And if it was so good, why wouldn't you just use it yourself and print money?
*  He's like, yeah, yeah, no, no, that's not our business.
*  Our business is we're going to create an app to get millennials to trade stocks.
*  And he said, hmm, you do realize there's no retail investors anymore.
*  Like the dot com crash plus the 2008 financial crisis
*  eliminated any individual's belief in participating in the stock market.
*  And he said, that's the opportunity.
*  I said, OK, I like it. Tell me more.
*  He said, well, we're going to get these millennials to trade.
*  I said the same ones who live in their mom's basements
*  and take Uber and Lyft and are on their parents have no money,
*  got screwed and went 250K into debt for school and now can't get a job.
*  Those people. And he's like, yeah, I'm like, OK,
*  they have no interest in their future, but they're going to trade stocks.
*  He said, yeah, that's the opportunity.
*  I was like, how are you going to make money?
*  And he said, well, that's the best part. It's going to be free.
*  And I said, so your idea is to get a group of people who have no interest in saving for their
*  future to trade and your business model is free.
*  And he said, yes, I said, I'm in.
*  Because in almost all cases, the crazy outlandish ideas
*  that nobody believes in are the ones that have the greatest returns.
*  I mean, Uber I introduced to about 25 investors and three of us said yes.
*  So, you know, a full 12 percent of the community who saw that deal decided to do it.
*  So your sense about this idea being good
*  had to do with the fact that this guy was just crazy and ambitious and bold thinking.
*  Or was it that there was something here in allowing a much larger magnitude of people
*  to be able to be investors?
*  Yeah, the way to do really well as an angel investor or just in technology or in life
*  is to not say what could go wrong, but to say what could go right.
*  And then to just imagine for a moment if it does work, what would the world look like?
*  And so when Elon was investing in Tesla and some other guys were running it
*  and he was trying to save the company, you know, it wasn't is this going to work?
*  It was almost positively not going to work.
*  It was and he knew that.
*  But if it does work, what does the world look like?
*  And so that's really what you're looking for is not the chances of success,
*  but if it does succeed, does succeed, what would that look like?
*  And you that's what the world needs more people doing.
*  And so when you looked at Robin Hood, it was like, well, if he does succeed,
*  what would the world look like?
*  And now we've seen what it looks like.
*  You have a generation who are so financially sophisticated
*  that they know how to do puts and calls and shorts and research at a level
*  that dominated the hedge fund industry.
*  So let's pause for a second.
*  These traders sitting there on a subreddit in a discord server are able to do analysis
*  and research and then act in unison to say we're going to beat in the Robin Hood sense,
*  you know, this group of sophisticated insiders who have more access and more access to capital,
*  but we will figure out how to solve this problem.
*  And, you know, things most things don't work.
*  It's like the Wikipedia, like there's no way no way the Wikipedia would ever work.
*  Right.
*  Except it did.
*  Yeah.
*  Right. Like you're like, how is this ever going to work?
*  You're not paying anybody, but it's built the largest corpus of an encyclopedia ever.
*  So I think Robin Hood actually succeeded.
*  And then what we saw was this system and a lot of the systems in our society,
*  whether it's the political system, the constitution of the United States,
*  education, higher education, which you're involved in, and then even the financial system,
*  we have not stress tested and stress tested it.
*  And we don't actually know all the edge cases and how it works.
*  So Trump was able to just really put this crazy stress test, like,
*  is the democracy going to hold?
*  Are we going to break this two or three, you know, 200, someone year old experiment?
*  And then we looked at the financial markets and it turns out there were more people shorting the
*  stock than stocks were and shares were available.
*  I don't know how that's possible.
*  And then I'm trying to uncover where can I see a list of people who've shorted the stock?
*  And it's like, you can't, but we can tell you sort of how many every two weeks or maybe twice
*  a week we can create a report.
*  Maybe we know.
*  I was surprised that nobody knows the list of people who were shorted and you guys are trying
*  to figure that out.
*  Yeah, there's no transparency on a lot of the systems.
*  And if you call to try to short a stock, like it's almost like they'll tell you on the phone,
*  like, let me see, I think I might know a guy who has shares to loan out.
*  So it's like, am I calling to like, try to find like a 73 Mustang Grande in, you know, gold,
*  you know, and you're going to call around.
*  It's like, shouldn't this be like on a ledger somewhere and be completely transparent?
*  So now we're seeing those things.
*  And I think the investigations will make it super clear.
*  But of course, in a vacuum without information, there are so many investors in these startups
*  that conflicts can start to appear.
*  And then, you know how it is with people in conspiracy theories, the mind starts to wander.
*  Right.
*  And so in some cases there is actually a conspiracy.
*  And then in other cases, people's mind will fill in like, oh my God, there's some grand
*  conspiracy here.
*  I can tell you Robin Hood's only goal is to get more people to trade stocks and to democratize
*  it even more.
*  And they apparently were on the brink of, you know, seizing as an entity if they didn't
*  get more money to cover all these trades.
*  I mean, they were on the brink and they raised three and a half billion dollars or something
*  like that in a week.
*  Yes.
*  So in some sense, Robin Hood enabled this very like the magic of this distributed system
*  of Wall Street bets.
*  Right.
*  You said Wikipedia, which is another, which is probably one of my favorite websites and
*  one of my favorite examples of like a distributed system somehow coming together in a way,
*  just like you said at that crappy bar, I would have guessed it would never work.
*  But if it does work, it changes everything and it did.
*  And Robin Hood in that same way, probably enabled or was one of the major enablers of
*  Wall Street bets of giving power, like empowering young kids to learn about how this whole messy
*  financial system works and take on the big elite centralized players.
*  Yes.
*  And you know, it's very easy when these companies get big.
*  One thing that's changed is the footprint of these startups and the velocity at which
*  they grow.
*  So something like Airbnb is another perfect example of something that should really not
*  work in practice, but it does.
*  Like I'm going to rent my couch or my extra room to somebody like a serial killer or I'm
*  going to stay in somebody's house, like a serial killer's house.
*  And you know, it's like, it really sounds scary, but it actually works.
*  And it has not destroyed the hotel business.
*  It has added.
*  So the best startups induce a market to exist.
*  If you look at, you know, Uber or Airbnb, people replaced their cars and Uber was not
*  competing ultimately with taxis.
*  They were competing with car ownership, public transportation, walking, or just not going
*  out.
*  And then you look at Airbnb, a lot of people who stay in an Airbnb would not be taking a
*  trip to Kyoto if not for the fact that they could get a $75 beautiful room with great
*  reviews in Kyoto for three weeks.
*  It inspires people and it manifests a market because the product is so transcendent.
*  Right.
*  And I think that's one of the things that Robinhood did.
*  You can't learn how to do this options trading and puts and calls and all this sophistication
*  stuff unless you actually do it.
*  It's just too hard to learn except in practice, just like poker.
*  If you want to learn how to play poker or guitar or tennis or skiing, like you can talk
*  about it.
*  You can watch YouTube videos, but at a certain point you got to get on the mountain.
*  At a certain point, you got to put some chips in the pot and it's going to be painful.
*  Like poker is going to be painful.
*  You're going to lose a lot of money.
*  That's why you should play at the small tables first.
*  Even in trading, you look at people who are doing this crazy trading and GameStop, a company
*  that's worth maybe a couple of billion dollars, but certainly about tens of billions of dollars.
*  Of course, the people who are throwing their money in last are going to lose it.
*  I think everybody knew that.
*  And so it was a momentum play and they're betting against the hedge funds.
*  So I think it's good for people to learn and become financially illiterate and just always
*  understand the concept of the risk of ruin.
*  The good news is for a young person, the risk of ruin might be like they lose $5,000 or
*  something and then they have to build their stack back up.
*  The only thing I am concerned about is there are people who will play poker or blackjack
*  or sports betting or whatever it is and lose control.
*  Just like there might be people who try alcohol and lose control, but we can't build a system
*  based upon limiting the average person's behavior based upon somebody who can't control
*  their ability to drink two glasses of wine instead of 20.
*  How does this whole thing end?
*  Probably in tears.
*  For who?
*  Who's crying?
*  Is everybody crying?
*  Who's crying when?
*  So I think there were some of the hedge funds that were crying initially.
*  That may be some of the Wall Street Bets people who bought last would be crying.
*  And then eventually there's probably another set of hedge funds or even the Wall Street Bets
*  mob and that army, some of them might have broke ranks and then shorted the stock.
*  So nobody knows.
*  So everybody has to be aware of what's happening in the game.
*  So if Wall Street Bets said, hey, let's squeeze these hedge funds because they have too much
*  short interest.
*  Let's all buy the stock.
*  Then some of them might have said, okay, it's at two or $300.
*  Maybe I'll join the short movement now that they've covered.
*  And they could have shorted their double agents.
*  So people have to understand this stuff is gnarly and it's a free for all.
*  I mean, it is a literal free for all.
*  There's a kind of morality, like a big statement that Wall Street Bets made in terms of like
*  the elites can't just push us around.
*  They can't bully around.
*  But at the same time, you know, they're also interested in making money, right?
*  What's your sense?
*  You said that some of the people in the Wall Street Bets might have broken off and shorted
*  the stock.
*  Are they more interested?
*  There was an emergent like morality that emerged and said, like, we're not going to
*  put up with the centralized elites, but is that going to continue?
*  Are they going to fight the power structures that are bad for society?
*  Or are they going to now like, I mean, are they ultimately going to introduce more chaos
*  that's going to damage the economy and damage the world?
*  Or are they going to continue being the good guys and fighting the evils that manipulate
*  the market?
*  What's your sense?
*  You know, it really feels like the Dark Knight series of films where like some people just
*  want to see the world burn.
*  I think there is a contingent of people who just literally want to see chaos.
*  Like, you know that contingent on some of these, you know, forums who just want to create
*  chaos, right?
*  So there's certainly that chaos contingent, but I think overall what the arc will show
*  is a group of people getting massively educated.
*  You see it in crypto as well.
*  There was like a three-year period where all of these failed entrepreneurs who I knew,
*  who couldn't build companies were then coming back to me after their companies has failed
*  or after they gave up or couldn't clear market raising money with the venture capital community
*  and they were doing ICOs.
*  And I was like, I met you before, right?
*  And they're like, yeah, yeah, yeah.
*  No, I'm doing an ICO now.
*  I'm like, okay, where's your company at?
*  And they're like, here's a white paper.
*  And I was like, this white paper with spelling errors in it that says you're going to destroy
*  Airbnb because everybody's apartment is going to be on the immutable ledger.
*  Yeah.
*  Wouldn't that be better in a regular database that was private and not public?
*  Why does it need to be on an immutable ledger?
*  It can't change.
*  I'm like, not changing the database is a feature?
*  That does not seem like a good feature.
*  And they couldn't explain it.
*  They were like, well, just people are interested in ICOs.
*  And there was that ICO mania.
*  And what it showed was there was a global appetite for risk.
*  People want to try new things.
*  This is one of the great things about the human spirit.
*  It is one of the great things about capitalism.
*  And one of the things that concerns me most about where we're at in society is
*  the sort of socialism, communism.
*  Entrepreneurship is bad.
*  Technology is bad.
*  And polarization of wealth and people getting rich is a bad thing.
*  When I grew up, I'm 50 now.
*  But when I was a Gen Xer growing up, we kind of maybe too much idolized Bill Gates and
*  people who were doing interesting things in the world.
*  And we thought capitalism was a force for good.
*  I still believe capitalism is a force for good because when a group of people build
*  a product or service that changes the world and it gets globally distributed, whether it's
*  Tesla or SpaceX or Google or Airbnb or Uber or Robin Hood, everybody gets to benefit from
*  that product or service having to compete.
*  And if you look at the places where there's no competition like public education or less
*  established colleges and stuff like that, less competition for accreditation degrees,
*  things tend to get a little weird, don't they?
*  And people tend to be protected and that's not good.
*  You need competition.
*  Does it mean that people shouldn't have global health care?
*  It doesn't mean that we shouldn't have a safety net, but we need to keep capitalism vibrant,
*  especially because China has now co-opted capitalism and created their own version of
*  capitalism, which is communism with capitalism.
*  It's like this weird operating system.
*  Like we still want to keep communism so we can take any of your gains at any time.
*  But we'd like you to be entrepreneurial.
*  And then you have somebody like the founder of Alibaba, Jack Ma, who disappears for a
*  couple of weeks.
*  Who's that?
*  Exactly.
*  Who's Jack Ma?
*  He kind of disappears for a couple of weeks and then he comes back and he's really sorry
*  about the things he said and then he disappears again.
*  We have to be very careful.
*  If China wins capitalism, this is going to be an existential threat for humanity.
*  The Chinese are no joke.
*  They are seriously focused and they are picking the winners.
*  It's a very weird system because it is in fact, I don't know what you call it, like
*  communism capitalism is such overloaded terms, but they do encourage entrepreneurship,
*  and they do a good job of it.
*  But then they're like the surveillance thing and they're controlling things in a way.
*  It's weird because it seems to work really well.
*  For them in the short term.
*  Yes, it's definitely got short term benefits.
*  So the question is like how that gets distorted and becomes worse and worse and worse,
*  which it potentially might be.
*  And I think on the entrepreneurial spirit, which you have a podcast all centered around
*  the entrepreneurial spirit, is one of the magical things that makes this country great.
*  I don't know if money is deeply tied into that.
*  I do get bothered by people treating the word billionaire as if it's a bad word.
*  But in general, all the hard things, all the difficult things we're going through in this
*  country, it seems like the way out is going to be making the entrepreneur the hero of society.
*  Letting that young kid with a big dream and the guts to take the big risk and build something
*  totally new, giving them a chance and whatever that involves.
*  I don't think it's about taxes.
*  I don't think it's about regulation and all that stuff.
*  It's about us and just public discourse saying that kid, that guy, that girl, they're badasses.
*  Encourage them to do it.
*  We have to have people buy in to the fact that they have that opportunity.
*  And I think one of the problems in society is there's a group of people who actually
*  don't believe that they can succeed or they don't believe even more perniciously
*  that other people can.
*  And that's the group of people that I think are highly vocal but a small group of people,
*  which are generally people of incredible privilege, rich parents, white city dwellers,
*  liberals.
*  They kind of look and say, poor people cannot change a lot.
*  And they're battling in their minds to protect poor people.
*  But they have this very weird patriarchal kind of approach to it, which is they think
*  that they're not capable of changing their lot in life.
*  And they're like, it's not possible.
*  And then once in a while, I'll tweet something where I say, it's really incredible that every
*  piece of knowledge you could possibly want is now available for free on YouTube.
*  And every course from MIT and Harvard and Stanford is available on edX or Coursera.
*  And all that information is there freely available.
*  And you can take the lectures.
*  This is amazing.
*  And then people will be like, yeah, but people don't have access to it.
*  I'm like, they do.
*  It's free.
*  Here's the link.
*  And they're like, yeah, but they don't have internet.
*  And I'm like, here's the chart of internet penetration in America.
*  And they're like, well, poor people don't have internet.
*  And I'm like, really?
*  Find me any downtrodden person without a smartphone with a high-speed connection.
*  That capitalism provided for $12 a month or $15 a month.
*  It's very hard to find that.
*  And we have it so well in this country.
*  And there's so much opportunity.
*  But people don't believe it.
*  And that's actually one of the problems.
*  See, the average American still watches four or five hours of television a day.
*  And often I meet people and they're like, I need a technical co-founder.
*  But all I need is a million dollars.
*  And I'm like, OK, well, what is your skill?
*  And they don't have a skill.
*  And I'm like, well, are you a designer?
*  No.
*  Are you a product manager?
*  No.
*  Are you a developer?
*  No.
*  Are you a sales executive?
*  No.
*  OK, what are you?
*  It's like, well, I have an idea.
*  Well, as my friend Sam Harris, I think your friend as well, says, like,
*  everybody has like a million ideas an hour.
*  You don't really get credit for those.
*  Even when you're asleep, your idea is spewing ideas.
*  Like, zero credit for your ideas.
*  It's all about execution.
*  You have to believe that you yourself can be the core of that execution.
*  You yourself can build the thing.
*  And no matter what your circumstances are,
*  I mean, we could talk about structural racism and all those kinds of things that push things down.
*  But from the individual perspective,
*  when you just like are coaching or giving advice to an individual,
*  you can literally change the world.
*  I mean, Wall Street Bets is an indication of that in the financial space
*  that you yourself can have, can change the world.
*  That's why this country is amazing.
*  Still the best country in the world, right?
*  I mean, it still is amazing the opportunity provided to people.
*  All this educational experience is online.
*  And the ability, what I tell young people who are looking for advice,
*  I say, you know, the skill you need to refine is the ability to learn new skills.
*  Like, if you become good at learning a new skill,
*  and Tim Ferriss, a friend of mine, has really pioneered this,
*  like he can get to 60 or 70% of like the knowledge in a skill in some incredibly short period of time.
*  Now, I'm not saying he's going to become a virtuoso drummer or a great basketball player,
*  but Tim and I were on vacation together in like a group vacation in Italy,
*  and there was a basketball court.
*  And I said, let's go shoot some hoops.
*  I'd never shot before.
*  And I was like, okay, come on, I'll teach you.
*  And Tim is fabulously uncoordinated.
*  People don't know this.
*  Yes.
*  Like, he tried to dribble a basketball and do a layup,
*  and it looked like he had a blindfold on.
*  I mean, you've never seen something less elegant than Tim Ferriss doing a layup in basketball.
*  And then he watched me do it three or four times, and I watched him study me.
*  And listen, I've been playing basketball in Brooklyn since I was a kid.
*  I got a couple moves, and he was just taking notes and taking notes and taking notes.
*  And by the end of a couple of hours of doing this,
*  I could just watch him checking his form and figuring it out.
*  That's every skill in the world now.
*  And what I tell people is like, I'm like, have you, did you watch Game of Thrones?
*  And they're like, yeah.
*  Watch Breaking Bad?
*  Like, yeah, I'm like, okay, that's about 400 hours.
*  Yeah.
*  How about you don't watch the next two,
*  and you put that 400 hours into learning how to be a graphic designer,
*  a UX person, a developer, whatever it is, and learn how to add skills.
*  That's what I did my whole life.
*  I was a kid from Brooklyn, went to school at night,
*  but I was very quick to get to maybe 50% of the knowledge base of graphic design,
*  or being a writer, or being a sales executive, whatever it was, a developer even.
*  And I was just good enough to not have people be able to bullshit me like when I hired them.
*  And that was a big unlock.
*  When you know enough that people can't snow you, that's a really good one.
*  And look at yourself.
*  You figured out how to set up an entire podcast.
*  People don't know this, but you don't have a team around you.
*  I have a team of like five, six people working in my pocket.
*  But you even know enough about to set this up, you would then be able to hire a team.
*  Correct.
*  And you'll be able to call them on their bullshit if they're not doing a good job.
*  And that's really important.
*  And I don't know that much about this whole thing,
*  but I know enough to be able to then see who knows their stuff or not.
*  You're absolutely right.
*  And the process of learning how to learn is essential there because I did martial arts,
*  Jiu-Jitsu, and so on.
*  And it's so funny to watch.
*  I did Tae Kwon Do, yeah.
*  Tae Kwon Do is awesome.
*  It's funny that there's some people that do an activity for years.
*  Because to sort of elaborate on something you were saying about hours,
*  it's not always the amount of hours, it's the quality that you put in.
*  Yes, deliberate practice versus just doing some behavior.
*  I mean, literally, I've been playing chess and trying to get that going again.
*  If you're watching Queen's Gambit and I got chess.com.
*  Of course.
*  And I realized I was just playing and I'm not getting better.
*  And then I was like, oh, wait, there's a little analysis feature here in chess.com
*  where it will show you your blunders and mistakes.
*  And I'm like, oh, I'm spending no time reviewing my losses in chess.
*  And I just want to play the next game.
*  I should really review these losses and figure out what mistakes I made.
*  And when I started doing that, I was like, oh, I'm getting better.
*  So some deliberate practice really works.
*  And if you want to take it all the way, Magnus Carlsen, shout out to the guy,
*  he has an app, but there's a few other coaching apps where you focus on the end game.
*  You focus drilling a particular, you basically don't play the game at all.
*  You just focus on drilling the different.
*  The openings, the openings.
*  The game.
*  Yeah.
*  And there's different kinds of puzzles.
*  You can really make it into a deliberate practice.
*  Not to make this episode sponsored by chess.com, but they literally have puzzles.
*  Oh, and it's a hundred dollars a year for this product.
*  I just thought to myself, this is capitalism.
*  They don't need to charge you a hundred dollars an hour for a lesson.
*  They can charge you a hundred dollars and they've created the ability for you to play
*  chess 24 hours a day against opponents who are perfectly matched against you based on your rating.
*  And they analyze every game and they have puzzles and they have tutorials and they've got everything
*  else.
*  It's like, just think about how much value is being provided to society because of capitalism
*  and because competition.
*  If you want things to get better and you want to step up your game, just make it slightly
*  competitive.
*  It is one of these things in human existence that is so powerful.
*  I don't know if you see the Michael Jordan documentary, The Last Dance?
*  Half of it.
*  Okay.
*  I'm still working through it.
*  He's so competitive and petty.
*  It's so inspiring that all he cares about is just winning to the level of which he literally,
*  there's like this running meme.
*  I took that personally and I took that personally.
*  I don't know if you've seen the images of him sitting, smoking a cigar, looking at like
*  an iPad or a video clip and it's like, I took that personally.
*  And you can make a super cut of every time he took something personally.
*  He literally takes everything personally to give himself that competitive motivation to
*  win.
*  That's capitalism.
*  And when people are competing, man, look at what Elon did to the space of cars.
*  They were literally laughing at him in the first 10 years.
*  Electric cars, ha ha, that company will get a business.
*  And now every single company is like, we're going fully electric by 2035.
*  And he kicked their asses so brutally that they had no choice but then to step up their game.
*  And that's what we want.
*  Right.
*  And this virus and this pandemic, I think the great thing that will come out of this
*  horrible experience that we've all had is psychologically death, learning, just so many
*  bad things occurred, the economy, people losing their jobs.
*  But we also got to see the human spirit with these mRNA vaccines and just how if we took
*  out some of the regulation and people were super motivated, we might actually be able to
*  eliminate all pandemics from ever happening again.
*  And before that, Bill Gates was banging his fist and Jeff Skoll was doing the movie Contagion.
*  I mean, for two decades, people have been banging their fists.
*  We have to be prepared for this.
*  Yes.
*  And everybody's like, yeah, whatever, YOLO.
*  It's not going to happen.
*  And now it's happened.
*  And people are like, we need to be able to destroy every pandemic and virus before it
*  happens.
*  And listen, you know a lot more about science than I do.
*  But these mRNA has been around for a while.
*  We've just never gotten aggressive about doing it.
*  And then you think about challenge trials.
*  I don't know if you've been following this, but they're doing challenge trials now in
*  the UK this month where they're introducing COVID into healthy young patients and then
*  giving them the vaccine.
*  And that is against all rules and regulations about do no harm.
*  But then you think about it.
*  We kind of celebrate people jumping out of planes.
*  And we got that one guy, Alex Honnold, who's climbing up mountains without a rope.
*  And they give him a North Star back page ad and an endorsement deal.
*  And we celebrate that.
*  We celebrate people surfing with sharks.
*  We celebrate people doing deep welding.
*  We pay them extra to go 200 feet underground and weld stuff.
*  And people do dangerous stuff all day long.
*  Astronauts.
*  But we won't...
*  Soldiers, firefighters.
*  But we won't let people get paid to do a challenge trial.
*  Yeah, we're weirdly risk averse in certain areas that completely don't make any sense.
*  It doesn't make...
*  And this is where the world needs to be.
*  We could have said these thousand people, young people, who we know are in all likelihood
*  not going to have a bad outcome.
*  But there's a possibility.
*  There's a possibility.
*  But it's very low.
*  And it's certainly lower than riding a motorcycle.
*  Right.
*  It's lower than riding a motorcycle.
*  People ride motorcycles everywhere.
*  We have ads for motorcycles.
*  We could have just said to those thousand people,
*  we'll give you a million dollars each to do this.
*  Okay.
*  There's your billion dollars.
*  We're printing trillions of dollars of money to deal with this.
*  If we had just done a thousand people for a million dollars each
*  to do a challenge trial in March, April, May, when they had the mRNA vaccines ready,
*  we could have deployed the vaccines in the summer.
*  We would have been done with this.
*  We would have been over by now.
*  We get to challenge all of that thinking.
*  I think that's what the great pause did.
*  It's letting everybody challenge that thinking is, why do we have that rule?
*  Okay.
*  Yeah.
*  We don't want to have people give up their organs for money.
*  We obviously understand, but there's a reasonable discussion about,
*  well, maybe there's a level of risk in a global pandemic.
*  We fought the Nazis.
*  We defeated the Nazis.
*  That took a lot of deaths to do that, but we had to kill that evil.
*  This is another evil which we must fight.
*  It's already resulting in thousands of people dying a day, but we could have actually stopped
*  it earlier if we just had a reasonable discussion.
*  This is why podcasting is, I respect what you do, and this is why intelligent people
*  are so drawn to podcasts because you and I can expand on this and not cancel each other
*  over this very suggestion.
*  When I make this suggestion that are challenge trials reasonable or not,
*  if I were to do that on Twitter, they'd be like, oh, Calacanis wants to give poor people
*  coronavirus in order to save rich people.
*  It's like, no, I didn't say that, but you and I could have a reasonable discussion about
*  a challenge trial is something we should consider in a acute situation where millions of people
*  are going to lose their lives.
*  All right.
*  So that's an example of capitalism competition working really well.
*  One of the, to me, sad thing to see about coronavirus is that, for example, testing
*  at scale should have, it seems obvious.
*  I was a little clueless about it, but because I thought there's no way you can have like
*  antigen tests at hundreds of millions, like order hundreds of millions of them and make
*  them cheap.
*  But actually I realized recently that there have been available since about like May.
*  Yeah.
*  You were able to-
*  In Korea, in Finland, all over the place.
*  You could have done mass manufacture.
*  So there, there's a little bit of a failure of capitalism to step up.
*  And I don't know if you agree with this, but it seems that the blame is to be placed at
*  the regulators and the various institutions.
*  Crony capitalism in all likelihood is what stopped it here in America.
*  I mean, I had friends who had imported them from other countries, the testing kits, and
*  you've probably been to parties where people had these kinds of testing kits from other countries.
*  And we're sitting here and they're just approving them now.
*  Really?
*  In February, month 11 of the pandemic in America, we're going to have testing online.
*  Really?
*  I mean, even if these tests were 80% effective and they're 95% effective, mass producing them,
*  we should have sent them in every postal, anybody with a post office box should have
*  with a mailing address, should have had 10 of them put in their mailing address just
*  for free from the government.
*  And then everybody would be testing and we would have contained it.
*  We don't have test and trace here in the United States.
*  All the countries that are on the other side of COVID did it by having testing,
*  tracing, and closing their borders and masks.
*  That's the combination that works.
*  The problem with the coronavirus is while a lot of institutions did not behave their best,
*  it's also the case that there's a lot of uncertainty.
*  So I tend to give a little bit of a pass to everybody involved for the uncertainty.
*  We were all-
*  I give them that until June.
*  I wonder how history will remember this whole period.
*  I'd love to ask you, because you were an early investor in Robinhoods,
*  you're in a very nice place of being a huge supporter of the Wall Street bets
*  distributed power of the people.
*  And at the same time, because of you being an investor,
*  intellectually giving a chance to Robinhood in this chaotic time of conversations
*  to think about, well, what did they do right?
*  What did they do wrong?
*  So you have a kind of a balance to you on the whole thing, which is really nice.
*  We've talked about what Robinhood did right, I think.
*  Can you sort of steel man Chirmatha's argument of what Robinhood did wrong in the last few days?
*  Communication is always the number one issue with these startups, right?
*  And you have to get ahead of any problem and you have to put all the bad news out immediately.
*  And in the case of Robinhood, it seems, based on what's been in the papers and what Robinhood
*  said publicly, is that they had this kind of liquidity crisis, right?
*  Where they were being, because of these exchanges telling them you have to put up this amount of
*  money in collateral and them being pinned at number one in the app store.
*  There were so many people trying to buy five shares of this stock, five shares of this meme stock,
*  that it kind of broke their system.
*  And then the people who clear the trades for them, they said,
*  you got to put up a billion dollars, two billion dollars, three billion dollars.
*  We can't do that overnight.
*  And I think that they were in an uncomfortable situation of going on TV and saying,
*  we have a liquidity crisis.
*  That could be like a run on the bank.
*  Everybody then logs in at the same time to Robinhood and tries to sell every share they own
*  because they're afraid that the whole thing's going to collapse, right?
*  So I think there was this kind of like black swan event
*  and they probably didn't communicate it all that well.
*  And at the center of that, this is really interesting.
*  Maybe you can comment on the nature of communication.
*  Vlad, the CEO, the guy you met at the bar, I think at the center of the communication, right?
*  So Elon is an example of a guy who also is at the center of the communication
*  for his particular set of companies.
*  And that, you know, on Twitter, it seems to be a really powerful way to communicate.
*  And there was something, this is me saying it,
*  there was something about Vlad that sounded like he's hiding stuff.
*  Like, as opposed to Elon, it doesn't sound like he's hiding stuff.
*  It could be the nature that beat the timing of the conversation.
*  Same thing with Mark Zuckerberg.
*  Mark Zuckerberg, for some reason, often sounds like he's hiding something.
*  And then there's like Jack Dorsey, as much less so.
*  And I don't know what that is about the CEOs that makes you trust them and not.
*  It might be the point in time, like in terms of escape velocity.
*  You know, there might be non-disclosures in place that we're not aware of,
*  where they're not allowed to talk about certain relationships.
*  I see. And that results, like in Vlad's case,
*  and that results in you being like acting weird and nervous.
*  Or nervous. Yeah, it could just be the person is nervous, you know?
*  So it's really hard to be building one of these companies and you're at scale and,
*  you know, oh my Lord, the entire thing's coming apart.
*  And you're the most hated person for that day.
*  You know how the rage cycle works and the media is just so crazy when they
*  get their hooks into something.
*  I saw it happen with Uber. We saw it happen with Facebook.
*  And even Tesla, you know, there were times when people did stupid things with autopilot
*  and it's like, okay, somebody's watching a movie and sleeping in their car
*  or leaving the driver's seat against all the rules of autopilot.
*  And somehow Tesla is responsible for that.
*  It's like we have people who stand on top of their motorcycles
*  and drive down the road on a motorcycle.
*  And we don't blame Yamaha or Harley Davidson for some idiot standing on the seat of their
*  motorcycle on a highway going 60 miles an hour.
*  We just say that person's an idiot.
*  But when new technology comes out, we blame the technology, not the person operating it.
*  And if you are going to operate, we basically vilify it and demonize it.
*  I think that is part of it.
*  Like when the person at, I remember Airbnb, we always thought,
*  what if somebody trashes your apartment?
*  And then sure enough, a bunch of meth heads rented this poor woman's apartment.
*  She left all of her stuff in it.
*  And then a bunch of meth heads had a drug party, destroyed her apartment,
*  ripped up all her photos and went crazy.
*  And we knew that day would happen, but nobody remembers it now.
*  But it was the number one story on every news channel because, wow, that's an exciting story.
*  And I just thought to myself, I wonder if there are any parties in hotel rooms
*  where the hotel room is being trashed and people are doing drugs and crazy things.
*  Yes, that's basically every hotel in Los Angeles right now is being destroyed by some rock band
*  that's throwing a TV out the window.
*  We expected a hotel, we just didn't expect it in somebody's house with Airbnb.
*  And then Airbnb created rules around, you can't rent an Airbnb for a party.
*  And they learned.
*  So I think there's a learning curve with these companies and they do get to scale
*  at a level that is unprecedented.
*  It used to take decades for a company to become an international phenomenon.
*  Now it happens in two, three, four years.
*  Look at Clubhouse, this thing went from being a private beta six months ago to being the
*  number one app in Germany and in Japan and here.
*  Just like that, boom.
*  And it's because there's an ecosystem that has never existed, the app store.
*  Then there's payments online.
*  And then everybody has a supercomputer in their pocket.
*  The thing people got wrong about entrepreneurship, technology, and business
*  over the last couple of decades was just how big the market was and then how quickly you could
*  achieve relevancy in these markets.
*  We thought the market was like the 60 million homes were broadband.
*  And originally it was like maybe 10 or 20.
*  Then it became 60 million.
*  Then it was like, okay, well, how many hours are you at your desktop computer?
*  Well, like probably at our computers for five hours a day, 10 hours a day at work,
*  three hours a day on our own.
*  And then I was like, yeah, nobody's on their desktop computer.
*  Everybody's on their mobile phone.
*  Oh, and by the way, they have it with them.
*  So the people with mobile phones are now using this high speed device
*  with an app store with their credit card in it.
*  Yeah.
*  In the early days of the internet, people were scared to put their credit card on the internet.
*  That was considered a really dumb thing to do.
*  If you put your credit card on the internet, you're going to lose all your money.
*  They're going to hack you or whatever.
*  And now it's just amazing to me how quickly when a company hits,
*  how quickly it can get to a million subscribers or 10 million or a billion users.
*  Right.
*  And there's all these networks like social networks that allow the spread
*  of the viral spread of like a new startup, a new company, a new app to be announced.
*  A meme.
*  Anything.
*  An idea, a podcast.
*  Right.
*  I mean, a single thing is just a single meme could change the world.
*  Speaking of Clubhouse, I mean, I just want to, we're saying so many interesting things,
*  but there was a magical moment with Vlad and Elon on Clubhouse.
*  That was wild.
*  Yes.
*  Is there, do you have thoughts about that interaction?
*  Which felt like so many aspects of this whole situation feels like totally novel, surreal,
*  like it's defining a new era.
*  It is.
*  Yeah.
*  Like a billionaire, the richest human on earth is interviewing the person at the center of one of
*  the most interesting mass scale, like power battles in finance ever.
*  Perhaps it's.
*  By the way, seven movies have been sold.
*  Two weeks.
*  Just think about how fast things are moving, Lex.
*  This thing happens.
*  Yeah.
*  Like people had the idea to short the stock six months ago.
*  They start doing their research.
*  They build an army.
*  They execute the trade.
*  The system goes down.
*  Robinhood raises three and a half billion dollars in four days.
*  Elon is interviewing them on Clubhouse on Sunday after the Wednesday had happened.
*  And now here we are.
*  It's 10 days later.
*  Yeah.
*  Doesn't it feel like it's been 10 months?
*  Yeah.
*  It's been 10 days, Lex.
*  It's been 10 days.
*  10 days.
*  There's like a new president, all these things.
*  And everyone forgot.
*  Oh, there was an insurrection.
*  By the way, we also have that revolution at the Capitol where a bunch of crazy people
*  who have guns and body armor, and then a bunch of them who are just yoloing in cosplay,
*  took over the Capitol.
*  Well, so the other more dramatic thing to me is-
*  That was one month ago.
*  That was one month.
*  And the president of the United States got banned from every major social network,
*  which I think I'm still deeply troubled by is Parler being removed from AWS.
*  That changed the way...
*  I...
*  That changed a lot of things.
*  As somebody who's an aspiring entrepreneur, that changed the way I see the world.
*  That little...
*  Maybe I'm being overdramatic, but-
*  No, you're not.
*  I think you're paranoid for a reason.
*  You're paranoid for a very good reason, which is as big as these companies can become,
*  they are beholden to the mob.
*  And if the mob says, hey, this person needs to be canceled,
*  they're going to get canceled because you can't lose your entire audience.
*  You could lose your whole customer base.
*  And you can lose all your employees.
*  I think what's interesting about your fear about Parler and AWS taking off is we went
*  from being a social network, which is the software layer, and then we went to the infrastructure
*  layer, and they'll even go after CloudFlare, which is a CDN provider.
*  They're just like a plumbing...
*  It's sort of like the telephone.
*  So we're basically holding everybody responsible on the whole chain of events here.
*  What that's going to do is...
*  I'm not a huge believer in crypto, but distributed computing, where nobody...
*  Decentralized and distributed computing platforms and open standards.
*  Podcasting is an open standard.
*  The web is an open standard.
*  FTP was an open standard.
*  But Twitter and Facebook are closed.
*  What's going to happen is we will see a group of individuals create
*  peer-to-peer networks for social media where nobody can control it.
*  The same for cloud computing, where there's a crypto project where everybody will...
*  And I invested in a company that tried to do this and got sold and it didn't work out.
*  But take your hard drive on your computer at home.
*  You give a terabyte of your 10 terabyte drive over to the cloud.
*  And then everybody else does their terabyte.
*  And then all of a sudden you've got this virtual cloud and anybody can store stuff on it and
*  it's all encrypted and then nobody can stop it.
*  And that could be tweets.
*  It could be videos.
*  And so this idea that YouTube will be able to tell people, to kick people off because
*  they're skeptics of, I don't know, the pandemic or the vaccine or they've...
*  They'll make things that are more censorship resistant.
*  I think that'll be the reaction to all of this.
*  Well, this is my question for you, going back to that crappy bar and people pitching you.
*  Is there, like with Clubhouse, do you see competitors...
*  Do you think it's possible that another perhaps more decentralized or another kind of social
*  media will emerge that will take on Twitter and Facebook and might be able to replace them?
*  If you look at the whole landscape with Clubhouse and everything else, do you think
*  some other company might emerge?
*  There'll be 10 versions of Clubhouse.
*  We looked at social networking.
*  We thought Friendster was it.
*  Friendster was so good, nobody would be able to compete with that.
*  It was growing so quickly.
*  And then MySpace was a juggernaut and they hit a hundred million in revenue.
*  And a hundred million users.
*  And it was like, well, that's game over.
*  And then Facebook and LinkedIn and Snapchat and FriendFeed and countless others.
*  There's usually 20 people who will win in a category.
*  And 80% of the category will be owned by the top two or three players.
*  But will those players change, do you think?
*  What's your sense of the...
*  Oh yeah, for sure.
*  If Facebook hadn't bought Instagram, it would be a company in decline right now.
*  People would be shorting the stock.
*  Facebook peaked and then was sort of heading down.
*  And Instagram saved them and WhatsApp saved them.
*  So that's another kind of weird moment in history that they were able to accumulate that much power
*  and consolidate that much power.
*  Instagram should have never sold to them.
*  That should have gone public.
*  They had just raised money from Sequoia.
*  And they had raised $50 million at a $500 million valuation and they didn't need to sell.
*  And that was a big mistake to sell.
*  They should have kept going and they should have took on Facebook.
*  And if Instagram was a standalone company right now, it'd be worth $500 million.
*  Do you think...
*  $500 billion, yeah.
*  Do you think Facebook might buy Clubhouse as been...
*  They'll probably copy it.
*  I mean, Zuckerberg has no moral compass or ethics or anything.
*  He's a marauder.
*  I mean, he basically copied Snapchat seven times.
*  Like he did poke and he just kept trying and trying and trying.
*  And part of the reason why the WhatsApp founders and the Instagram founders left
*  is they found Zuckerberg so distasteful in terms of his ability to copy.
*  What do you think makes a great leader in that sense?
*  Okay.
*  So when I look at Zuckerberg...
*  He's a great executor.
*  I don't think he's a great leader.
*  I was bullish on...
*  I was excited by Facebook in the very early days.
*  I thought it was an exciting opportunity to connect people and stuff started going
*  wrong in certain kinds of ways.
*  And again, maybe it's our human nature, but I attribute a lot of that to the leadership.
*  Absolutely.
*  I mean, the guy started it because he was unable to ask girls if they were single and on a date.
*  I mean, that was his explicit...
*  That could be a good motivator.
*  That could be a good motivator.
*  Well, I mean, the motivation of 18, 19-year-old men is pretty clear.
*  He was just trying to...
*  He had no game.
*  He had no game.
*  And he needed to know who was single so he could at least have a shot at getting a date.
*  It's a little creepy.
*  Yeah.
*  He, I think, was so obsessed with engagement and winning.
*  And he's kind of like one of those friends you have who's just really good at playing
*  a video game but maybe doesn't see the bigger picture in life.
*  I mean, there's a reason why everybody who worked for him hates him and doesn't talk to
*  him anymore and then actively derides him.
*  Like so many...
*  The people who sold WhatsApp to him then backed other projects like Telegram and said horrible
*  things about him on the way out.
*  And these are the people he made billionaires.
*  They really don't like him.
*  So I think there is something that he does that does not breed loyalty,
*  but he's very successful in his focus, which is growth is all that matters.
*  He's a marauder.
*  And taking friction out of products and processes is the playbook of Silicon
*  Valley for the last decade or two.
*  So whatever the friction...
*  That's poetry what you're saying right now.
*  I'm sorry.
*  You're speaking so fast that I almost forget that you're dropping bombs.
*  But so removing friction.
*  And you're saying Facebook is exceptionally good at removing friction.
*  He was the best at it.
*  I mean, at Uber they were like, we're going to take out tipping.
*  We're going to take out the need for you to take out your credit card and do payment.
*  It's just going to be in your wallet.
*  You got picked up, you leave, that's it.
*  And I was like, we should have tipping.
*  And they're like, it adds a step and we're trying to have no steps.
*  You put your address in, you click the button and you do nothing else.
*  And so we've been obsessed here in Silicon Valley is how many clicks can we take out of the process?
*  I guess Amazon is incredible at that as well.
*  Absolutely.
*  One click was the start of it.
*  And then you look at Clubhouse as an example, you open Clubhouse and you see rooms,
*  you click on it, you're listening.
*  So in one click, you're listening.
*  And then in one click, if you raise your hand, you get invited and you say yes, you're speaking.
*  So it's two clicks to speak, one click to listen.
*  The only way they could make that app work even faster is if you opened it up
*  and your microphone was turned on, which is kind of scary, but that is the next evolution.
*  And what happens when you go that fast is you get unintended consequences.
*  This is why Facebook has had more fines than any company in the history of Silicon Valley,
*  just giant fines for doing stuff like this.
*  And one of them was, I don't know if you remember when they created groups,
*  or if you have a group for your podcast, but you can just add people to a group
*  without their permission.
*  And there was this famous case when they first came out with it.
*  Somebody created a NAMBLA fake group, National Man, Love, Boy, Association,
*  whatever, like Caterpillar Association.
*  And they added Zuckerberg, Mike Arrington, myself, and like 20 other famous people in
*  Silicon Valley.
*  And I was like, and then somebody takes a screenshot of it and they're like, you're
*  at NAMBLA?
*  And I'm like, no.
*  Facebook, and then Zuckerberg's response was, well, if your friends put you in that
*  NAMBLA group, you should get new friends.
*  And it was like, you got put in there too.
*  And then the sad part about it was there were a group of young men who were gay and
*  who were in college, and there was a gay choir in their college, and the person who
*  was coordinating their Facebook group added them.
*  It wasn't enough for Zuckerberg to make it so anybody could add anybody to any group
*  because it will grow faster, let alone you have to confirm you want to be added to the
*  group.
*  What it also did was posted it on their walls to increase engagement.
*  And what they inadvertently did was they outed a bunch of 18, 19-year-olds in college to
*  their families because they joined the gay men's choir at some college.
*  And this is the kind of way, you know, this is where Silicon Valley needs to check itself
*  and to do better, is you have to really think, well, there is my incentive to grow faster,
*  and then there's what's right for society and for the individual.
*  You got to think it through.
*  Think it through.
*  It's sometimes very difficult.
*  This is where vision is required to anticipate the unintended consequences.
*  It seems like Mark Zuckerberg is not very good at that.
*  You've talked to so many great leaders in this world, privately and publicly.
*  What do you think makes a great leader of these tech companies?
*  Do you have an example?
*  Like, is Elon to you a great leader?
*  He's also a controversial one, right?
*  Yeah.
*  There's a love and hate controversy in the sense that there is, and I know a lot of people
*  work with him, for him, that there's also a love-hate relationship.
*  The hate comes from the fact that they get pushed extremely hard.
*  It's a very competitive environment, but it's a positive one because there's a vision that's
*  underlying. It's similar to the Steve Jobs thing, and it has to do with the, back to our
*  Michael Jordan discussion as well, that there seems to be the demons involved in tension and
*  anxiety, all those kinds of things.
*  If you want to do great things, there will be some suffering, and there'll be some pain,
*  and it's not easy if you want to change the world.
*  Then some people have this expectation that it's going to be easy.
*  What you'll typically find for any great leader who's trying to do something super ambitious,
*  if you want to be like, if you're a rich guy and you start a restaurant and you don't care
*  about making money, and people have made restaurants before, you could be high fives and everybody
*  could love you, whatever. But if you want to change the world, you want to do something
*  hard driving, there's going to be sacrifice involved. The problem is people are looking at
*  something that is an Olympic caliber sport or a Navy SEALs-like effort. In other words,
*  an effort that requires massive sacrifice. We would not look at somebody who wins a gold medal
*  like Michael Phelps and say, oh my God, he had to get up at 4 a.m. every day and he had to swim,
*  and he had to do an ice bath. Oh my God, that poor guy, he suffered, he was tortured.
*  People were super mean to him, they put him in an ice bath. It was like, no, he wanted to be the
*  greatest swimmer of all time, and he knew what the sacrifice entailed. Then what happens in
*  work, in business, is that people conflate like, oh, well, I went to work to make a living to pay
*  my bills versus Michael Phelps' approach to getting gold medals, or Michael Jordan,
*  or pick the person, Elon, or Jeff Bezos. When you look at the reviews of a place like Amazon,
*  there was this incredible story in the New York Times where people were, I don't know if you
*  remember it, this is the worst place you could ever work, Amazon. We talked to 200 people,
*  and they all told us, they all described for us in the New York Times a culture of cutthroatness
*  and brutality that has never before been seen. Then you see all these people who worked for
*  Bezos for 24 years from when they graduated with their MBAs until today, and they've never left the
*  company, and they are ride or die forever. What you're seeing there is, there's a mismatch of
*  people going to work in an extreme sport or an extreme endeavor who should not do that.
*  There are people who should go out into the rice fields and pick rice. Then there's another group
*  of people who are samurai and who wield a sword and who take on missions that are dangerous.
*  But if you're a rice picker and that's what you do and you feel safe, just getting a couple grains
*  of rice, put them in a basket, cleaning it, and then whatever, that's valid work. No big deal.
*  I'm not deriding it, I am sort of. That is one group, and then there's people who are samurai.
*  You cannot conflate the two. You cannot compare the two. That's what is happening right now in
*  business. Whenever you see these stories about this person at this company is like a tyrant,
*  and they're so horrible, and they yelled at somebody. If you're in the field and you're
*  taking the beach at Normandy and it's D-Day, or you've got to take the hill, or you've got to whack
*  Osama bin Laden, and you're the Navy SEALs, and a rotor gets knocked off the back of the Blackhawk,
*  this is serious shit. Don't do it if you're not serious. If you're not serious about changing
*  the world, why would you go work for Bezos? Why would you go work for Elon Musk? Don't do it.
*  Don't go work there. Let me just sit back and enjoy the beauty of all of that. That's music to my
*  ears, but I'm not sure what to do with it because it's conflicting to a lot of the things I hear
*  from the way you're supposed to act. I think in order to do great things, you have to...
*  I always admired people that lose their shit a little bit because they're so passionate,
*  and apologize and all those kinds of things, but there's a tension, there's a drama to the
*  creative process when, especially in the early startup, this is not the work-life balance idea
*  that doesn't even apply. Work-life balance is ridiculous. It's a ridiculous concept.
*  The idea that there's work-life balance in a startup is ridiculous. If you're looking for
*  work-life balance, do not go to a startup or any kind of ambitious company. There is a series of
*  places you can work in the world where you do not need to do anything more than what's put in front
*  of you, and you just put the round peg in the round hole and the square peg in the square hole,
*  and you go home. You get your little bits and grains of rice, and you go heat them up and eat
*  them. That's it. Then there's this other thing, which is the extreme pursuit of changing the world
*  and sacrificing. We have a generation of people, multi-generations of people, who are soft. They're
*  just soft. What is the big struggle we've had to deal with in America in our lifetimes? Like 9-11,
*  we didn't have the Vietnam War, and then we had this weird Iraq Wars and Middle East Wars that were
*  kind of like a small number of people went, and we sent drones. We have not had to sacrifice.
*  Maybe the tail end of boomers experienced the Vietnam War, regrettably. But we've had a couple
*  of generations now, three I guess, that just haven't had to suffer. So we're soft as Americans.
*  We're soft. Then you look at people in China, and we're like, oh my God, these poor Chinese people
*  are living in these tiny cramped apartments. They were living in essentially lean-tos in northern
*  China with no running water or one spigot of ice cold water for the entire village.
*  They're thrilled to be joining the middle class, even if it's the bottom of the middle class.
*  They've taken hundreds of millions of people in China and moved them into the middle class.
*  We're like, oh my God, these people are suffering. They're up to $4 an hour,
*  $3 or $4 an hour in the factories there. They were just two decades ago at, I don't know,
*  it was probably 50 cents an hour, something crazy like that. Now they've improved the quality of
*  life there so much, just like America did 200 years ago or 100 years ago. They've improved it
*  so much in China that now they're getting outpriced for factories from Vietnam, Sri Lanka, Pakistan,
*  India. People in China are moving the factories out of China into other countries.
*  Because the Chinese are now outsourcing to Vietnam and other countries. This is the way of the world.
*  People move up and they get a better lot in life for their families. Just in America,
*  we've gotten soft. How do people die in America now? Suicide, obesity, heart attacks, anxiety.
*  We're suffering from things that if you told people 100 years ago that the top ways Americans
*  would die would be overeating and suicide, they'd be like, what? You're literally killing
*  yourself or eating yourself to death? That's what's happening in America.
*  Yeah. When everybody, not everybody, unmasks, there's a large number of people who have become
*  softer and softer. Capitalism creates an environment where there's people that still step up amidst
*  that with a big dream and challenge the conventions. That human spirit just arise above that. Elon is
*  an example of that. Jeff Bezos is an example of that. Countless, countless examples.
*  And they push the limits of those of human beings that are willing to step up. I think about how to
*  create a company that amidst all of the softness, still creates a revolution. It doesn't seem trivial.
*  It seems like how do you build a culture that's once healthy but also
*  unhealthy in the way that an Olympic pursuit is?
*  It's all top down. You asked earlier what leadership was and I never answered the question.
*  What leaders do is they set the example. They set the bar. If you look at someone like Elon,
*  we're personal friends for 20 years, and he is indefatigable. The guy has a stamina that is
*  just phenomenal. He does not get tired. He works relentlessly and he sets that standard for the
*  rest of the team. I think Bezos is very sharp and likes to debate stuff and Jobs was just incredible
*  at design and figuring out how to bridge that gap. Leaders set the standard. They set the standard.
*  You know that your time is over as a leader when you can't set the standard,
*  and that's when you have to pass the baton. Bezos did that.
*  Brilliant.
*  Bezos now is saying, you know what? I'm 57. I'm the richest guy on the planet,
*  depending on the week. I would like to do some other challenges, but I don't want to grind it
*  out at Amazon for another 25 years. I want to do other things. So he passed the baton.
*  That's the healthy thing to do in that regard. I do think there is a time period in which you
*  can run that hot and then at a certain point you have to then change. Just like an athlete
*  might go to be a coach or a commentator. So being an entrepreneur is brutal. It's seven days a week,
*  12 hours a day. Anybody who says anything differently is kidding themselves. You're
*  going to have to sacrifice. This competition and America has to fight. If America does not win
*  capitalism and China does, it is literally the end of the human species. It's over for humanity.
*  Right now, everything has been going really well in terms of the number of people living in poverty
*  is plummeting. Lifespans have been rising. Science is booming. The economy is booming.
*  All these things are incredible. The one thing that's kind of stagnant right now is the number
*  of people living in democracy versus under authoritarian rule. It's flat. So when you look
*  at all Steve Pinker's charts and he's really excited, there's one you're going to see that's
*  flat. I think we peaked with 53 or 54% of people on the planet Earth being in a democracy and now
*  it's going below 50. It's because some of the democratic Western countries don't have the
*  population growth of some of the communist and socialist countries and authoritarian countries.
*  We have to make sure that we win capitalism. We must win economically. That is the battlefield.
*  The battlefield of science, technology, and money and economy, finance. That's the battlefield.
*  China wins, authoritarians win. At any time, Xi Jinping can pull Jack Ma into a room and say,
*  it's time for you to be reeducated or they can put three or four million people, Uighurs,
*  into prison camps and say, you know what? This religious thing, that's counter to what is
*  productive for us. Therefore, we're going to shave your heads and we're going to have you
*  literally pick cotton in the fields. They have Uighurs with no sense of any kind of
*  arc of history in the fields picking cottons as slaves in what can only be described by
*  every humanitarian organization as a concentration camp. And every Jewish person I know takes great
*  offense when somebody uses the Holocaust as a metaphor, except in the case of the Uighurs
*  right now. And every Jewish person I've talked to has said to me, that is a Holocaust. That is
*  millions of people going to genocide because of their religious beliefs. And I'm an atheist,
*  but if people want to believe a certain religion, fine. But China's approach is,
*  we need to win capitalism so bad, we need to win on the global stage so bad, we can't have any of
*  this religious stuff going on here. That is a distraction from winning and beating America.
*  And then in America, the people who are going to make us win are the entrepreneurs and the
*  scientists and the technology and our education system and finance. And we're vilifying those
*  things. It's pretty dark. It's dark, but I still believe that the vilification is just in the
*  space of Twitter and the space of ideas. I think that's probably a good-
*  And entrepreneurs win out in the end. I believe we'll win.
*  They don't listen to that and they'll build, we'll get the rocks up.
*  Some of them do actually. In their darkest moments, I can tell you that they turn off
*  their Twitter accounts and they, I've had to sit down with a number of entrepreneurs and say,
*  turn off Twitter. This is not healthy for you. This is not a healthy pursuit because
*  don't read the comments. If you do, it's like a full contact sport. You should just take it as
*  professional wrestling or something, but stay focused on building companies
*  and advancing the human species through science and technology.
*  As you're describing, you've hosted this week in startups for how many episodes?
*  11 years, almost 1200 now.
*  1200. So you've talked to some of the great leaders in business in general.
*  Is there a common thing that you see or-
*  Really messed up relationship with their parents.
*  Find me a great entrepreneur. I will show me the trauma. Their dad was like, you're not good enough.
*  In the teenage years, is that truly, is there something-
*  There is definitely something to-
*  Hardship at some point in their life kind of thing?
*  I think so. I mean, and there's definitely something with immigrant parents
*  that is a bit of a stereotype out here, but I've heard from many investors that's like they're,
*  oh, were your parents immigrants and did they beat into you that you have to succeed and
*  you feel the need to succeed because they suffered to get you to this country?
*  There is an archetype there that I hear. When I started investing, I heard from a lot of people,
*  it's like, yeah, you want to find those immigrant founders who are coming out of
*  Stanford because they had to fight to get there and their parents had to fight. So it's like two
*  huge fights and there's so much at stake as opposed to somebody who's fifth generation and
*  had everything handed to them and they were legacy and got into schools for free. But
*  I think in general, the ability to get people to join you on that journey is so critical.
*  You have to be charismatic and it doesn't mean you're an extrovert. There are introverts who are
*  super charismatic and there are soft spoken people. They don't have to be super vivacious
*  or rambunctious people. They could be just quiet assassins, but you need to be able to get people
*  to come on the journey with you. You have to be that storyteller and you have to have that
*  passion and then you have to transfer that enthusiasm to investors, the press, to customers,
*  to all the stakeholders. And if you're enthusiastic about it and you're engaged,
*  then it's easier for people to come on that journey. And that's why people really start
*  to think about, well, what is the purpose of what I'm doing? And it sounds corny. And when I first
*  heard that, I was like, it's kind of corny. But then I read this book by, I forgot his name,
*  Rick something. He wrote the purpose driven church and he had spoken at a Ted or something
*  and everybody went crazy about it. And he's like, a church should have one purpose, one single thing
*  they do. And like his church, which was like one of these mega churches in San Diego, just wanted
*  to do education for this specific country and that's all they did. And they just, they benchmarked
*  I think it's very important to have a purpose and a mission, not everything,
*  but, you know, a specific purpose of some kind of joy that you want to put into the world. You
*  want to solve some kind of big hard problem. And then everybody knows why you're coming to
*  work every day. And then for the founder, when you dread going to work that day, and you don't feel
*  like solving that problem anymore, that's the, that's the tell. And a lot of times I meet young
*  founders. I'm like, why are you doing this? And they're like, well, I was looking for an idea.
*  And this is the one I came up with, because I think I'll make a lot of money. And it's like,
*  you're going to quit. You're going to get to month nine or 10 of this, and you're going to run out
*  of money or like your CTO is going to quit, then your CFO is going to quit, and you're going to
*  lose your biggest customer. And you're just going to say, this is not worth it. You know, and if,
*  you know, using, you know, Bezos or, you know, Elon as examples, they just needed to see this,
*  the world change first in very specific ways. And Steve Jobs, you know, they needed to see a change.
*  And it doesn't matter if they made money or they were losing or winning. They just went to work
*  every day and they had to change it. It's almost like they didn't have a choice. No choice. Elon
*  makes it sound like torture his whole journey, but he can't help it. Having been a witness to it,
*  you know, just as friends for that long, I have never seen an entrepreneur suffer more than him.
*  And, you know, he's been public about that. Like you do not want to be me. He has suffered
*  for those companies. He has suffered to get them where they are. It has not been easy.
*  Can you second analyze Elon in that aspect? Like is there, is it just he can't help it?
*  He must see the change that he hopes for in the world.
*  He's just incredibly hard working and he's very talented as well. And I don't think people
*  understand that. He actually is a really brilliant engineer. At the end of the day,
*  he actually knows what he's doing and he asked the right questions. I mean,
*  people were kind of aghast that he was asking Vlad such good questions. And they're like,
*  oh my God, Elon's the best journalist on the planet. And it was like,
*  that's what anybody who knows Elon knows. He has great questions. I mean, I've been, I used to
*  have dinner in LA and my book agent also was Sam Harris's agent and Sam and I met
*  through John Brockman and we became friends because we lived near each other and I was
*  friends with Elon. And then I used to invite them to both dinner and Brentwood because
*  one lived in Bel Air, one lived in Santa Monica and I lived in Brentwood. And we would go to this
*  place, Popone, this Italian restaurant. And every Tuesday for years, we would just, the three of us
*  every other Tuesday or so we'd have dinner and I'd sit there and Sam wanted to know about AI and
*  Elon's talking about artificial intelligence because he's on the board of DeepMind and
*  and Elon wanted to know about atheism and meditation and all this other stuff that
*  Sam was an expert on. I got to sit there and just listen to these two guys talk.
*  And they have both piercing intelligences, but Elon, he goes straight to the gut.
*  The questions that no engineer wants to hear is just the basic stuff that it's like, why the hell
*  are you doing it this way when the obvious solution is like much easier or this or that?
*  Why haven't you tried this? You can figure things out. I mean,
*  he's a problem solver. And that's another thing. I think the great entrepreneurs can look at a
*  problem with very fresh eyes, almost consistently. Bezos described that as day one thinking.
*  Just pretend this is day one every day. And then other people use the term first principles.
*  But it basically means like, when you see a problem, pause for a second and really think
*  through what is the best possible solution here? What are some alternative solutions and get from
*  everybody? Like, how do we solve this problem? What people do sometimes they get in a rut.
*  They just come to work and they just go through their email. They do whatever they did the day
*  before. They don't think, why are we doing this? And is there a better way to do it? Now you can
*  get so obsessive about that that you can over engineer stuff and you can never actually ship
*  a product. So there have to be some pragmatism and some goals and some dates associated with
*  that. But it is a very cool thing to really think like, I wonder if we actually made the
*  batteries ourselves, what that would look like. Or I wonder if we could get to two day shipping,
*  you know, or I wonder if we do same day shipping. Like you need to have somebody who's willing to
*  say, you know what, fuck it. Let's set a crazy audacious goal. Two day shipping of any product
*  anywhere in the United States. And once you throw the gauntlet down like that, now everybody knows
*  they're rowing in the right direction. Two day shipping, Amazon Prime. And that's what people
*  didn't realize about Amazon. The business wasn't shipping of those products. It was getting you to
*  sign up for Amazon Prime. They have hundreds of millions of people doing Amazon Prime for 10 bucks
*  a month. I think globally it's probably cheaper, but that was the driver of that business was all
*  of those people. Cause they would, you're an Amazon Prime subscriber. Do you know how much you pay?
*  No.
*  Exactly. It started at $50. And I think they even had like 40, 50, $60 was like the testing in the
*  early days. And now it's I think $149, 12, $13 a month. If you pay for the year, I think it goes
*  down to 10 bucks a month, 120. And you're like, wow. And he's like, yeah, you're paying $13 a month
*  for the privilege of shopping at Amazon. But you would, you say it's the greatest thing in the
*  world because anything I need, you know, if you forgot a microphone or a cable goes bad or a
*  camera goes bad, you get it here, you know, within a day or less. It's pretty amazing.
*  You've already been dropping bombs, incredible advice on startups in general, but let me maybe
*  go straight in and ask, is there advice for somebody that wants to go big, to build the big
*  startup to help them succeed? Yeah. It's very similar to the advice I give to investors. Cause
*  now I teach angel investing because there's so many people who want to invest. And so I wrote
*  a book on that angel. And then I do a course called angel university that I teach six times
*  a year. And then I have a syndicate called the syndicate.com where I invest in companies. There's
*  6,500 people who are members of that. It's the largest syndicate in the world. In fact,
*  the first thing we ever did was calm.com the meditation app. We put $378,000 into it when
*  it was a $5 million product, a $5 million company. So we bought six or 7% of the company. It's now
*  worth 2 billion. So you can do the math on that. We still own 5%. What year was it? Six years ago.
*  So probably seven, maybe 2015, 2014. And nobody else would invest in calm. But Sam Harris was the
*  reason I did because I asked Sam, tell me about meditation. And he's explaining it to me. And I
*  said, what about this? Like, you have to have like a mantra. How does it work? Exactly. I know
*  positive. It was like, well, you know, you should just go to UCLA and talk to Diana Winston. And
*  like, there's this whole project there. And like UCLA does meditation. So yeah, there's a mindful
*  Institute there, like teaching people to be to teach meditation. And they're doing PTSD and I'm
*  doing brain scans on them. And I was like, oh, and then I talked to the UCLA people and they're
*  like, it's real. Yeah, like we we taught Phil Jackson and Kobe Bryant and Shaquille O'Neal did,
*  you know, that's how they won their championships. They meditated. And I was like,
*  hmm, if UCLA is doing as Sam says is cool. Well, fuck it. I'll put money into that. And that's the
*  second biggest investment in my career after Uber and it will in all likelihood become the biggest.
*  I mean, it's between Uber, Robin Hood and calm. And long story short, when I'm teaching people
*  to angel invest, there's really two things that you cannot cannot fake. One is a product that is
*  built really well. So if you look at calm, Robin Hood, Uber, Tesla, Amazon, these products are
*  transcendent. They're well constructed this craftsmanship to them. They're great products.
*  So you're saying not fundamentally like the idea but the execution of the actual craft
*  for the construction, the actual product is amazing. Then there's customers. And that every
*  business has ultimately a customer. And that customer if they are in fact delighted by that
*  product, that's the magic. Because you need a team to build the product. And then you need
*  customers to use the product. And really those three vectors are undeniable. Now,
*  you can have great teams that build a bad product doesn't happen too often. Or you have customers
*  who don't like the product. But generally speaking, a great team will build a great product
*  or a good product and iterate, and then eventually delight customers. And so most people say the
*  team is the most important. But there's a lot of smart people out there. And let's assume that you
*  can have you can raise money for your idea or you have money or you can just convince people to do
*  it for free. If you make a great product and it connects with users, that's the magic. You look at
*  Clubhouse, it's actually a really well designed product. And that product is connecting with
*  customers. And if you were to talk to the customers or look at the product, you would see a well
*  constructed product and a delighted customer. And you can tell the delighted customer by just the
*  amount of time they use it. That's called engagement. It's the fancy word for how much they use it.
*  And Snapchat when that was going around, and they were trying to raise money, they had a fraction of
*  the number of users. But the top maybe third were opening the app every hour. And nobody had ever
*  seen that before. People were using Facebook a couple times a day, the top users, but nobody had
*  ever seen people using it every day for 100 days in a row, every hour. And I was like, what's going
*  on here? I was like, oh, the ephemeral messaging and then the streaks. They had created these
*  streaks between people where every day and then people would be like on vacation, like I just have
*  to open my streak and keep my streak with Lex that we chatted every day going. And so they had this
*  addictive nature to it. And that's why Clubhouse was able to garner so much investment is the
*  number of hours people were using it every month was just unbelievably off the charts.
*  Some of that is execution, but some of it is the weird magic of the-
*  Product market fit.
*  Yeah. So there's something, I mean, Clubhouse, there's a, it's still a mystery to me because I
*  also use Discord voice. There's an intimacy to voice.
*  Oh, for sure. Well, you have people's, yeah, tent.
*  It's, it's, well, but like the video gets in the way actually in a weird way. There's a privacy
*  when you just use voice.
*  People are not taking showers now, Lex. I mean, we're in a pandemic and people just roll out of bed.
*  And the hair thing, nobody's getting haircuts.
*  Nobody's hair is good. Nobody's getting haircuts. People are wearing gym clothes. I mean,
*  Zoom is just horrific to be on Zoom for five hours a day. It is exhausting.
*  Well, it does make me wonder what, once we emerged from the pandemic, whether
*  product market fit, how that evolves with Clubhouse and all those kinds of things.
*  Yeah. No, Clubhouse is a beneficiary of the pandemic for sure. When do you think,
*  when do you think debts will be under, let's say 200 a day and we'll have 200 million people on
*  the other side of this? Cause that's kind of what it takes, right? You got to get to 150,
*  200 million people on the other side in America?
*  I haven't, you know, I personally stopped deeply thinking about this because I've been frustrated
*  for so long that I almost checked out because it psychologically allows me to carry on because I
*  thought for many months now that testing needs to be done at scale.
*  And it still hasn't gotten done.
*  It has. So we gave up basically on testing.
*  We gave up.
*  Because we're in, we're all sitting there waiting for vaccine to come along.
*  And the distribution of the vaccine is not, you know, it's struggling from the same kind
*  of things as the testing is going to take a quite a bit of time. So it does, if everything goes
*  great, meaning there's not a second strand of the virus that's going to create a second major wave
*  that I am cynical enough to think that it won't be until mid summer that we started opening back up.
*  Yeah, I think it's going to be May, June. I'm a little bit earlier than you. I've been tracking
*  it. It's like 1.5 million shots in arms a day. I think this vaccine has been undersold. I mean,
*  it's a miracle. Not one person who was in the trials died, who took it. And only one went to
*  the hospital and they weren't even put on a ventilator. So, and the hospitalizations are
*  plummeting and we're at 10% now in the United States at the pace we're going at 1.5 a day.
*  I think when the Johnson and Johnson one comes out next month, it will be 3 million a day,
*  maybe 2.5. And we already have 100 million people who've likely had it. So I've been doing the math.
*  I think we're like 60 days away, February, March. Yeah. Sometime in April, I think anybody's going
*  to be able to get a shot. And the number of deaths is going to go below 200 a day. And once that
*  happens, I think people have had enough of this. They're just going to go YOLO.
*  But see, the crucial piece for me that I've been focusing on is the social media aspect of how
*  the, it's not just about the reality of deaths. It's about the state of the collective intelligence
*  of the human species, which is determined by our communication on social media. So we could, yeah,
*  we can be collectively afraid. The fear can spread, or it could be YOLO can spread, or it could be
*  like all different kinds of misinformation. And of course, during the election year, the politics
*  influences our perception of what is true and not. But having real rigorous, nuanced conversation
*  about this kind of stuff is the way out of this. And that's where social media really comes in,
*  because social media drives division, where people form tribes and so on. And it feels like it's
*  honestly a technology problem. People say it's a human problem, but it just feels like,
*  I believe people are good. Technology can enable them to be thoughtful.
*  And we talked earlier about the magic of Silicon Valley, and then maybe going too far
*  with the Facebook groups example, where you take out all that friction. What happened was,
*  we used to have something called R-Cron, reverse chronological order. That's how you
*  consume to feed. So any kind of social feed, like Twitter, was in reverse chronological order. The
*  newest thing was up top, and you would just work your way backwards. And so it gave this really
*  fresh feeling. And then a guy named Dave Moran and the team over at Facebook realized, you know,
*  there are some things that got a lot of attention two hours ago. And the stuff since then has not
*  been as important. But if you missed that, there was a really good tweet, where there was a really
*  good update, like somebody had a baby. Can we get the baby one at the top? And it was like,
*  well, how would we do that? How would we know that that's the important one? It's like, well,
*  let's put a like button on it. And let's see how many comments there are. So if it gets a lot of
*  likes or comments or retweets, let's show those first, and then we'll kind of mix in the most
*  recent stuff. And so when you're on Twitter, and then when Facebook did that, Facebook became so
*  addicting, because Facebook was on, what has got the most engagement? Put that first. So every time
*  you open up Facebook, get the dopamine hit. And then what happens when you see the Bart Mitzvah
*  photo or, you know, the enraging story about some injustice in the world, you retweet it,
*  you write a comment, you share it on your wall. And thus, this addiction to the outrageous,
*  the outlandish, the inspiring occurred. And it used to be like inspiring stuff, puppies or some
*  heartwarming story. And then it got dark. And then people started to realize, if I want to show up
*  on the top of my friends feeds, if I say something controversial, or I'm outraged,
*  I get to the top. And then that's when outrage culture came in. And then that's when cancel
*  culture came in, everybody started to realize, if I try to cancel that person for being a racist,
*  or a sexist, or a horrible human being, or whatever they did that's wrong, I get to the top of the
*  feed. And we all collectively started playing a very weird video game, which is how outraged can
*  we all be? And to get to the top of the list. And then of course, with Trump, he realized it.
*  And he's like, okay, yeah, I'm just gonna make fun of a celebrity and I get more retweets. Okay,
*  I'm gonna make fun of Rosie O'Donnell for being overweight or something. And he just starts
*  attacking people. And people are like, oh my God, what did he say? And he copied that from
*  Howard Stern. Because he was in New York and he used to be on Howard Stern. And Howard Stern
*  took over all the dialogue in the 80s and 90s because he was outrageous. And then Trump did
*  that. And then social media incorporated that into the operating system. It became the actual
*  device of social media was the ding, ding, ding, ding, ding, ding. We've got something incredible
*  for you. Everybody salivates like Pavlov's dog. Oh my God, I can be outraged. That's what's gotta
*  be undone. And the only way for that to be undone is these things can't be billions of people where
*  the most outrageous thing that happened in the world today, in the last five minutes,
*  is now in front of you. And that's why people have anxiety. They don't sleep and they doom
*  scroll all night is because the human mind was not meant to process this much suffering, pain, anger.
*  And that's why we have all this mental health issues. Also, young girls or even adults watching
*  other people post their private jets and their vacations and YOLO adventures on their Instagram.
*  To the point at which young people are now faking being on private jets to put on their
*  Instagram and creating this crazy FOMO around their Instagrams. We wonder why people are unhappy.
*  If you think everybody's on a private jet going to some Michelin star restaurant or whatever the
*  coolest thing in the world is today, like going to the Grammys, going to whatever Coachella Burning
*  Man, you're like, oh, but I'm home. I'm in my house and I'm not at Burning Man.
*  Feeling inadequate. Exactly.
*  So this whole system is creating the wrong set of incentives. I tend to believe it's possible
*  to still have extremely high engagement and create a successful, profitable business
*  while encouraging personal growth, encouraging people to be the best version of themselves.
*  I just think we got the first generation of social networks. I think a new generation needs to be
*  built. Absolutely. Is that your plan for a business?
*  I have a longer term plan in terms of ambition, which is I believe in being able to have
*  deep connection between human and AI systems, like partners, friends. There is a connection
*  to there with social media. I do think AI has a strong role to play in representing us
*  and guiding us in how we consume social media. So this algorithm that controls the feed for Facebook
*  is a somewhat centralized algorithm, but instead to give more power to the people,
*  individuals to where each one of us have our own algorithm.
*  Bring your own algorithm.
*  Bring your own algorithm. BYOA?
*  BYOA. I like it.
*  Instead of bringing your own alcohol, you bring your own algorithm. Well, if you thought about it,
*  if we came and said, when I look at my Twitter feed, I would like to see the people who are the
*  most helpful in the world, generous, kind, intelligent, considered, commenting on things
*  that I don't already know about because I want to open my worldview. That could be a beautiful thing
*  for society. And actually Jack was talking about potentially on Twitter, letting people bring their
*  own algorithms and sort their feeds themselves. This would be a wonderful thing. I think it's
*  one of the reasons Clubhouse has resonated is it's such a diverse group of people that I've been
*  able to drop in on conversations with people who are nothing like me and listen in and hear
*  conversations that I wouldn't normally be privy to. And everybody's like, oh, come join as a
*  speaker. I want to do a room with you. I get asked every day, can we do a room? Can we do a room?
*  Ask an angel investor, talk about startups. And I'm like, my usage of Clubhouse is going on my
*  Peloton treadmill, putting Clubhouse on, picking a room and just listening. It's so delightful for me
*  as a podcaster where my job is to talk, to sit back and just put in a couple of miles and play
*  chess and listen to a Clubhouse discussion that is about relationships or some fashion
*  hip hop or whatever it is that I'm not part of. I just sit there and I listen and you learn. It's
*  such a delightful thing. I always think about these kids who go to college and I've always been so
*  jealous of these Ivy League kids. They go and they're like, oh, I got to go to class. And I'm like,
*  I would just love to sit there and listen to Professor Lex talk. What a privilege to sit there
*  and let somebody else drive and talk and listen and learn. Yeah. That's the beauty of podcasting,
*  but of course, Clubhouse creates a whole nother experience where its conversations is different.
*  I think it's going to be the in-between. I like it as you release your podcast. You and I are
*  going to release this podcast. And then at some point I'll have you on my pod when you launch your
*  startup. And then at some point somebody is going to be like, you and I will run into you. I saw you
*  were on Clubhouse the other night and I was busy, but I was almost going to click on you and say,
*  let's start a room together. But you and I will start a room together with Eric Weinstein or
*  somebody or Sam Harris will jump in or Eli and we'll have a different experience, which would
*  just shoot the shit. And it'll act as like a fabric and a little filler between the tent pole
*  podcasts. Like you and Eric, you've done three, I think, with Eric. Yeah, it was your fourth.
*  I haven't released the fourth yet. Okay. So I watched all three because I really thought you were
*  you way and him giving you advice was very interesting dynamic. I thought it was very
*  interesting dynamic. And I find him like a fascinating cat. We know everybody in common,
*  except we've never met. It's very weird because you think about the social graph in the real
*  world. This is why I think augmented reality is going to be such an amazing product. I just have
*  one killer feature I want for augmented reality. We wear our glasses and when I look at you above
*  your head, I see the relationships we have and the things we've done together. So I see, oh,
*  you both know Sam Harris or you had Elon on the podcast on this date or you and I were both at
*  Burning Man in 2016. So it's the most meaningful element of our connection. Correct. And then,
*  because we would discover that through small talk, but imagine you're like at a party and you look
*  and it just, people glow and you just see a glow around a person and like green means you have some
*  financial relationship. Blue means you have some friendship one or yellow means you have friendship
*  one. Blue means you know nothing about each other. You have no connections. You're like,
*  wow, these blue people have no connection to these people. That one's glowing red. We know
*  seven or more people in common and those are the seven people. Oh, we should go talk about how we
*  know each other. And that sort of happened with Facebook member or MySpace where you were like,
*  oh, you know that person, friend of a friend, but that's what there's going to be ARs. This is why
*  I think if Apple figures out AR or Snapchat and they just have those glasses, forget about VR.
*  It's just nauseating and whatever. But AR where you put the glasses on, you see the real world,
*  but you augment it. Or you make, just like you were saying, you make it frictionless,
*  a very low friction to make a deep human connection because you have all the basic elements
*  there already. Now think about the unintended consequences of what I just described.
*  It could get creepy and weird. The privacy thing. I mean, people will, here's the thing. People,
*  your privacy is an illusion. Like all this information is there. And then
*  people are more than willing to give up privacy in exchange for some value. It's a value trade.
*  And giving, if my Tesla, when I'm driving in the direction of my house, just starts the navigation
*  and saves me three clicks and that friction's gone, I'm willing to give Tesla my location and
*  my home address. Right? I'm not willing to give Zuckerberg anything because I don't trust him,
*  but you get the idea. I mean, it will be that way with like DNA and other things. At some point,
*  we'll just be like, yeah, just take my DNA. Like I don't, yeah, sure. People can look and see that
*  a mental midget in my IQ is like lower than, I don't want to bring the bell curve up or whatever,
*  but you could figure out like, if we all put our DNA in a sequence online and be like, oh yeah,
*  you know, Lex has got 10 more IQ points than J Cal and Sam's got 10 more than Lex. And all of a
*  sudden people are like all bent out of shape about it. But what if they, we did that and they were
*  like, and by the way, you also, all three of you are going to get Parkinson's unless you do X,
*  Y and Z, unless you eat more blueberries or whatever we figure out. They're going to accept
*  it pretty quickly. Yeah. That's brave new world, brave new world. I have to ask you, you're just,
*  like you were saying, you're one of the world experts in investing and in startups. Yeah.
*  VC and so on, from the perspective of the startup, I was always kind of skeptical of raising money
*  it feels like people do it too quickly, too easily, but I don't know what the hell I'm talking about.
*  When is the, when should a startup raise money? And from the perspective of the investor,
*  when should the investor invest in a startup? Like, is there a timing thing here? Is there,
*  what, yeah, what? It's a very important question because the venture capital community is only
*  going to fund, you know, sub 1% of enterprises started in the, in the United States every year,
*  like maybe 10 basis points of them, like one in a thousand. And the reason is it's jet fuel.
*  You only want to take that money if you really want to build something big and you want to build
*  it fast. And when you put jet fuel behind a startup, as we've seen with other rockets,
*  things can blow up and people can die. You know, it's not people literally dying, but the business
*  can go up and smoke, right? Like rockets get blown up all the time at SpaceX as part of their
*  ambitious plans and startups, seven out of 10 startups we invest in go to zero. Now, if you
*  were to start the business and only build it off customer revenue and use your own money and go
*  nice and slow and grow 10% a year, the chances of you blowing up the rocket are very low because
*  you're riding a bicycle. Like, so you can go a little faster, but the bicycle can only go so fast.
*  And once you start taking that money, the way venture capital is constructed as
*  in the mix of like MIT or Harvard's endowments is, you know, we're going to put some money into
*  safe things and then we're going to have these really binary things over here.
*  And they probably put 5% in venture capital traditionally. It's grown to 20% just as a
*  function of how successful it's been. So, you know, the Harvard's of the world and MIT is
*  probably one 5 or 10% in venture, but it's grown to 25% because, you know, companies like Airbnb
*  and Uber have grown so big and Tesla, but the goal is in these venture funds, we're going to
*  invest in 30 names and one or two of them are going to return three times the capital we've deployed.
*  So it's a $300 million fund and there's 30 names and they each got 10 million. That means one of
*  the 10 million is going to return the fund plus. So that means it has to grow 30X and then 60X
*  to double the fund. And you're really supposed to be doing three times cash on cash. So that
*  $300 million funds, the expectation is in 10 years to return 900 million, triple the person's money,
*  as opposed to the stock market, which doubles your money in the same period. So you're supposed to do
*  25% annualized returns in order to triple the money. And maybe I have an outlying chance of
*  four or five times the money, which does happen sometimes when you have an outlier in your
*  portfolio, like Uber or Facebook was. And what that means is the venture capitalist behavior in
*  the game they're playing is different than you as the founder. You as the founder, you may really
*  care about this and it dying really matters to you. And then you got a venture capitalist who's like,
*  we're betting on 30 names. We need two of them to hit it out of the park, maybe three and nothing
*  else is meaningful. So now you start thinking about the game theory there. You're dealing with
*  money that is coming in that only cares about you going 100X. It's a whole different ball game.
*  Whereas if you build off revenue, you don't have to do that. And if you look at a company like
*  calm.com, we invested at 5 million. The next round they did was 250. They were so capital efficient
*  that they grew from $10,000 a month in revenue to millions of dollars a month in revenue
*  over those four years since we invested and they didn't raise money in between.
*  Wow. It was unbelievable. And I've only seen this happen three or four times.
*  So it doesn't happen all this capital efficient meaning based on customer revenue alone, plus
*  some small amount of fundraising you're able to go like, how hard is it to do that?
*  It takes extreme product market fit. You have to have a great price for your product that has a
*  great margin. Yeah. And if you're doing something in hardware, it's probably impossible because it's
*  super capital intensive. So it's probably got to be a software business. Hardware businesses take
*  a lot more. Do venture capitalists get in the way at all of the business or is it possible to get
*  out of the way? Yeah. If you get young venture capitalists who are starting their career,
*  they're very nervous and scared because they're putting all these bets. And then there's a very
*  weird thing that happens. The bad news comes first. So companies that don't work out,
*  go out of business immediately. So if it's not going to be com or Robinhood or Uber,
*  you know you have one of those great successes somewhere in your five, six, seven, eight as an
*  investor. What is the first five years like? The first five years, you feel like an idiot
*  because let's say you make these 10 bets. In year two, two or three of them come back and
*  they don't have product market fit and they're out of money. And they say, can we have more money?
*  You say, no, we have to go get it from somebody else because you have to prove that there's still
*  a market for it. We may keep our pro rata. We may put a little bit in to maintain our percentage
*  ownership, but we're not going to give you another big chunk of money. And that company dies. So now
*  you've got 10 million, poof, up in smoke. Boom, 10 million up in smoke. So this is called the J
*  curve where your performance goes down and then it's only in years four or five and six it starts
*  going up. And what you're seeing right now is the people who started like I did in 2000,
*  you know, just 11, 12 years ago in 2009, I started investing. We all look like geniuses. Why? We're
*  at the end of the cycle. We invested after when the stock market was on the floor after the
*  financial crisis and it's gone straight up since. So everybody looked, there's a couple of little
*  blips in there, but generally speaking, there hasn't been like a major crash with the exception
*  of the pandemic crash, but that bounced right back. And so, you know, it takes a decade to
*  figure out if you're good at it. And then if the market crashes again, everybody feels like
*  in it again, the cycle starts again. So you are now as a founder, you are now inserting yourself
*  into that casino. And now you've got all these other forces pushing and pulling and you're
*  growing. Let's say your company was growing 50%. You feel like, wow, I'm successful. I made a
*  million dollars last year. Now I'm doing a million and a half. And the first thing a VC is going to
*  say is how do we triple? We're growing too slow. See, but that's like you said that beautifully
*  is a rocket fuel. It's in the sense, it's a kind of motivation. It's a drive. I mean, it's a positive.
*  So if you want that, if you want that, if you want to go to Navy SEAL school,
*  you're going to be in pain and they're going to put that hose in your face while you're underwater,
*  with your hands tied behind your back in the pool and you're going to be choking and they may have
*  to do CPR on you. And like every couple of years, tragically, somebody dies in Navy SEAL school.
*  Yeah. Well, does it mean we're getting rid of the Navy SEALs?
*  Rocky, if he dies, he dies. I don't know if you know who David Goggins is by any chance.
*  I do. I mean, I don't know him personally, but oh my Lord.
*  So I'm running 48 miles together with him in person in a month.
*  What? You're doing an ultra marathon?
*  With him and probably other stuff because he enjoys just breaking people and making them cry.
*  Oh my God. I'm so jelly.
*  So, you know, I, well, I offered, we agreed a while ago to do a podcast
*  and he's like, oh yeah, come, we'll do it this day.
*  Is he in the Bay Area?
*  I don't know where the hell he is, but we're doing it and I don't think I'm supposed to say
*  where it is, but it's not anywhere close to anywhere of this. It's in the middle of nowhere.
*  Got it.
*  But he seems to be in a bunch of different locations. Like he's in Oregon or something like that.
*  What does he do for outside of writing books and being inspirational? Does he actually train people
*  or like, you know, life coach or what is he doing?
*  He's full-time insane. Like he fights forest fires, like for a few months a year.
*  Wow.
*  As a farmer, like unpaid labor. Like he, you know, there's a bunch of people who are like him,
*  like Navy SEALs and so on that kind of make a career out of motivational speaking, all that.
*  He's not interested in any of that. He's literally interested in just doing hard shit all the time.
*  Breaking himself.
*  Breaking himself personally.
*  He seems like he wants to break himself. And that book is amazing. And the audio book is amazing
*  when he's talking about how fat he was and how he just had to go and keep running and his legs
*  are broken and he's just super pain and he just goes through it. It's really inspiring.
*  The inspiring thing also-
*  Are you going to videotape yourself doing this? I can't wait to see you get destroyed.
*  This is going to be so entertaining for the Lex audience.
*  The pain. But the other inspiring thing is he's happily married and there's a partnership there
*  everybody finds this attention as a push and pull that's beautiful, I think.
*  But in speaking of a beautiful push and pull, how about that transition?
*  You and Jamat, he's a friend of yours.
*  Besties.
*  We're besties.
*  Yeah.
*  Yeah. I mean, there's very few people in my life. Him, Elon, David Sacks, John Brockmans,
*  very few people have supported me as much as those folks. I mean, I'm a huge debt.
*  So he's also co-host on the All In podcast.
*  We taped episode 21 today.
*  Oh, today?
*  Yeah. Every Friday now. They want to do every Friday. They're addicted like me and you are to
*  podcasts.
*  So you're going to release it when?
*  It's probably released as we're sitting here.
*  Okay. Beautiful.
*  Special guest on it. We had Draymond Green from the Warriors
*  phone in so we had our first guest.
*  Awesome.
*  Yeah. So it's really funny because he plays poker with us and we're all besties.
*  Beautiful. So you guys went pretty heated.
*  Yes, we did.
*  Against each other versus Rob on Robin Hood.
*  Yes.
*  Maybe those are two things I want to ask.
*  Yeah.
*  First, on the actual Robin Hood discussion and the Wall Street best discussion,
*  can you still man his argument? What was the nature of the disagreement? Where?
*  So.
*  Where? Yeah. What is the little because I don't think it's as big as a space as it came off as
*  sounding. What is the nature of the disagreement?
*  He felt that Robin Hood turned off trading because the hedge funds told them to and that they were
*  bowing down to the pressure of the hedge funds. That's not true, but in a vacuum of information,
*  you know what happens to people's minds, conspiracy theories abound.
*  And sometimes there is a conspiracy theory and sometimes there's just
*  the appearance of impropriety or a bunch of related things.
*  When you look at the Trump situation with Russia, was Trump trying to coordinate with Russia or
*  were the Russians just screwing with a bunch of neophyte idiotic dipshits like Donald Trump Jr.
*  who don't know any better? And they don't know that you shouldn't meet with the Russians.
*  And if you do meet with the Russians, you are probably a useful idiot. You probably should
*  tell the FBI. They're just a bunch of idiots in all likelihood. Who knows?
*  And there's a vacuum of information.
*  And there's a vacuum of information. We don't know. And the Russians are trying to compromise
*  everybody. So would you call it a conspiracy or would you call it an attempted conspiracy?
*  There was no conspiracy here. What it was was Robin Hood needed to raise billions of dollars
*  to stay solvent in all likelihood. And they weren't allowed to talk about it. So they were
*  forced into not talking about it in all likelihood and had to come up with that money or shut down.
*  And then what got me upset with Chamath and we had a talk afterwards that people don't know
*  about, I'll talk about it here for the first time, on Sunday, we had to air it out.
*  Yeah. In the episode after, you guys sounded like you've had a private...
*  We had a private discussion, just one-on-one. And we said, listen, we love each other. We're besties.
*  We've always been there for each other. What happened here? And what happened there is,
*  I'm fiercely loyal to my folks, whether it's Chamath or Travis from Uber or Sax or whoever,
*  I'm just a loyal guy. And I'm always ride or die with my founders. If I invest in them,
*  even if they make a mistake and Uber made plenty of mistakes, I always went on CNBC
*  on my podcast and said, hey, we're going to fix these things. I'm in touch with the team.
*  Mistakes were made. We're going to solve them. This is a group of people with great intent who
*  want to make the world a better place. And you know what? I was hated for a period of time with
*  Uber. I was hated for it last week with Robinhood. I got a lot of blowback. But I think in both of
*  those cases, eventually I was right. Uber's doing great stuff in the world. Robinhood's doing great
*  stuff in the world. And I like to be loyal to my investments and my partners to just... I feel like
*  if you invest and you're on the team, you have really three choices. You either fight for your
*  team, you can go silent, or you can throw your team under the bus. And I've watched investors
*  throw the team that they invested in that made them a bunch of money under the bus. Not acceptable
*  to me. And being quiet's not acceptable to me. So I always ask the founder, do you want me to...
*  Is it okay if I go out and defend you publicly? If they say yes, I do it.
*  And then- That's beautiful, by the way,
*  because what else do we have in this world if not friendship?
*  Loyalty means everything to me. I grew up in Brooklyn where if you were not loyal
*  and you were not loyal to your crew, then you were a Ronin. You were out there on your own,
*  flailing in the... Trust me, you do not want to be on your own in 1970s, 80s Brooklyn, Manhattan.
*  You need to have a crew with you. I've gotten into... You don't want to get into a fight with
*  10 guys and be alone, or just be with... You need a crew to survive. So I just learned early,
*  and my dad, who owned a bar, just drilled into me being loyal. And so for whatever reason,
*  I'm a bulldog when it comes to loyalty. And Shamoff came out and said,
*  these guys need to go to jail and they're scumbags and da-da-da. And I'm trying to defend them,
*  and I'm in a position where I can't defend them because I don't have complete information. There
*  is no complete information. It's in the heat of the moment, and then it becomes the number one
*  story. And it's my number three investment. And Shamoff has a competing company, SoFi,
*  and he's killing my guys. And then I started killing his guys. And then all of a sudden,
*  we're like, wait a second, we're best friends. And we're swinging our swords at each other,
*  and we're a group of the seven samurai who fight together. When did we turn on each other? And then
*  everybody else who's on the pod, the two Davids, who are both on the spectrum a bit, they got a
*  little Asperger's or whatever. No offense, Lex. I'm not saying. You're into AI, and you might be
*  somewhere. It might not be a coincidence. Anyway, we upgraded the two Davids firmware. We're going
*  to upgrade your firmware after this. You're on the 1.5. You have the three emotions now,
*  or should we add a fourth? Do you want to go with joy? I'm on the 2.0 already. You're on the 2.0.
*  You got the joy. How's it working out? It's difficult. You'll get there. Just let it happen,
*  Lex. Just let the joy happen. So anyway, we just talked about it offline, and we decided, listen,
*  we didn't pregame that episode, and I happened to be skiing with my family. I had taken the first
*  vacation since this goddamn pandemic started, and I was having a wonderful time. And then this whole
*  thing blows up. I'm coming off the mountain, just having a great time with my daughter skiing. And
*  then I'm mixing it up with him, and he had a short fuse about it because he was triggered,
*  he told me, because he really feels like he's fighting to defend the everyman. And I was like,
*  that's what my team's doing. That's why they named the company Robinhood. We're on the same side here.
*  And then over time, we've started to see the explanation come out. And
*  people who are friends are going to have disagreements. In the podcast, it happened
*  to happen very publicly, and we didn't know it was going to become the number one story.
*  In the world, if Trump still had his Twitter handle, this would not have been a story.
*  Trump would have said something about GameStop, and he would have co-opted the entire conversation.
*  So in a way, going back to our censorship discussion, I might actually be in favor of
*  Trump being censored only because how delightful has it been since January 20th that we can all
*  focus on something other than him. He was exhausting. I mean, the amount of cycles he
*  took on our processors. He monopolized the conversation. And now this is a little bit more
*  of a distributed... Yeah, everybody gets a chance to be the number one news story. Everybody gets
*  a chance to discuss it, but... So on a scale of one to 10, how much do you love Chamath?
*  Oh, 11. I love Chamath. We played cards last night. We're besties. I would literally jump
*  in front of a bullet for him. What's the lesson in that discussion? Because it was super... I
*  think the love was felt and the respect was felt throughout, even when you guys are going pretty
*  vicious on each other. Is there a lesson to be learned? Do you regret any of that conversation?
*  No. I mean, I think he told me that he regretted some of the things he said publicly on the podcast.
*  Like, listen, I was a little hot. I may have said things in the heat of the moment,
*  but I don't live with too much regret because I always think about intent.
*  As one of the nuance and intent have been totally lost, the idea that we could have any kind of a
*  nuanced discussion about things seems to have been forgotten. And the fact that people don't look at
*  people's intent. If you hurt somebody's feelings or you disrespect somebody or you do something mean
*  or whatever, I always look at the intent. And I've had people attack me and I look at the intent and
*  I'm like, that person feels bad about themselves. Or maybe I said something and I insulted them and
*  that's why their blowback's there. So I always try to think what's the intent of the person. And then
*  almost universally, you talk to somebody and you find out you ascribe some crazy intent
*  that's not there. And they're like, oh yeah, you know what happened? I got in a fight with my spouse
*  and I didn't sleep last night and I've had a lot of anxiety about my business and I just snapped and
*  said something about you. And it's like, oh, okay. I literally had somebody on Twitter
*  this past summer. I had said something. I was complaining about a New York Times journalist
*  and something I thought was wrong. And this person was a fan of that journalist.
*  And they went, I kid you not, onto my social media account, found a picture I'd taken about
*  how blue the sky was one day. They reversed image search the tree line, found the tree line
*  on Google image search, somehow with a reverse image search, found an old listing that some
*  broker had listed on their website of my house and then posted my home address, the value of my home
*  and doxed me on Twitter. And I'm like, what is going on here? So I call the person
*  and I look them up and they work in private equity in Boston. And I look and I'm like,
*  this person works in Boston, this is July 4th week. So, and I, when I look at the person's
*  LinkedIn, we have seven people in common. So going back to the AR conversation, I'm like,
*  okay, this person literally just doxed me. I asked them to take it down. They told me they
*  won't take it down. And then I look at it. So then I DM him back on Instagram, on Twitter. And I said,
*  by the way, your boss, Susan, and I know seven people in common. And these are the seven people.
*  Here's a screenshot. What is she going to think when I call her on Monday and you've doxed me?
*  Here's my phone number if you'd like to talk. He calls me. I said, what's going on? Why would
*  you do this? He's like, well, I really pissed off about what you said about this person. I was like,
*  you understand I've had like two or three stalkers, like in anybody who's a high profile,
*  like I am like, or medium profile, you're going to have weird things happen. You literally put
*  my home address, you put my family at risk. What if I put your home address on my, I have 400,000
*  followers or 300,000 followers, you have like 300. What if I post your address? He said, well,
*  I wish you wouldn't do that. I was like, well, I asked you kindly to take my address down.
*  And I said, are you married? Do you I said, I said, how old are you? Like 25 or something? He's
*  like, no, I'm 42. I was like, you're 42 years old. I said, are you married? You have kids? He's like,
*  yeah, I just had a baby like six months ago. I'm like, you're home with your wife. It's July 4th
*  weekend. You're doxing Jason Caliganis because you're upset at me because I said something about a
*  New York Times writer. He's like, yeah, this is the biggest mistake of my life. I said, I tell you
*  what, let's forget it ever happened. And he wrote me back. And he said, I just wanted to thank you
*  for how you handled it. My wife said I'm a complete fucking moron. And he literally says to me,
*  my wife says a complete fucking moron. And I'm really sorry, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And
*  I wrote her back. I said, I wrote it back. And he said, my wife says the same thing to me all the
*  times. I walk up to the club. It's totally fine. But intent, nuance, it matters. And the person
*  could be having a bad day and they do something stupid, they regret. And what am I going to do?
*  Cancel the guy? Or if I had called his boss, he would have been fired immediately. And then I got
*  to live with this guy got fired and he's got a kid. And what is this personal destruction? Why are we
*  doing this to each other? Life's hard enough. Life's hard. Just getting through the day is hard.
*  Yeah. And that little bit of empathy, thinking about the intent of the person
*  allows you to then deescalate this kind of conversation that social media wants to escalate.
*  Yes. Back to what we were saying. In my younger years, I would have retweeted the guy's home address
*  and my address and would have called his boss and tried to get him fired or whatever. And now I'm
*  just like, why are we attacking each other? Life is so hard. This is what the pandemic, I think,
*  should make everybody realize is like, look at that, how hard it is. Life is hard. And then just
*  think about all the people suffering right now who are at home, the single mom or dad with two or
*  three kids at home in public school. Maybe they've been laid off and their kids aren't learning and
*  they're in a tiny apartment. I mean, this has been brutal for a lot of people. And not to mention
*  people losing loved ones or maybe some people got Corona and now their lungs are still not right.
*  Can I ask you about love? Oh, sure. I'm feeling it. We're in hour two here,
*  Lex. We could become besties. I feel like we've got a bromance going here, Lex.
*  I feel it too. I don't know if it's Eric Weinstein level, but I feel like it's close.
*  Yeah, I'm feeling the love. But we talked about the... There's music to my ears,
*  your whole rant on the Olympic nature of a startup. Is there a role, like what role does love,
*  family, friendship play in that brutal pursuit of excellence that is building a startup, building
*  a company or building, creating anything new in this world? Such a great question and totally
*  unprepared for it because nobody would ever ask me about that. So I think that's why you've got
*  quite a following on your podcast is that you're able to ask these questions. And I can tell one
*  story because I don't talk about... I try not to talk about relationship with Elon that often
*  because he's so famous now. I mean, when we met, I used to go out to parties with him and people
*  are like, oh my God, you're Jason Calcas. I'm like, yeah. And like, who's your friend? I'm like,
*  that's my friend Elon. And they'd be like, what? He's doing rocket ship stuff. But he's told this
*  story publicly so I can tell it. And it would never talk about anything that he hasn't already
*  talked about publicly, especially since he's so high profile. But it was a pretty funny moment.
*  He... There was a moment in time when Tesla almost went out of business and you've probably heard
*  the story many times, but it was during the financial crisis and they were running out of money.
*  And they said, let's go get a steak. And we're in LA, we drove to BOA and I had my orange Tesla
*  Roadster and he had his P1 or P2, like the red one that I think is in space now. And we drove
*  to the valet and we had a steak together and we're sitting there. And I said, I read the story in
*  Gawker or whatever, New York Times, you only got like five weeks of money left in Tesla.
*  He goes, it's not true. I was like, oh, thank God. He goes, we have two weeks.
*  I was like, oh God. I was like, well, what's going on with the rocket ship company?
*  I know you did the one last month and don't you have one coming up? He's like, yeah,
*  we've got the third one coming up. I was like, well, how's that going? I said, well, we'd blow
*  that one up. There's no more SpaceX. I was like, so two weeks of money left in Tesla and SpaceX,
*  she blew up the first two rockets, she blew up the third SpaceX's ever. He's like, yeah.
*  I was like, I can loan you a couple million dollars. I don't have like a ton. He's like,
*  it's okay. Our friend beep has loaned me some money. And Elon's been super public about this.
*  I would never tell the story unless he hadn't been, but he was talking, he never said who it was,
*  but somebody had loaned him money to keep him afloat. He was functionally bankrupt.
*  I mean, he had the equity in the companies, but the equity was quickly becoming worth zero and the
*  financial crisis. And he's figuring out if he's going to go on vacation for Christmas or not.
*  And he's on the phone trying to save both companies. And I said, certainly there must
*  be some good news. And he takes out his BlackBerry to date this conversation. There are no iPhones.
*  Takes his BlackBerry and he starts swiping and he says, don't tell anybody.
*  This is what I'm building. And he shows me the Model S.
*  And nobody knew that he was working on the Model S. We knew he was doing the Roadster and he was
*  trying to save the company. And I looked at it and I was like, that's gorgeous. It was the clay
*  models. So it was a full-size clay model. So there's human beings standing around a clay version of
*  this tiny little BlackBerry picture. I'm scrolling through on the, remember that little pad or the
*  ball on the BlackBerry? I'm scrolling through it. I'm like, this is fucking great. And I just said
*  to him, it's like, what's the range going to be? I said, well, I think we get 250 miles. I was like,
*  250 miles? He's like, yeah, I think it'd be the safest car ever. I said, what is it going to cost?
*  He says, I think this could cost eventually 50, $60,000. I said, Elon, if you make that car,
*  you'll change the goddamn world. This company must survive because the Roadster's for like
*  2000 people in the United States. This car is for every person in the United States.
*  Every single person in the United States will want this car if it's $50,000. And maybe some of the
*  people who have 20 or 30,000 cars won't be able to afford it, but they'll all want it. It's gorgeous.
*  And he said, you really think so? I said, yeah. So I got home and I talked to my wife, Jade,
*  and I said, do you have the checkbook? She does all the finances and stuff like that, pays every
*  bills and whatever. And I said, don't tell anybody Elon's making this great car. And I wrote two
*  checks for $50,000. And I just took out a piece of paper and I wrote, E, love the new car, I'll take
*  two. And I signed it. I kissed the two $50,000 checks, put them in the envelope and I FedExed
*  the two for Monday delivery. And I said to Jade, that $100,000 is going to be gone in 48 hours
*  because it will pay for one or two days of payroll on Tesla. So we just added like instead of two
*  weeks of roadways, got 12 days. And the checks don't cash, but then I read a story that he's
*  closed the money, saved the company in like the next week or two. And a couple of months later,
*  the checks get cashed. And I'm like, okay. Three years later, I get an email. Your reservation
*  number, it's from Tesla, your reservation number is 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1. And then five seconds later,
*  your reservation number is 0, 0, 0, 0, 73. And I forward the number one to Elon. I said, you know,
*  I can't take number one, a signature number one. I can't take that. That's yours. And he said,
*  I got five of them. And besides you're the first person who ordered it.
*  And I was the first person who had seen it. You're going to give me to be teary-eyed.
*  And then I know it was a very, it was an incredible moment for both of us. And we talk about it
*  sometimes, you know, those moments in time. And when you, to your point about love,
*  that's like the darkest moment, one of the darkest moments in his life, probably. I think it was,
*  I could tell you it was the darkest period of his life for sure. And he's been very public about how
*  dark that was. And I think, you know, this is why I have great sympathy for the entrepreneurs
*  of the world, like the suffering and the pain. And when he talks about the suffering and the pain
*  that all of these founders have felt, and then we were throwing rocks at them and we're criticizing
*  them as they try to change the world and save humanity. And in Tesla's case, I mean, they
*  weren't, you know, they weren't like delivering pizza. I mean, they were trying to get us off
*  of fossil fuels. Like this was a big, heady mission to literally save the environment,
*  the planet, humanity. And the way they shorted that stock and they attacked him,
*  it was always perplexing to me why any human being who is standing on God's green earth
*  would want to throw rocks at the guy who is trying to stem the dam of global warming that is about to
*  engulf all of us. How dare they throw rocks at that guy? There's so many people you could throw
*  rocks at. There's somebody who's making the jewel vaporizer. Throw rocks at that scumbag,
*  no offense. But like whoever's making the jewel things and is, you know, selling pina colada
*  flavor to 12 year olds, like throw rocks at them. Somebody's doing something, you know, abhorrent,
*  but not E. I mean, and yeah, anyway, that car is, you know, up the road here, sitting under a cover
*  with 20,000 miles on it in my garage. And then the roadster number 16 is in the garage next to it.
*  And every day I walk by the two of them and I get a warm feeling in my heart because I know he did it
*  against all odds, against all odds. He pulled it off. And it was that moment, that month in that,
*  it was probably December, January, December of 2008, I think. It was just 12 years ago,
*  when you think about 13 years ago, it was dark. I mean, it was dark. And they almost had the same
*  thing happen, you know, in the Model 3 production in June of two years, three years ago. And I
*  remember him just trying to get the Model 3 out the door and the company almost crashed then.
*  Most of these companies have, you know, these kinds of moments. And I think friendship is,
*  you get what you give. You get what you give. And if you are there for people, you're going to feel
*  so good about having done that. And then the reciprocation effect, which you probably know
*  very well, is so great in the world that anytime you're kind to people, you build this incredible
*  bond. And then what are we at the end of the day, Lex, besides a series of memories with the people
*  we love? That's all it is. It's just a series of memories and moments. It's just moments.
*  You ever see Blade Runner? Yes, of course. Do you remember what
*  Rucker Harris says at the end? All of these memories gone, like tears in the rain? Yeah.
*  I mean, that's our existence. It just all goes away at some point. It's just these drops of rain.
*  Each of those memories, just like one snowflake or one drop of rain, and they're all lost at some
*  point, but they're here now. And that's why we have to be there for each other. That's why
*  I feel like what I do is so important in this world. And I get such great meaning out of it,
*  just being a friend, just having these conversations. What you're doing on your
*  podcast, just talking to intelligent people and spreading the word and the gospel of what they're
*  saying and amplifying it, you're inspiring so many people. Every podcast, you get 500,000 people,
*  a million people watch these videos, and there's some kid in Sri Lanka or some little girl in
*  Afghanistan who's going to stumble upon this on YouTube, and they're going to change the world
*  in the next century, because it's not just about America. Our story is almost over, right? We were
*  the story of the last 200 or 300 years. I hope it keeps going, but there's all these other places
*  in the world, San Paulo and Africa, where people now have access to these videos. And somebody will
*  have this video and go, Elon did it. Oh, and that guy Jason was his friend, and Lex does those
*  interviews with the... Oh yeah, I could do it too. Your little magical moment of love amidst the
*  suffering with Elon, because you've talked about it, it'll have these ripple effects.
*  It's fascinating to think about it, and in that case to come, and new entrepreneurs being born,
*  new, more love being put out there, and more support through these rough times when people
*  are trying to create new things. I mean, that's a beautiful thing. I'm glad you think of friendship
*  in this way. I'm deeply grateful that you're loyal in the way you are.
*  Here's the thing, it costs you nothing to make this investment either. The amount of time it
*  takes to be bitter or angry, sitting at home, to be disappointed, you could just channel that same
*  amount of energy into being loyal, loving, kind, and there for people. It just only takes the
*  intention. Those emotions are going to flow. Sam would always tell me when I was struggling in my
*  life, and I talked to him, he'd say, Jason, your brain is spewing all these ideas. Imagine you're
*  sitting by a river, and the river is all your ideas. You are not a slave to any one of these
*  ideas. They're just whipping by, like each of those little waves in the river. You can pick one of
*  those ideas out and look at it and examine it, and either keep it, or throw it back in the river and
*  let it go. I was like, wow, Sam. Of my entire friendship with Sam Harris, that was the one
*  moment where I was just like, oh my God. All my life, I've wondered about all these thoughts in
*  my head, insecurities, imposter syndrome. I didn't go to MIT. I'm not the smartest guy,
*  but somehow I made a career writing little 50K checks, and now $3 million checks, but whatever,
*  little checks, and being a journalist, and doing this little podcast. It's added up to something.
*  I'm proud of it. I'm 50, and I'm proud of what I did. I wake up every morning, I get retired,
*  and I say, I like what I do. I like having the conversation, writing the check,
*  and then being on somebody's team. I got offered to be in these giant mega funds,
*  and they said, Jason, you're in it. You invest in 60 companies a year,
*  you know, 500K at a time. You put $30 million a year to work. Come work with us, write one
*  $50 million check, and then you can go to Aspen, and Cabo, and Coachella, and not work.
*  Why are you doing all this work? It's like, well, the $50 million check is like a formality. It's
*  just like being an ATM. The companies are already huge by that time. I really want to meet the two
*  people with the idea. I want to meet them in year one. I want to meet them on day zero.
*  I want to be the guy who wrote the first, second, or third check. I don't want a guy
*  who wrote the 3,000th check, the last check. It's fucking boring.
*  And make that basic human connection, and also be there, be with them through the rough times,
*  be with them with that first, I mean, the first early successes. I mean, that's a beautiful-
*  So great. When a founder and their team get product market fit, and you just know it's
*  going to work, oh man, Lex. When Calm would email me and they'd say, the company's been growing,
*  and we're not going to go out of business, but we added some sleep stuff, and then we added this
*  other function, and we have a streak now, and we grew 10X in the last three months, and we're good.
*  It's like, oh, that's nice. It's real nice. It's a nice feeling.
*  That's a good feeling.
*  Well, because so many of them die. We talked about that J curve early. Imagine it's like
*  all these baby turtles going out to the ocean, and the seagulls are ripping them to shreds,
*  and then their sharks are eating them. But then a couple of the turtles make it,
*  and they become wise old 100-year-old turtles. And you're like, yep, I remember when you
*  catched, and all of your brothers and sisters were ripped to shreds by the seagulls, and you
*  made it into the water, and then you made it out to the deep water. It's a pretty great feeling.
*  I think there's no better way to end it than the talk of the cruelty of life,
*  the suffering that is life, and the love amidst the suffering. Jason, I've been a fan of yours
*  for a long time. You're one of the most special people in Silicon Valley.
*  Thanks, Lex.
*  And maybe you'll also call me in one of the rough times.
*  Oh, yeah.
*  I'm sure there'll be many.
*  There will be, yeah. There's one expression, nobody gets there alone.
*  Nobody gets there alone. And anybody who thinks that they got there alone
*  is delusional and kidding themselves, and they will at some point wake up and realize, oh, shit,
*  there were a lot of people who helped me get here. I need to write a couple of gratitude letters.
*  I got a gratitude letter the other day from a friend of mine who I helped.
*  I was one of the... You know about these gratitude letters people are writing?
*  It turns out Martin Seligman in... Was it Authentic Happiness? Anyway, the guy who
*  really studied happiness and joy, turns out one of the greatest amplifiers of joy in your life
*  is to thank somebody for doing something for you. And somebody who I had helped just wrote me a
*  letter, and I got in Christmas, and I had the stack of Christmas cards, and I hadn't opened them.
*  And it's the second week of January, and I was just getting to the last stack,
*  and I opened it up, and I almost missed it. It's an incredibly heartwarming letter about how
*  meaningful certain things I had done to help along the way, and how he'd always appreciated
*  my counsel. And I was just like, well, this happened 25 years ago, and you wrote this letter
*  now, and it just hit me like a ton of bricks. And I was just like, wow, if you're hearing this,
*  there's probably 10 people who are really instrumental in your lives, go ahead and call
*  them on the phone, write them an email, or even better, just write a letter, and send it to them,
*  and just tell them you're thankful. And let me tell you something, the amplification of joy in
*  your life will go 100x, 100x when you tell somebody you love them, and that you really
*  appreciate them, and that what they did for you was magical. So just... And you can look it up,
*  gratitude. Gratitude is like one of these incredible forces.
*  Amen.
*  I'm grateful for being on the pod.
*  I'm grateful. You wasted all this time with me. I love it.
*  And now, let me leave you with some words from the man himself, Jason Kilikamis.
*  The number one reason a startup shuts down is not running out of money.
*  The number one reason a startup fails is that the founder gives up.
*  Thank you for listening, and hope to see you next time.
