---
Date Generated: April 12, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 9848s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence', 'artificial intelligence podcast', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex podcast', 'mit ai', 'niels jorgensen']
Video Views: 185410
Video Rating: None
---

# Niels Jorgensen: New York Firefighters and the Heroes of 9/11 | Lex Fridman Podcast #220
**Lex Fridman:** [September 11, 2021](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hZenJc1fa70)
*  The following is a conversation with Niels Jorgensen, a New York firefighter for over 21
*  years who was there at Ground Zero on September 11, 2001. He was forced to retire because of the
*  leukemia he contracted from cleaning up Ground Zero. This podcast tells his story and the story
*  of other great men and women who were there that day. Some of the stories we talk about are part of
*  a new limited podcast series that Niels hosts called 20 for 20 with 20 episodes for the 20 years
*  since 9-11. To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description.
*  As a side note, please allow me to say a few words about the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001.
*  I was in downtown Chicago on that day, lost in the mundane busyness of an early Tuesday morning.
*  At that time, I was already fascinated by human nature, the best and the worst of it,
*  exploring it through the study of history and literature.
*  In the years before, as a young boy growing up in Russia, I saw chaos, uncertainty, and desperation
*  in the Soviet Union of the 1990s, wrapping up a century of war and suffering. But after coming
*  to America for me, there was a sense of hope, like all of it was behind us, a bad dream to be
*  forgotten as we enter into the new century. On 9-11, when I saw the news of the second plane
*  hitting the towers, my sense of hope had changed. I understood that the 21st century,
*  like the century before, would too have its tragedies, its evildoers, its wars, and its
*  suffering. And unlike the history books, these stories will involve all of us. They will involve
*  me in however small and insignificant a role, but one that nevertheless carries the responsibility
*  to help. I became an American that day, a citizen of the world. I felt the common humanity in all of
*  us. I felt the unity and the love in the days that followed, and I think most of the world shared in
*  this feeling, that we are all in this together. Evil cannot defeat the human spirit. There were
*  many heroes, sung and unsung on that day, and in the years after. Often politicians fail to rightfully
*  honor the service and sacrifice of these heroes. There is much I could say about that, but I don't
*  want to waste my words on the failures of weak leaders. Instead, I want to say thank you to the
*  men and women who rushed to ground zero to help, who put on a uniform to serve, who make me proud
*  to be an American and a human being, and give me hope about the future of our civilization,
*  here on a small spinning rock that despite the long odds, keeps kindling the fire of human
*  consciousness and love. This is the Lex Freedman podcast, and here is my conversation with Niels
*  Jorgensen. Take me through the day of September 11th, 2001, as you experienced it, as you lived it.
*  September 11th, 2001, it was a bright, beautiful, sunny Tuesday morning. It was a late summer.
*  There's a lot of folks who go to the beaches in New Jersey called the short summer.
*  Everybody's left there for Labor Day, but it's still beautiful enough to enjoy the weather.
*  I left my house about 6.30 in the morning, and my four and a half year old daughter
*  said to me, Daddy, which truck are you driving today? The fire truck, the oil truck, or the
*  Boars Head truck, because I had three jobs at the time. Most New York City firefighters and
*  police officers, EMS, we don't make the most amount of money. So in order to live in that city,
*  you have to hustle. My wife stayed at home raising the children.
*  My daughter said, oh, you should be safe because you're on the oil truck. I told her I was
*  going on the oil truck that day. She said, you should be safe today, Daddy. I left and
*  worked for this great company on the North Shore of Staten Island, Quinlan Fuel.
*  Very nice people. Treated me very well. It was my first day back actually for the winter season.
*  I usually get laid off a couple of months in the summer because things are too hot to need oil.
*  So I took the truck, started my route that day, and the plane hit the tower. So initially,
*  I'm like, oh, it's probably some silly Learjet pilot, and he veered off track to get a better
*  picture for a client, and he hit the building. Probably hit a bad turbulence, gust of wind.
*  It's very windy down in that area of Manhattan, so that was my first thought.
*  Can we pause there for a second? So 6.30 a.m., you wake up, you leave, and then the plane hits at
*  8.45 a.m. It's just interesting how you phrase it. So how did you hear that a plane hit something?
*  I'm a big news radio guy, news guy. A bit of a buff. I've been that way since I was a kid,
*  and I had the news radio on the local New York radio station. As I was driving the truck, I heard
*  an emergency report. This just in, aircraft has just struck the World Trade Center.
*  Where Quinlan's is located, it's on the north rim of Staten Island, which is right on New York
*  Harbor. You could see Statue of Liberty a mile or two away in your distance, and then past that is
*  the towers. So I just literally stopped the truck and looked out, and I saw the smoke.
*  So there was smoke. Oh, it was dark, black smoke. It was just, yeah, I mean, it was burning fully
*  at that point. Did you have fear of what the hell happened?
*  Or is it- I was initially scared for anybody involved. I realized, I said, there's going to be
*  lots of fatalities, obviously, depending on the size of the aircraft. The business day there had
*  started probably at 8, 830, so those buildings should have been packed at that moment. So that
*  was a thought across my mind. But from our being responder perspective, if you're off duty, normally
*  you do not go to a scene. They don't want you to because of accountability and safety.
*  The on-duty platoon will handle it, and if it's something very horrific, then they will have
*  something called a recall, which is any police firefighter or EMS personnel is obligated to go
*  to their command immediately, check in with their command, get their gear and standby and await
*  orders for deployment, or to remain in that command for routine duties.
*  How often throughout history have there been recalls?
*  I believe the one prior to that was in the 1968 riots, possibly. And then maybe in the 70s,
*  there was another blackout and riots. And I remember my dad talking about it, and he actually
*  always said, just remember if something bad is going down, don't just rush in. You will wait
*  the recall, or at the very least, if there isn't a recall, you get to your firehouse.
*  And because if you show up somewhere, there's a good chance that no one knows you're there.
*  And now in your well-intended movements, you get lost or trapped, or no one's looking for you. So
*  that's the whole thing with checking in. And now you're with a squad or group of guys, and everyone
*  knows, hey, there's Nels, there's Lex, okay, they're on this team. So I said, all right,
*  they're not going to need us. It's probably going to be a fifth alarm, and there'll be 250
*  firefighters there. They'll handle it. It's going to be a bad day for those guys, but our guys take
*  on some heavy stuff, and they'll be fine. A few minutes later, the second plane hit, and I knew
*  immediately. I'm like, okay, we're under attack. So I just flew the truck back in. I told my boss,
*  I have to go. He understood he knew something was way wrong, and I just was flying. At the time,
*  I actually had a yellow Volkswagen Beetle, kind of a goofy car to be driving, but I loved it.
*  So for people who are just listening, you're kind of a big guy.
*  Well, yeah, I definitely need to lose about 50 pounds.
*  No, I don't mean in that way. Your frame, big hands.
*  As my beloved friend, Bobby Adams, would say to me, I was driving around in a clown wagon,
*  and he also says I have a waving hairdo, waving bye-bye. So thanks, Bobby.
*  You're good luck.
*  Yeah, he's a great friend. Yeah, so I took the Volkswagen, and I flew in, and I was heading over
*  the Verrazano Bridge and hit the Brooklyn Queens Expressway. And my phone rang, and my wife normally
*  doesn't curse or raise a voice, and she was yelling at me. And she said, don't go in there.
*  Go to your firehouse. Well, first she asked where, she knew I was on the way, but she just
*  wanted to know where. And I said, I'm on the curve, which is 65th Street on the
*  Brooklyn Queens Expressway called Dead Man's Curve. We actually used to do a lot of car wrecks up
*  there. And I was hitting that curve pretty fast. And then right around the curve is the exit to
*  the firehouse. And I had to decide, well, am I driving right in to the battery tunnel to the city,
*  or am I going to the firehouse? And then I said, but I have no gear. I'm going to be ineffective.
*  How do I show up with no gear, no protection? So she said, do what your dad would,
*  follow the recall, go to the firehouse. I hung up the phone, said, I love you, gotta go.
*  And I did, I went to the firehouse, and I'm glad I listened to her. I had my father ringing in my
*  ears. My dad, beautiful guy, he's 82, 34 years in New York City Fire Department. He came down on
*  end stage, non-hazardous lymphoma. He's 38, going on 39, 1978. And this guy, he's my hero. He was
*  going to die. They sent him home. They said, there's really not much we can do. Go get your
*  affairs in order. And he says, but doc, I have three young kids. And she called him a couple
*  hours later. She said, I got in touch with Sloan Kettering, and they have a new drug. We want you
*  to be a test pilot. And he said, hey, doc, he's got a heavy Brooklyn accent. I'm a fireman. I'm
*  a fireman. I'm not a pilot. And so she said, no, no, we want you to try this drug out. And if it
*  works, we may have some success. But if not, he says, yeah, I'm going to die, so let's do it.
*  So every two weeks for four years, he'd go for treatment. But he was assigned to a desk job
*  after that, after the cancer tumor removal and the heavy treatments. And he'd get up every morning,
*  4 o'clock in the morning, and he'd walk down to the train station in Staten Island, take the train.
*  And then he'd take the ferry across the harbor, and he'd get off looking at the towers. And then
*  he'd take a subway into Brooklyn. And on every other Thursday, he'd leave at noon, do the same
*  exact reverse route. And he'd get to the cancer center, and my mom would meet him. And he'd get
*  his infusion. And within two hours, he'd be violently ill for a few days, really badly ill.
*  And I just remember, I was 10 years old, and he just had to have the room darkened out. And he'd
*  be so sick. And I'd just go in and wipe the vomit off his face, just try to give him a little water,
*  but he couldn't take it down because he'd throw it up. And maybe on Saturday, he'd start coming
*  around a little bit, drink down a little bit of tea. And on Sunday morning, he'd put his robe on,
*  he'd go down, mom would make him black coffee and toast. He'd sit up, watch the news, watch a game.
*  And then Monday morning, he'd go back to work. And he did that for four years. And he's 82,
*  and he's still here. You said that your dad's a man of a few words, but when he talks,
*  they're profound. So what words were ringing in your ear when you were driving?
*  I just always remember him saying, kid, they give the recall, you go to the firehouse. You don't
*  go where you think you should. You go to the firehouse, you follow your orders.
*  So do the smart thing, do your job.
*  Yes, sir. And every time we'd hang up the phone, it's fireman talk. He'd say, I love you, keep low.
*  My dad couldn't tell me he loved me until I told him when I first got on the fire department when
*  I was 22. My dad grew up in a tough household. My granddad was a good man, but a tormented man.
*  He was sent away from home at 12 years old. He was from Denmark, and I'm named after him,
*  Grandpa Nils. And I think his demons took up a large part of his life, his anger, his whatever
*  it was, his fear. We got the sense that maybe when he was a child, he was an apprentice baker,
*  living with strangers, working for them. And we think maybe he was abused, and that's why he took
*  it out on my dad and my grandma and my aunts. But they made it up to each other at the end of my
*  granddad's life. My granddad turned out to be the best grandfather ever. I think he tried to heal
*  and heal everyone by his change of behavior. So he's proof that you can change, you can improve
*  if you work on it. But I know I'm going off track here. But you were man enough,
*  you say in your 20s to tell your dad that you love him?
*  I got on a job. He said, I had a co-kid. I was the tour, we called it Tour of Duty. I said,
*  oh, that was great. It was great. I love it. And he goes, just remember, you keep low. You always
*  keep low. And keep low means you stay down below the flames. If a room flashes over and it's burning,
*  if you stay up high, you're going to get burned badly. But if you get down on your belly and you
*  crawl, you'll get out. So he'd always say that when you hang up the phone. And I said, well,
*  I love you, Pop. And he says, well, thanks, kid. I said, well, you can say it too.
*  Oh, nice. He pressured him.
*  And he did. And he said it. And now every time we talk, he says it. So they talk about masculinity
*  and whatnot. And my dad is one of those tough, tough guys with a soft edge. And that's how he
*  brought me up, to be a protector. I hate bullies. I was bullied really badly as a kid. And I really
*  hated it. And now I find myself sometimes throwing myself into situations to protect
*  people that are being violated and hurt. And I just can't walk away from it. But that's my dad.
*  My dad was just a great guy. But anyway, yeah.
*  You still listen to it. Therefore, see, you probably want to rush right to the
*  towers. But you went...
*  Yeah. So anyway, I did. I listened to him. I listened to my wife. I went to the firehouse
*  and it was really strange. It was eerie because the computer dispatch system was still beeping,
*  which meant it sent a dispatch and the truck received it. Ladder 114, my truck company
*  received it and they left. They were gone. So there was this beautiful old building built
*  in the 1880s with a spiral staircase, just a narrow old brick garage. And it was empty.
*  And I just heard the computer chirping. And I looked down on a ticket and I said,
*  Ladder 114 respond, Veccian West World Trade Center aircraft into building.
*  And I said, Oh God, I just hope they're not on a death ride because this now was two towers.
*  And they were burning. They were free burning. And I knew this was really, really bad.
*  And I got on the phone and I called commands right away. I called the 40th Battalion and
*  chief's aide just said, look, get 12 guys, sign them in to the journal. There's a journal of
*  daily events. Everything that takes place in the firehouse 24-7 has to be logged.
*  And I logged myself as coming in, reporting for duty. And as the guys came in, I logged them in.
*  And then one of our lieutenants took command. We grabbed up a bunch of gear and they basically
*  told us get 12 guys, get a city bus and get down to the battery tunnel. They said it would probably
*  be closed. There was threats it was going to be blown up to get to the Brooklyn Bridge. And
*  so we did. We got a city bus. We flagged it down and the bus driver said, I'm sorry,
*  I can't give you the bus. I will drive you. And he took us and we stopped at engine 201, which is
*  just about a quarter mile down the road from us. That's our affiliated engine company. And my
*  childhood best friend here, Johnny, he was assigned there and he was on shift. And
*  then they went through the tunnel. And we picked up those guys, the off-duty guys from 201. And
*  then we kept going down Fort Devin and we picked up 239's crew. And then we hightailed it down
*  the bridge and there's a lot of traffic. There's a lot of people fleeing, coming over the bridge
*  and waves. So it affected the inbound. What was the mood like?
*  Um, it was somber because just prior to getting on the bus, the first tower went down. So we
*  figured that I had heard 114, my lieutenant Dennis Oberg, I heard him on the radio and he said,
*  114 Manhattan, we're on your frequency. What do you need us? And they said, Tally Ho, which is
*  our nickname, Tally Ho respond in the Vessian West to the command post and receive your orders.
*  And I heard Dennis say Tally Ho, 10-4. And Dennis, a little while after that, they were proceeding to
*  go into, I believe it was, I get this mixed up and I'm sorry, I should know this by the back of my
*  hand, but sometimes it's just such a haze. But the second tower hit was the first one to go down.
*  And they were heading over to go in it. And all of a sudden he looked up and he saw like what he
*  thought to be disintegration and he turned the guys around. He said, run, just run. Don't look
*  back. Don't look up, go. They sprinted as fast as they could and they dove under a fire truck.
*  And the guys that were sprinting behind him, 40 feet away were underneath the pile. That was 10
*  stories deep. They were killed. And just further into that pile was his rookie son,
*  Dennis' rookie son, who was working in Ladder 105, which was my first command under the department.
*  I worked for, proudly served for three years. And just beside them was my childhood best friend,
*  John Chard and his crew from 201. And they were all killed. And the strange irony to that is that
*  Dennis' son, Dennis Jr. was working underneath the wing of a senior man, as we say. A senior
*  man is a guy with a lot of experience and he'll watch over you and make sure you don't veer off,
*  like I veer off a lot of talking and you don't veer off and you get yourself hurt.
*  In the morning of 1993 bombing, Henry Miller was my senior man.
*  And I was the young guy under his wing and he protected me. And toward the end of the day,
*  looked around and he said, kid, it's a bad day. He said, they didn't do it right. They blew it up
*  in the middle. If they did it in a corner, they would have dropped this building half a mile down
*  at Canal Street. But don't kid yourself, they'll be back and they'll do it and they'll do it right
*  next time. And it's so strange and so prophetic because he was there with him and he died with
*  Dennis. He knew it. And like 1994, we had a training manual with a picture of the towers
*  with a target. And it's not a matter of if, but a matter of when be prepared.
*  And it's a whole thing. It was like people knew, right? And we didn't stop it.
*  And so we got off the bus, but just prior to that coming over the bridge, the second tower is gone
*  now. And we're just destroyed because we're like, our guys are there. They're all in there. Now we're
*  feeling like cowards because we got there late. And initially we're thinking there's 500 guys
*  that are gone because it was a 10th alarm assignment, which means 50, 60 fire trucks,
*  five to six guys per. You're looking at at least, there was even more, 10th alarm plus
*  multiple alarms on top of it. There was a dispatch basically equivalent of five to 600 firefighters.
*  And we figured they're all in there, they're all gone. All the police officers,
*  port authority police, NYPD police, court officers just up the street from the courts,
*  transit cops from the train tunnels. We knew everybody was going and now they're gone.
*  So what you saw, what were we looking at? What did it look like? So you saw rubble and then you knew
*  that 105 and 201, many of those guys are dead. What did you see?
*  114 was in there too. We didn't realize at that point, we didn't even realize that they had gotten
*  under that truck. We thought they were all gone. But yeah, it looked like a movie scene with just
*  end of the earth destruction. It's just massive piles of intertwined steel, what was left of the
*  steel and there was no cement. It was all just dust and it was just a burning pile of dust and
*  concrete and plastic and everything was just pulverized. And it was truly hard to mentally
*  compute that. And then there was just fighter jets, a couple of fighter jets just circling
*  and you just heard the flying by over your head. I mean, you'd literally see the guy banking a turn
*  around a Brooklyn bridge and just coming back and I'm like, holy shoot, we're on their attack.
*  And we couldn't really get concrete intel as to what exactly, we knew planes, but then we kept
*  hearing there was multiple devices. There was devices in a battery tunnel and there was devices
*  on a George Washington bridge and in the subways and it was just chaos. I mean, we kept it together
*  obviously because that's kind of, we try, that's what we do. But the just constant barrage of
*  different reports, it was like, holy shoot. And then as we were being deployed, it was a little
*  frustrating, but they were trying to take command and send us in groups now because they realized
*  we have to start searching this. You could hear the alarms on the Scott AirMask, the packs we wear
*  to go into the building. It has a motion alarm and if you stop moving for 30 seconds, it just
*  sounds like this whining, this screaming bell, like it just keeps going and going.
*  And you could hear multiple units of those going off and you're like,
*  wait a minute, there's guys with those, like where are they? And it's emanating from underneath the
*  pile. And it was just surreal and truly like a war zone. I mean, I was a soldier in the reserves
*  and I never saw combat and I would never claim that I did, but we trained, we trained for a lot
*  of situations and we trained in real life atmospheres and whatnot. And this was just beyond that by
*  weeps and bounds. It was bizarre. Did you see the towers collapse? As we were coming over the bridge,
*  the first one as we were deploying from the firehouse, we had a television on and I saw it
*  go down and it just, it was just like, and we were so involved in getting gear together and getting,
*  okay, team set up and okay, you're going to be with these two guys. And I just yelled, there's
*  the guys and they're looking at me. I dropped to my knees and I started praying. They're like,
*  what the hell's wrong? I said, I couldn't even say it's like, I said, 114, they're in there.
*  And they're like, what? I said, the tower's gone. And all you saw on the TV was just this pile of
*  dust. And I guess, cause they didn't see it going down, I probably thought I truly lost it. And then
*  then the realization came as like, oh wow, the tower's down. So now it was like, wow,
*  this is really on. So we just took off and got that bus. And
*  so if you thought many of the guys on 114 were dead,
*  if you thought that, did you think you're going to die? I mean, if you're rushing into the,
*  towards the rubble, I, as crazy as it sounds, I never thought that the other tower would go down.
*  I said, okay, maybe some freak chance that one went down, but nah, the other one's not going to
*  go. Like they're built so strong. You know, I was in those towers so many times and I mean,
*  I ate dinner up in the top four restaurant windows on the world. And I'm saying, nah,
*  there's no way like, like how the hell did this one happen? But I was having a hard time mentally
*  processing that the building was gone. And, and, and believe me, if, if you don't have fear in this
*  industry and, you know, police, fire, military, then you're, you're kidding yourself or you're a
*  danger to everyone. I don't care who it is as tough as they are, this and that everybody has
*  a certain level of fear with doing this. And I don't care how long you do it. There's always
*  that chance of something going bad and everyone who does it has that certain amount of fear.
*  But at that point, it was such a feeling of disbelief that fear wasn't even kicking in. It
*  was just like, what the hell just happened? And I honestly think it was almost like a shock. And,
*  and it just stayed that whole day. So the building is before it collapses is burning.
*  It's just burning. I mean, upper floors, you know, up in the 78th up to the 80s. And then
*  it's, you know, there's the way that the cut was from the plane. It wasn't just straight across.
*  It was, you know, from the 78th, then, you know, on up to maybe the 86th. And, you know, then the
*  jet fuel had come down and was burning down. And there was people on the, on the ground who were
*  doused with jet fuel that was already burning and they were lit on fire on the ground. It was,
*  it was just insane how vast the destruction path was.
*  As a firefighter, what are you supposed to do with that scale of fire?
*  I think the first bosses in the first chiefs were just going to do their best to get,
*  as we, we get hose lines with our whole theory is our tactics is to get water at the fire,
*  at the base of the fire and get the truck company, which is the ladder company. They're the guys who
*  break the doors down, put ladders up, this and that, to get them to where the life is most expected
*  and get them out of there. So I think the chiefs tactics at that point was let me get multiple
*  engine companies. Let me get four or five, six hose lines fighting this fire, this massive fire.
*  And let me get 15, 20 truck companies up there just yoking people out of there.
*  Yeah, but you got to go up the stair. Everything's not working.
*  Yeah. Guys had to walk up 80, 80, 90, 100 flights of stairs. And there's audio of, of
*  officers and firefighters speaking to each other on the radio channels. And unfortunately,
*  at that point in time, we had very, very bad communication system. We'd been fighting for
*  years to get radios that work properly. We couldn't because it was a lot of money.
*  We fought for years to get the full bunker firefighting suits, which is the pants and the
*  coat. We used to have just coats and these roll up rubber boots and guys were burning to death.
*  And we had to fight. And unfortunately, we lost three guys in one vicious, vicious fire in 1994.
*  And then they finally said, enough's enough. Give these guys the gear.
*  So it's a strange phenomenon in the first responder world and in the military world.
*  It's really one of the most important things that takes place in society, the most pertinent
*  organizations, and we can't get the funding we need. It's crazy. They'll throw money at every
*  nonsensical thing, but when it comes to gear, equipment, protective equipment, trucks, this
*  couldn't get it. Just all the ways you could take care of people. I saw in, since 9 11, the wars in
*  the middle East have cost America over $6 trillion. And the amount of that money that was spent on
*  the soldiers, in this case, the first responders is minimal compared to it. Yeah. It's nothing.
*  They, they, they like, they closed down. I believe it's either seven or eight in May of 2002.
*  They closed down nine firehouses in New York City for budget reasons. We hadn't even finished
*  cleaning up the World Trade Center site and they slashed the budget and still to this day have not
*  reopened those firehouses. There's a million more people now living in New York City than there
*  were in 2001. And the fire protection is, is way less than it was. And it's, it's a sin.
*  It's really a sin. Can I ask you a difficult question? So there's this famous
*  photograph of a falling man. So many people had to decide when they're above the fire,
*  in the fire, whether to jump out of the building or to burn to death. What do you make of that
*  decision? What do you make of that situation? Those people who jumped, those were acts of
*  sheer desperation. I've been in fires and just minor burns, but minor, you know, in situation,
*  but I've been trapped or caught somewhat ended up in a burn center for some nothing,
*  nothing serious at all. But like, but I, I, for those brief seconds, half a minute was thank God,
*  if I didn't have my fire gear on, I would have been burned to a very, very horrible level.
*  Those people were burning alive and they had the choice of either to stay there and burn alive
*  or to launch themselves. And some of them, I don't fault them, but they, they had a few folks,
*  they won't show it anymore because they say, I don't know why I defend some people, but
*  they had a couple of folks that took umbrellas and they took garbage bags because they thought
*  that it would slow down their acceleration rate to the ground and maybe just maybe they
*  wouldn't be killed. And that's to me, a true sense of desperation for humanity to say,
*  I'm going to die either way, but let me take my chance. And I don't know the exact number of those
*  folks who did that, but our first member of the fire department killed firefighter Daniel Serf
*  216 was struck by a jumper. And one of my dear friends was ordered to help take him and they knew
*  he was passed away because he was hit by a flying missile. I mean, you know, 120 miles an hour body
*  lands on you. Those, those two bodies are now crushed and they were ordered to take that
*  firefighter and bring him across the street to engine 10 ladder 10. It was literally a firehouse,
*  less than a hundred yards from the facade of the trade center, from the trade center complex.
*  They literally right there. And there was plane parts that went into that firehouse landed into
*  the front doors onto the roof, but the building itself was not destroyed. So it was used as a
*  a mini command center for quite a while. So my friend was ordered to take Daniel's body in respect
*  and bring it over to this firehouse and give it some semblance of dignity and lay it out on one
*  of the bunk room, the bunks we have in the bunk house and just cover it with a sheet and put a
*  sign, please firefighter killed, do not disturb. And then we'll get to him later because obviously
*  this operation is going to go on for days. And my friend who's such a great, great, wonderful guy is
*  so still to this day filled with guilt because if they weren't taking his body out
*  with the respect and dignity that they did, it took a while because it's a tough situation.
*  His ladder company was coming over the bridge. There's a famous picture of ladder 118. You see
*  this tractor trailer fire truck. It's the one with the guy in the back also drives.
*  And it's a zoomed out shot and you see the Brooklyn bridge and you see only the fire truck in the
*  middle and you see the two burning towers in the distance. Well, his engine company was just ahead
*  of them on the bridge. And the only reason that engine company lived is their initial duty
*  assignment was to take that firefighter and bring his body over. It's like the military. We don't
*  leave anyone behind. These are our guys. As some guys say, it's all about the guy right next to you
*  and nothing else really matters. When that guy right next to you goes down, it stops. You get
*  that guy to safety or if he's dead, you get him out. So in that timeframe, that saved his life,
*  but that's a heavy burden to carry now for the rest of your life. Because you say,
*  if I wasn't helping my dead friend, I'm dead. Yeah. What did it look like at ground zero? What
*  did it feel like? What did it smell like? You said there was a sense that it was almost like
*  a war zone, but can you paint a picture of how much dust is in the air? How hot is it?
*  How many people are there? And again, how did it feel like? It was just, it was a scene of control
*  chaos. Control because there was a semblance of command and we were just trying to do our jobs.
*  But it was such a frantic pace because we're now digging frantically knowing that there's life
*  underneath this pile. And this is throughout the afternoon of that evening. Yeah. I mean, this was
*  nonstop, just nonstop really for days. But for my particular crew, we literally kept going. We
*  were initially were dispatched over towards number seven had just gone down and we were searching the
*  post office that was there. There was reports of people trapped and we painstakingly searched every
*  single inch of that building to make sure no one was left in there. And then we were deployed to
*  the pile and the pile is sort of ambiguous because it was just such a vast, vast pile. I mean, it
*  went for city blocks and we were assisting in the retrieval of two port authority police officers
*  were lucky enough to survive, but they were trapped. They were deep down into a crevasse
*  and they had to be physically dug out and extricated. So there was a couple hundred,
*  few hundred guys involved in that process of bringing in equipment,
*  jaws of life, airbags to lift steel, you just, you know, to cut pieces of steel. It was just a
*  huge operation. And we were back toward the logistics end of it, shuttling in gear and
*  bring it, bring it in stretchers, bringing in oxygen, you know, whatever, whatever was needed.
*  And you were trying to climb over this, this jagged pile of debris. It wasn't like you just
*  walked a hundred feet on a street with something you were trying to climb over this I beam and then
*  down into this hole and then I'll back up that hole. I mean, just to run one piece of equipment
*  took a half an hour to get a hundred feet, 200 feet. You know, mind you, some of these pieces
*  of equipment are a hundred pounds, you know, generator for hearse tools, this massive motor
*  on a frame. Unstable ground, unstable ground, just, just horrible conditions. Fires were still
*  burning aside you beneath you. And at one point I kind of veered off to the side and I was with
*  this other fireman from my father's old ladder company, 172. And it was strange because we were
*  down quite a bit down, like 70 feet down into this ravine of debris. And he says, brother,
*  what do you hear? And at the time it was like dust. It was like sand just falling down a pile
*  and it was hissing from gas pipes and water pipes. And I said, I hear the gas lines. I hear the sand.
*  I hear the concrete. He goes, no, no, what else do you hear? And just the side of us was a lady's
*  pocketbook and a high heel shoe and someone's sneaker with nobody with it. And I said, I don't
*  know. I don't hear anything. He says, me neither. He goes, no one's coming out of here. And I said,
*  no, no, no, there's got to be someone coming out of here. I mean, there's just thousands of people
*  in here and they're coming out. He says, brother, we would hear them calling for help. They're gone.
*  And I still at that point thought there was a chance. And after about the fourth day,
*  they just said, this is a recovery now. There's no more life. There's no more chance.
*  And on that first night, we went full tilt till my crew, my specific crew of 12, 15 guys, and
*  four in the morning, we just couldn't breathe anymore. We couldn't see. We were caked. It was
*  like if you took flour and just kept dousing yourself. And the lieutenant just said, look,
*  guys, we're going to go back. We're going to get some medical aid and then we'll come back in a
*  few hours. And we took a city bus back through the battery tunnel. And unbeknownst to us, that
*  morning, this off duty firefighter, Steven Siller from Squad Company One, he raced down there with
*  his pickup and he couldn't go any further because the traffic was stopped up because they had a
*  report of a bomb. So everything was held up and he grabbed his fire gear and he put it on. Stuff
*  weighs about 60 pounds and he ran through the tunnel. Two and a half miles, got to the end of
*  the tunnel. Fire truck was coming in from the other way. He hopped on the back, got him up to West
*  Street, jumped off, tried to look for his company, where they were. And he was never seen again.
*  He just ran through the tunnel. Ran through the tunnel and he got there to help his team. It's
*  all about the team. It's all about the guy right next to you. And he's the Tunnel to Towers
*  Foundation, Steven. His brother, Frank, decided in his name, in perpetuity, he's got a fund that
*  now builds a home for every Gold Star family, for every seriously battle wounded warrior,
*  for every seriously wounded first responder or killed in a lighting duty first responder.
*  If they had a home, they'll pay the mortgage. If they didn't have a home, they give them a home.
*  And especially if it's a severely battle wounded, they give them a smart home because these poor
*  guys come home with no limbs. And so the beauty of Steven and his selfless act
*  was that he's now helped thousands and thousands of people. Tunnel to Towers is incredible.
*  That's part of our mission is to bring awareness to these great people at Tunnel to Towers. What
*  they do, they've raised $250 million to help protect the protectors, to rescue the rescuers
*  in a what's become, unfortunately, a somewhat ungrateful society. But they will not forget
*  these great guys. So you tell Steven's story. He's one of the 20 people that you talk about in the new
*  Iron Labs 2420 podcast series. If you can just linger on his story a little longer,
*  what does that tell you about the human spirit that this guy,
*  you know, the tunnel couldn't drive through. So he just puts on that heavy pack and runs.
*  What do you make of that?
*  That shows the depth of a man's soul. He didn't have to do that. He could have turned around and
*  went home to his family and nobody would have shamed him. But he's one of those beautiful
*  brave people that take a job that really doesn't pay a lot of money. And you become a cop or a
*  firefighter or nurse or an EMT or a medic or soldier or a Marine, an airman, sailor. When
*  you take these jobs, you don't do it for fanfare. You definitely don't do it for money. I mean,
*  those 13 brave souls we lost a week or two ago in Afghanistan, they're brand new soldiers and
*  Marines. They make $22,000 an hour, but they don't work 40 hours a week. They work 80. They
*  work 90 hours a week. So they make it about six bucks an hour. And you know what? They sign up.
*  And firefighters and cops and medics and EMTs, nurses, emergency room doctors,
*  they don't really make a lot of money. I mean, they're starting salary right now for a New York
*  cop. I was a New York cop for two years first. I made $12.25 an hour back in 1989 to get shot at
*  during the crack wars. If you made $11 an hour with a family of four, you were entitled to welfare
*  back then. So I was just above the welfare level, risking my life. And these are the guys that are
*  getting ripped up now. And look, I won't get into any politics, but that says something about a
*  someone's soul, that they're willing to take a job like that and get now, get zero respect.
*  So a guy like Steven, what that shows is the depth of that man's soul and courage and determination.
*  It's hard to be selfless in this world anymore, but I still know a lot of selfless people that
*  just put on equipment every day, bulletproof vests, fire, bunker gear, stethoscopes,
*  flak jackets, military helmets. And they go in and they do it smiling. That young Marine,
*  that passed last week, she was photographed and quoted as saying,
*  I have my dream job as she was holding the left-hand baby. And she was dead a few days later.
*  She was so thrilled to be making $7 an hour helping people. Isn't that huge? That to me says,
*  that's a true sign of character right there. And it's important for our society to elevate those
*  people as heroes. Let me ask you about firefighting. What do you think it means to be a great
*  firefighter and a great man, a great human being in a situation like you were in in 9-11?
*  That's kind of a broad term. You can go to different firehouses and they might have a
*  different definition of what they consider a great firefighter. But I think in the industry as a whole,
*  if you're willing to put everyone else before you, especially your team, as we say,
*  there ain't no I in team, right? It's T-E-I-M and there's no I in there. It's all about those guys
*  and girls next to you. If you can do that, that makes you pretty great. You put everything else
*  second and you just run in and you run in with that team for strangers.
*  I've had the honor of, I spent almost 25 years of my adult life serving humanity, my country,
*  my former city. And the people I worked with were giants. And I don't mean that in height,
*  but I mean that in spirit and in soul. I saw some of the most heroic, selfless acts.
*  And then I saw some of the behind the scenes that were so impressive. We'd go to a fire around
*  Christmas and the family would lose everything. And even when I was a cop, same thing, you'd come
*  back either to the police precinct or the firehouse or the EMS station. And someone would put together
*  a collection and say, Hey guys, hey Lex, 50 bucks a man. The Smiths down the street just lost
*  everything. We're going to go get some presents for the kids and some turkeys. And not one of
*  those guys questioned that. And they were making 12.25 an hour and they still came up with 50 bucks
*  for that family. But see, that's the stuff the press won't show you. They don't want to show that
*  humanity, that soft edge. See, when you're a warrior, you need to have this rough shield,
*  this rough exterior. Cause if you don't, you die. But a true great firefighter or responder or cop
*  or military personnel, they have that rough exterior with that soft on their belly, that
*  heart, right? And that's to me, the true great ones. Some of them, they just have a hard time
*  doing that. There's no shame in showing your soft side. Well, you got your dad to say,
*  I love you back. No, that was huge. That took me 22 years. So you were a firefighter for 21 or 22
*  years. Why did you become a firefighter? Oh, my dad. I was five years old when I went to his
*  firehouse and there was these, at the time they looked like giants to me with mustaches and the
*  trucks. Trucks smelled like smoke and the gear smelled like smoke and the tires and the diesel
*  fuel. And that one was like, this is what I'm going to do. And then they bring you in the kitchen and
*  they stuff you with ice cream and cake and everything. And then I go home to my mom shaking
*  with a sugar cone and she's mad at my dad. But yeah, it was just, oh, I was like, I got to do this.
*  They were like a baseball team in a garage with a truck and these big tools and big coats and
*  helmets and they were just laughing and having fun. And I'm like, yeah, man, I'm doing this.
*  And I knew, I was obsessed with it. I mean, I was so pissed that the fireman's test came out when I
*  was 14 and I couldn't take it. You had to be 18. And it was done, the test was graded and whatever.
*  So my dad, now there's a copy circulating because it's old now. And he goes, yeah, yeah, this is
*  what you're in for. And I took it and I did it like it was real and I got a 99. I was so pissed.
*  I said, I want to get hired. He goes, you can't, you're 14. But I just wanted to do it so bad.
*  And I just wanted to help people. I just wanted to be like my dad. He'd come home smiling,
*  as tired as he was. And he fought fires in the 60s and 70s when the city was burning.
*  And he's still as exhausted as he was, he'd still be smiling.
*  I wanted to smile at work. And I used to, I got paid to laugh and joke. I got paid to cry sometimes.
*  But man, we laughed a lot. We really, it was the chop breaking. It's just unending and it's great.
*  If you don't mind, can you tell me, you were really kind enough to give me
*  one of these shirts with 114. Can you tell me the story of 114, of Tally Ho?
*  Yeah, I wear, proudly, I served eight years in that command and I didn't finish my career there.
*  I passed the lieutenant's test and once you do, you have to leave. The story behind Tally Ho is,
*  back in World War II, there was this gentleman named Bad Jack Carroll. Jack was an airborne ranger.
*  And my father-in-law was also on the department and he knew Jack. And Jack came home, Jack jumped
*  Normandy and stormed up through the Battle of the Bols and Bastonia. And he came back,
*  greatest generation as they all did. And they got jobs and they went right to work. And
*  they were treated better back then, vets, right? And he got on the New York City Fire Department
*  and he got assigned to Ladder 114. And they first got radios back then. And when Jack,
*  he would drive the truck, you're up there with the officer, either the lieutenant or captain. So,
*  the boss is off the truck, you operate the radio for them as the driver. So, when they called him
*  and they'd say, Ladder 114, respond in the 52nd Street, 3rd Avenue Structure Fire, you're supposed
*  to get back and say, Ladder 114, 10-4. But he refused to do that. He'd say, Ladder 114, Tally Ho.
*  That's what they'd yell when they'd jump out the plane. So, all these years later, it stuck. And
*  it's a little bit of a bragging right, but out of 350 engine and truck companies in the whole New
*  York City Fire Department, we're pretty much the only one that's called by their nickname on the
*  radio, not their number. So, it tweaks some guys off in other places. They may, hey, F you, Tally
*  Ho. But it's just, yeah, it's a great, great heritage and we're really proud. And the Shamrock
*  was, he was Irish and a lot of the guys back then were Irish immigrants from the area,
*  from the neighborhood. And they would actually take the fire truck to church on Sunday and park
*  out front and one guy would stay in it to hear the radio in case they got a call. So, yeah, that's
*  the proud history. And you said that if I wear this around New York, am I getting a little bit of-
*  You might get a guy from the Bronx, hey, Tally Ho, screw you. But I mean, it's all that good rivalry.
*  We like to kid each other back and forth. Guys from Manhattan will say, yeah, you guys in Brooklyn,
*  yeah, short buildings, tall stories. And we're like, yeah, you guys are Manhattan, tall buildings,
*  no stories. It's all that jocular ball breaking. It's good stuff.
*  Let me ask, I guess, a difficult question. If we just step back on the events of 9-11,
*  on the side of the people that flew into the towers, what do you take away from that day
*  about human nature, about good and evil? How did that change your view of the world?
*  I witnessed evil firsthand. I remember later on well into that night when we were
*  trying to help get those police officers out, I remember looking up at the building,
*  Century 21, the store runs along the east side of the towers and it was still there. And the
*  debris had come down right almost to the edge. Century 21 is this old storied department store
*  in New York City. And the sign was there and it was still lit up. Some of the neon was broken,
*  but I think some of it was actually still lit up. And I just looked around and I was like,
*  this is a war zone. We're at war. And we knew we were attacked. We heard the fighter planes.
*  Back then, it wasn't the extensive communication network. And we had cell phones,
*  but they were the old school flip phones and there was no news on them. Plus, we didn't have a signal
*  down there anyway. I couldn't reach my family for like 12, 13 hours. And my dad had deployed down
*  to the ferry terminal to retrieve bodies. He was retired, but he still went. And they deployed him
*  to go be basically the morgue transport guys. They expected to be sending hundreds and thousands of
*  bodies across on the ferry. And they set up these tractor trailers as a mobile morgue. And that
*  never happened because there were no bodies to take. They were all buried. So we saw evil
*  firsthand. I don't know how someone can inflict such revenge or a vengeful act in the name of
*  anything, in the name of a religion, in the name of a cause, in the name, like what the hell.
*  Were you ever able to make sense of that? Why men are able to commit such acts of terror
*  in the days and the years after? No, Lex, I haven't. My mom's from Ireland and I still have
*  a lot of family there. And my great uncles, one of them was dragged out and shot. He lived,
*  but just based on a rumor that he was in the IRA. And I wasn't happy to see what happened to my mom's
*  people because they were victimized and brutalized by England at that time. But blowing up bombs and
*  killing innocents in the name of that, it doesn't make it right. I couldn't justify something like
*  that. I can see, I was a cop, I was a soldier, and you never want to take life in those jobs,
*  but sometimes you have to. But you don't do it with a vengeance. You don't do it with a thirst.
*  You do it because it's necessary for survival. When you do it out of a blood lust, out of a
*  thirst, out of a cause, that's evil. There's something wrong with you. I respect life to the
*  highest level. Life is sacred to me. It's precious. It's beyond. It's not a commodity. It's a gift.
*  But to take life just so randomly, so there's something way wrong with that person. And maybe
*  I'm a conflicted soul, but I would have no problem seeing someone like that put to death because they
*  do not deserve life. There's many children around this world that are being taught to hate someone
*  who's different than them just because the person who's allegedly teaching them says so.
*  I don't understand it. Well, that starts with just having a basic
*  respect and appreciation of other human beings. And that starts with empathy. And one of the
*  reasons I love this country, while joking that I'm Russian, maybe you could say the same as you being
*  Irish, is you're actually truly an American. And that's why I consider myself very much an American.
*  And one of the reasons I love this country is it serves as a beacon. I still believe it serves as
*  a beacon of hope and that empathy and love for the rest of the world, that hate is not going to get
*  you far. That love will get you a lot farther. And I still think sometimes it's easy to
*  see the press, mainstream media, you can see social networks, because you can make so much money on
*  division, sometimes because it makes so much money, it's easy to think we're really divided.
*  I honestly don't think we are. That's just the very surface level thing that we see on Twitter.
*  It's that you're 100% right. There's people out there that are maximizing off this whole division.
*  They want us divided. They want people angry because it sells. A lot of these people that are
*  in charge of certain organizations, well, they all seem to have nice cars and nice houses and nice
*  vacations. And they're constantly trying to convince everybody that we hate each other.
*  To me, I'll use a fireman analogy. It's like a little campfire. And if you just let the embers
*  flutter, they'll go out. But if you take a little cup of gasoline with those embers,
*  it'll blow right up in your face. And that's what a lot of these politicians
*  and a lot of these media folks are doing, because there's something in it for them.
*  And I think it's possible to defeat them with great leaders, with great spokespeople,
*  with great human beings having a voice. One of the powerful things with the internet
*  is more and more people have a voice. And I ultimately believe, certainly in America,
*  but in the world, the good people outnumber the assholes.
*  Oh, I agree. There's days when I think the assholes are overrunning us. But you know what?
*  I think what the downfall of the world is, is ego and arrogance and people that think they're
*  better than that other guy. My parents raised me to be this way. My mom is such a
*  sweet, gentle soul. She's an immigrant. She came here at 16 years old. She helps everybody
*  but herself. She's just one of those people. She's sick. She's got Parkinson's. You'd never
*  know it. And she's still flying around her condo complex helping everybody, because that's what
*  she does. She loves to help people, but she's been in their shoes. She's been poor. She's sick.
*  Her husband was sick. She's had all sorts of suffering and loss in her life. My granddad died
*  when my mom was 10, and she was one of 10 children that survived out of 14. She knows hard times,
*  but she so appreciates the good times and the goodness of this country.
*  Fire department and police department, military, it taught me a lot about empathy
*  and trying to really feel for someone and put yourself in their situation. I remember years
*  back, I was a much younger fireman, I probably had five years on the job. And I was sent down
*  to the next firehouse over to fill in. We would get sent around randomly when they needed an extra
*  guy. And someone came banging on the firehouse door. And in the tenement apartment next door,
*  they said there was an older woman that was unconscious. So we dispatched ourselves and
*  we ran over with the medical kit. And it was an elderly woman laying there on the bed. And she
*  was obviously not breathing. She was obviously in cardiac arrest and an older gentleman that was
*  holding her hand, just inconsolably crying. And it turned out it was her husband and they were
*  married for 65 years. And normally we would just respectfully ask the family members to just step
*  aside and let us do our work. And I realized that he wouldn't leave her side. So I kind of gave the
*  crew a wink and they were doing CPR and what they had to. And I just let him keep holding her hand.
*  And I said, sir, could you just come over just a little bit so we can work? And I held his hand
*  as he held hers. And I said, sir, do you have faith? And he did. And I said, would you like to
*  pray with me for your wife? And he said, I would like to. So we said the Lord's prayer and I just
*  asked God to protect her and bless her. And I think he realized that she didn't have a chance,
*  but we still gave her that chance. And we got her in the ambulance and maybe it was wrong to try to
*  make it look like we could save her, but you can't really not try. But the one beautiful moment was
*  he thanked me and he was almost okay with it at that point. He wasn't as upset, he wasn't as
*  distraught because I tried to just humanize that situation of what we were trying to do. We were
*  trying to do our best, but we also tried to be compassionate to his sadness. And I walked away
*  just feeling so good, even though it was a tragic situation and she did pass that he came by to
*  thank us days later. And it's just heartbreaking, but it just happens many, many times throughout
*  the country every day. People get that opportunity as a responder to be that last bridge to the
*  family and the loved one. And you only get that opportunity once sometimes and you really have to,
*  to me, it's like your moment to shine. You could just be very, very dismissive and very rude,
*  or you could be compassionate and just show, hey, I have a mom, I have a grandma,
*  and just in your mind, pretend that that's who you're working on and that's who you're with.
*  So that moment of compassion, that moment of empathy, even if it's brief, can be the thing
*  that saves the person from suffering, make the difference between suffering and overcoming in
*  the face of tragedy. Yes. I felt that even though obviously his loss was still huge, it just made it
*  a little more bearable and tried to just take his grief down to a lower level. And it made me feel,
*  just feel really good about doing it. That's a powerful way to see the job of a first responder.
*  Of course, you have to deal with certain aspects of the tragedy, but it's to provide somebody with
*  that moment of compassion. Yeah. And I made it a little habit because sometimes with faith,
*  it's a little bit of a tricky subject. So every time I had someone who died, which unfortunately
*  was many, many times, I would just touch their hand and just say a little quick prayer and just
*  say, look, I hope you're moving on to a better place. I hope if you did have faith that it's
*  strong as you depart. And if you didn't have faith, I hope maybe at your last moment that you found
*  some and you just found some closure. So that was just my little ritual, I think. I felt it was
*  important that that person, even though they were a stranger, just had someone there, just sort of
*  hoping for the best for them in their last moments. You mentioned cancer. You had a rare
*  leukemia due to all the work that you did at ground zero. Can you maybe talk to the experience
*  of just breathing through those days and what that was like being unable to breathe, being overwhelmed
*  by all of the dust in the air? Yes. The first day, especially, we didn't have equipment. We
*  didn't have breathing apparatus. And then we were handed little 69 cent hardware store dust masks,
*  little thin paint masks that would just get sweated up and stick into your face within 30 seconds. So
*  just they were useless. And what you wound up feeling like was that you swallowed a box of
*  razor blades because there was glass and there was cement and it was just so caustic. And I remember
*  that night when we went back just to get some medical relief for the few hours, we were walking
*  up the hill to the firehouse because they dropped us off like a block away down at engine 201s and
*  quarters. And one of the older firemen, as we're walking up the block, we're all struggling. We're
*  all having a hard time breathing. I mean, I felt like I was dying literally. It was pretty bad. And
*  just remember the one guy going, now we're all dead. And I said, no, no, we made it. We made it.
*  He goes, no, you don't get it, kid. He said, we just breathed in poison after poison for hours.
*  And then that went into days and it went into months. He says, we're all dead, man. This is
*  going to take us all. And I thought he was crazy. And then now years later, starting in 03, 04,
*  guys just started coming down with these really rare and advanced cancers. And then
*  it just stopped being a coincidence with the number of guys. And they were young.
*  One of the first guys, John McNamara, he was 33 or 34 and he came down
*  colon cancer. And it took him quickly in 2000. It was in 2005. And I kind of said to friends and
*  family, I said, I feel like I'm running through a minefield and I wonder when I'm going to step on
*  my mind because everybody's going to get sick. And I wasn't feeling well from 2008 on. I couldn't put
*  I couldn't put my finger on it, but I just wasn't right. And then 2011,
*  I failed my medical. My bloods came back horrifically wrong and they pulled me off the
*  truck. But they strung me out for a month. The doctors in the fire department, one of them
*  said my spleen was engorged because there was probably drinking myself to death. Like
*  as he said, most of the guys did after 9-11, which was pretty wrong of him and stereotypical,
*  just to stereotype and to categorize. And guy couldn't have cared less. He just, he was so
*  crude and nasty. And then my one doctor, who was my doctor on the outside,
*  my blood pressure was 240 over 140. My spleen was about to rupture. She didn't even show up for my
*  appointment. And I went down, passed out. The paramedics responded. She got into an argument
*  with a paramedic because for big ego and basically telling him there wasn't really anything wrong.
*  And he's looking at my paperwork going, this guy's got leukemia. And he overrode her. He
*  raced me out of there down to Brooklyn Methodist. And the doctor, the charge physician, the ER
*  physician, he says, you're not leaving because you're in a bad way. And I said, what is it? He
*  said, I need a little while to figure it out. He goes, but you probably have one of a few different
*  types of leukemia. He said, I'll drill into your hip, take your marrow and find out. And he said,
*  but in the meantime, we'll get the swelling on the spleen down, like some sort of rapid medicines
*  and whatnot, because my spleen was about to rupture. I had no blood platelets left, which is
*  your clotter. So I basically would have bled to death. And I found out from my team of doctors
*  that I had about 48 hours to live. And that really set me off. I was infuriated because
*  I was telling them for a long time that I was sick. And-
*  The doctors failed you. The few doctors in the beginning failed you.
*  I felt very betrayed and other guys had died. And I had it out with that one doctor. I basically
*  told her she was fired from my case and she's a pretty politically in charge person and I didn't
*  care. I jeopardized my job for it because it was my life. And I got the sense that it didn't really
*  matter to her. She didn't have any empathy, as you say. Well, the exact, so why for her, why for a
*  few others? Was there not a special care, a special compassion for, first of all, all humans, but
*  human beings in your position, especially a firefighter, a first responder?
*  Alex, I think what it is in the department, their title is just to get us back to duty as
*  quickly as possible when we are either injured or sick. Because what happens then is your
*  replacement is now in overtime. So you're out being paid on medical leave, but then they need
*  to replace your spot and then that costs more money. So I think it just behooves them to get as
*  many personnel back and especially during the summertime, they look at it like, oh, maybe you
*  want a few extra days off to go to the beach. And this one doctor, he tipped his hand back as if
*  I was drinking an alcohol beverage. He says, hey, busy summer. Because I asked him to look at my
*  spleen, which was sticking out of my abdomen like a football. And I said, excuse me, sir. I said,
*  how dare you assume that I'm abusing alcohol? Because alcohol abuse sometimes will present
*  itself as the spleen is engorged and having an issue. So he automatically just assumed that
*  that was my situation. Wouldn't even give me an exam. And I was horrified. I was so angry. I
*  wanted to punch this guy out. And I literally was screaming at him and an executive officer came in
*  to defuse it and sent me to another doctor. And when I showed her my paperwork, she was horrified.
*  She was like, what did he say? And she said, oh, okay, go to your regular doctor tomorrow,
*  who was one of the department doctors. And it was just an indifference. It was like, I don't know.
*  I was shocked at the lack of compassion. But you know what? That being said, I'm past it.
*  It, life moves on. The team of doctors, I ended up with a Methodist and my subsequent oncologist,
*  Dr. Peter Menzel, world class, just incredible human being. My Dr. Pete is just, I love him.
*  I just love him like a friend, like a big brother, like a father, like my primary oncology care nurse,
*  Mike Nunez, was just an incredible human being. And he knew I was frightened because I had to get
*  two and a half years of chemo compressed into seven days or I was dead. These massive bags
*  of chemo that never stopped. And they burn, the minute they went into your body, you felt like
*  you were burning to death from the inside out. And Mike, when Mike came in to hook me up, he said,
*  look, I have to wear a hazmat suit. This stuff is so caustic that if it drips, it'll burn whenever
*  it touches. And I was like, but Mike, you're going to put that in my body. How the hell is it
*  not going to kill me? He says, no, no, this is exactly what it's supposed to do. Trust me.
*  So when he prepped the IV tube to get it flowing, it spilled onto the tube and the tube started to
*  smoke and burn. And I said, no f-ing way, Mike, you're not putting that in me. No way, no way.
*  And he goes, listen, let me get another one. Let me start it over. And here he is wearing a
*  hazmat suit looking at me and I'm going, this is insane. And he goes, he looked at me, he took my
*  hand and he says, Nels, if you don't take it, you're dead. He says, you got those three kids.
*  I'm sorry, I have no other option. You're dead. And I said, all right, Mike, okay. And he hooked
*  me up. And you know what? It was like, if you do drink alcohol and you have like a shot or strong
*  strong type spirit and you start feeling that burn, well, the minute he hit me in the vein,
*  it just started going up my arm, burning and then up my shoulder, across my neck, into my head,
*  across the rest of my body, within a minute down to my feet. And I was writhing in pain for seven
*  days and I was praying to die. I was the seventh rescuer in six months to come down with the rarest
*  leukemia there is. There's only 500 cases in all of North America a year. And seven of us came down
*  in six months. Two guys died during treatment, seven responders, police fire. Two guys died in
*  the first couple of days of the treatment because it's so vicious. Your liver, your heart, your
*  kidneys, something will fail. And I was praying and I was praying, but I wanted to die. I was in so
*  much pain and I wouldn't take a painkiller because I know people with some issues and I just didn't
*  want to go there. And finally on the last day I gave in, I said, please, I can't do this anymore.
*  I was literally jumping out of my skin and they gave me something, but it had burned out my mind,
*  it burned out my body. I couldn't hear, I could barely see. It was vicious, but it worked. And
*  my nurses especially, they just, they were so dedicated and devoted. And I was not an easy
*  patient because I was in a lot of pain. It was bad and it drove my friends, my family crazy.
*  It was just, it wasn't good. But on that first night I had a quick vision of all these people
*  that I loved that were dead, that died. A lot of them in the trade center. And I saw Johnny, I saw
*  friends I grew up with. The last one was my mother-in-law who had passed six months before
*  and she died of, she was in a coma. She had a stroke. She had a horrible, horrible last six
*  months of life and it wasn't fair because she was so religious. She went to church every day,
*  devout Catholic woman. And all of a sudden I see her and she's smiling and we used to talk a lot.
*  It's the Irish thing, like the gab, the gift of gab. And she used to call me her boyfriend
*  because we'd sit and talk for hours and talk about books and about movies and about food.
*  I loved her. She was my friend. And she'd say, my boyfriend's here. And all of a sudden she's
*  smiling and she goes, hi, my boyfriend. I says, dad, what are you doing? She goes, he's not ready.
*  He doesn't want you. You gotta go back. You got things to do. And I'm like, no,
*  no, no, it hurts so much. Please, please take me. And she laughed. She goes, no, no, not yet. I'll
*  see you. And she just faded away. And one of my doctors on my team, she had a problem with
*  religion. And that's okay. I understand that. I'm not a preacher. I have a faith, but I don't
*  preach it. I don't push it. I just live and let live. So she sent in this shrink to see me. And
*  I was messed up from the chemo, but I knew what I was seeing. I knew what I was saying.
*  And he was a Jewish gentleman. He was a rabbi also in a synagogue. And I actually had responded in
*  that district and he knew 114 would run into Borough Park. Oh yeah, I see Tally Ho. They come
*  down the street. And he asked me to tell him the story and I did. And he started laughing
*  and he scared me now. I said, Doc, am I really crazy? He said, no, no. He said, I believe you,
*  my friend. He said, we share the same God. He goes, we work in the same corporation,
*  but in different departments. And he says, you did see your mother-in-law. He says, your faith is
*  that strong. He said, I've had many patients express the same sentiments. He said, so I want
*  you to listen to her and fight and be strong. And he said, so what else do you want to talk about?
*  I said, well, I don't know, Doc, am I that messed up? He goes, no, no. He goes, they're
*  paying me for an hour. It only took 20 minutes. So we watched the Yankee game together. But it was
*  just, again, it showed the human condition. Here's these two men of two totally different faiths.
*  And yet we shared that bond of faith and he had empathy and he had sympathy. And he saw me and many
*  other patients. So he just didn't assume. And he gave me a fair shake and I will always be grateful
*  to him for that. Through any of this, the pain you had to go through with the leukemia, but also the
*  days of 9-11 and after, did your faith get challenged? You know, Lex, it was strange.
*  It was times it was so angry. There's that range of emotions, the anger, the denial,
*  the depression, the this, the that. And this is the weirdest thing. It was mostly, I knew my
*  career was over and they retired me out of the job. I got sick in August and that October,
*  they told me I was out. And by the time I was processed and used up my leaves and whatever
*  you want to say it was, I was officially retired in January of 02. And it was less than six months.
*  And I'm there walking my dog one day, my rescue Greyhound, who I miss. She was such a soul. God,
*  she lived to be almost 13, Katie. And we're walking in the snow and I got the call. I was retired.
*  And I looked at her and I'm like, Katie, what am I going to do? And she just looked up and said,
*  we're going to go on a lot more walks. And I was so sad. And I was so sad. I was so angry
*  because I lost my priesthood. I loved helping people. I really, Lex, I would have done it for
*  free. I would never tell Mayor Bloomberg that. He's all about the buck. But honestly, I would
*  have been a New York City fireman. I would have paid them to do it. And I wasn't allowed anymore.
*  That's it. You have over 20 years and you have cancer. Back when my dad got sick, they'd let you
*  hang around for 10, 12 years in an office, but not now. Now it's all about the bottom line.
*  And, uh, but I was more depressed about losing a job than almost losing my life. Like as crazy
*  as that sounds, you know, and it just, uh, it was more than a job. I mean, it's, uh, it's a way of
*  life. It's also as your family, your father, your, your caring torture, your father's.
*  Oh, my friend. I love my friends. I love, we work 24 hour shifts together. You cook, you clean,
*  you break jobs. I mean, it was, I love those guys so much. I mean, I, I hope that my kids
*  and anyone that I know and care about, I hope they can experience the bond of that brotherhood
*  that I experienced in my life. It was so God, I would give anything to have it back. Just, yeah.
*  Can I ask you about New York? So when I have, uh, unfortunately I've never lived in New York. I
*  visit, I've always wanted to live there for a bit. Obviously it's a very different experience
*  to have really lived in New York for many, many years, but there's a few friends of mine that are
*  from, they got similar accent as yours that, uh, that are a little bit saddened. Perhaps it's
*  temporary, but perhaps not. They don't seem to think so of what New York has become, especially
*  with COVID. It's losing some of the spirit of New York. Um, do you have that sense? Do you have
*  a hope for the city that has been so defining to what is America? You know, my heart's broken.
*  I had moved to New Jersey many years ago and, but I still have close attachment to New York. My,
*  my parents are still there, many, many family members. Um, and I've since now moved to Tennessee.
*  I needed to go somewhere quiet. I wanted to heal my fractured soul and, uh, I'm, I'm in the middle
*  of a beautiful farming rural area in middle Tennessee. And, um, so they probably call me
*  a sellout back in New York for leaving, but it's not the same city. And it's sad. Um, you know,
*  I'll refrain from the politics and the finger pointing, but it's a mess compared to what it was.
*  And, um, you know, I did Broadway theater security for many years
*  and I started to see it slide, like, like with stuff that was happening, like, you know,
*  public urination and defecation and just like, you know, tourists don't want to see that. Right. And,
*  and, um, I, I had an unfortunate incident, um, two years ago, I was jumped by four teenagers
*  coming off the subway and they were pissed off because I was wearing an American flag hat. And
*  I, um, I don't know. I, I'm not really sure why, but it left me, I got out of it. Um, okay. But
*  I was taken back. They were literally videoing it and the kid was just throwing shadow punches
*  at my face wanting to beat me up. And I finally looked at many eyes and I was like, Oh boy, I'm
*  a little too old for this. And body's a little broken down for chemo. And I finally just said,
*  all right, all right. I just, I had enough. I wanted to go home. Just worked a 17 hour shift
*  as a stagehand and I was so taken back. I was so insulted. I'm saying, you know, I spent my life
*  protecting this city and now I'm getting attacked like for nothing. And I just, I gave up and I,
*  maybe I should have given it a little more time, but it's, um, I don't know. It's turned into an
*  angry place. It's turned into, I think there's a lot of people that aren't getting the resources
*  they need in a sense. There's a lot of mental illness. There's a lot of homelessness. There's
*  a lot of violent people just roaming around the streets and it's not good. It's not safe.
*  And tourists are not going to come back. Even just leading up to the COVID. I had some tourists
*  saying to me, I won't be back. And now I can only imagine that it's just gotten exponentially worse,
*  but I hope there's a chance it'll swing back because it is, it's the gateway to the world.
*  My grandfather came from Denmark. He landed in Ellis Island in the twenties,
*  American success story, 25 bucks in his pocket. Didn't speak the language.
*  Had a sponsor family in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, and he made it. He ended up dying on in a bakery at
*  one point and then an apartment building. And he did pretty well for himself for an immigrant who
*  was poor. And my mom, my Irish mother landed in the same neighborhood, Bay Ridge, Brooklyn,
*  16 years old, worked as a cashier 50, 60 hours a week in a supermarket and finished school at night.
*  Married my father to firemen and lived the American dream. And it was all from New York.
*  And my father's mom was from Irish immigrants and they all landed in Ellis Island. Well,
*  my mom didn't because it was closed at that point, but there's people breaking down the
*  doors to come to this country. There's no one breaking down the doors to leave. And this is a
*  problem I have with people that aren't grateful for being here. And this again, it's not political,
*  just straight down the middle fastball. If you don't like it here, I'll show you the door.
*  I'll get you the plane ticket. I mean, would you want to live back in Russia compared to here?
*  You might because of family ties, but I mean, if you had no ties to Russia,
*  or would you want to go to China right now and possibly end up in a labor camp?
*  There's people busting down the doors to get to this place. It's not perfect. It's got its flaws.
*  It's got its blemishes, but it's a damn great place. It's the best country in the world.
*  Yeah. And some of it... So first of all, I have hope for New York. I think that culture is very
*  difficult to kill. I think it will persevere. And I think ultimately the same story with New
*  York as with the rest of the United States, it has to do with leaders. And I'm always hopeful
*  that great leaders will emerge. I agree. And the kind of leadership we see now and the kind of
*  conversations we have now, I think has to do with prosperity and comfort. And in the face of hardship,
*  I think great leaders will emerge. And I just think ultimately in the long arc of history...
*  Well, leaders shouldn't become rich. They shouldn't become rich in the process.
*  You shouldn't go into political office as an alleged lunchbox kind of guy and then come out
*  eating at the best steakhouse in the world. I mean, that's the problem with politics.
*  My Irish grandmother, God rest her, used to say,
*  those politicians, they're all like dirty diapers. They're full of shit and they stink.
*  And it's true. I don't give a crap what party they're in.
*  Yeah, greed and power.
*  We had to beg these guys, beg them for federal legislation to cover our medical bills.
*  There's a gentleman, John Field from the Field Good Foundation. This guy is a lion of a man,
*  a general, but with a soft, big, great heart. And John is a former construction worker who came to
*  the 9-11 site the day after. He was one of those guys cutting the steel with torches and craning
*  it out of the air. One of those hard hats that just never got the credit and the praise that we
*  did as responders. And I don't mean that as a knock to responders, right? I mean, we lost
*  37 Port Authority police officers, 23 NYPD officers, about a dozen
*  emergency medical technicians and paramedics, three court officers from New York State courts,
*  and two federal agents, and 343 New York City firefighters. We lost a ton of responders.
*  But the recovery workers thankfully weren't killed in that process, but there's hundreds of them now
*  who are dead from illnesses because they came down to recover our people and the civilians and the
*  poor lost souls that were killed at work that day. And John literally almost lost his foot
*  in a construction accident at the site, an 8,000-pound eye beam tore off half of his foot,
*  ended up with massive sepsis, six months in the hospital, hundreds of thousand dollars
*  in medical bills, and then no one wanted to pay him. So here's a guy who's going to lose his house,
*  lose his life, lose everything. And now, the never forget, it started quick, right?
*  And he went on a mission, formed his Feel Good Foundation. His last name is Feel,
*  F-E-A-L, Feel Good Foundation. And this man literally went to Washington, DC with his army,
*  as he called it. And I was honored and blessed to be with him only a couple of times. I wish I had
*  dedicated some more time to it. And what it was with John is he set out on a mission to get,
*  and initially what he did is he got funding to take care of responders who were in that limbo,
*  who couldn't get their medical bills paid, who couldn't make their mortgages, who couldn't make
*  their car payments, who couldn't make their childcare payments. And John just took it upon
*  his own to get donations and take care of you while you were suffering, right? I got a call when I
*  got out of the hospital. You okay? You need anything? I said, who is this? It's John Feel.
*  I said, aren't you that constructor? Yeah. You need anything? I'm pretty good right now. I said,
*  I appreciate it. Phone ring again a few weeks later. Hey, John Feel, you need anything? I'm like,
*  this guy's incredible. But there's people who needed stuff and he was getting it done.
*  And he, with his army, had to chase these politicians through the halls of Congress
*  to get funding to cover the medical bills. I was getting sued for $125,000 for my month
*  stay in the cancer ward. And I couldn't believe it. I said, well, wait a minute, I have insurance.
*  They're like, oh no, no, this is terrorism related. We don't cover that. So usually then workers' comp
*  will cover your on-duty injury or illness. Oh no, no, no. Leukemia is not covered under that.
*  We don't cover that. So then the ping pong game starts and I'm literally have people showing up
*  pictures of my kids in front of the house. And I went and grabbed the guy one day by the collar.
*  I said, who the hell are you? Sir, I'm a private investigator. We're putting a lien on this property
*  due to a non-payment of a bill. I said, okay, I understand. Do your job. Let me bring my kids
*  inside. Take all the pictures you want. Don't step on my front lawn. And I went in the house.
*  I closed my room, my door, my door in my room, and I cried. I said, I can't believe this. I spent
*  my entire adult life trying to help people give of myself and I can't even get my medical bill paid.
*  Well, John Field got my medical bill paid. He finally got these politicians with his team,
*  firefighter Ray Pfeiffer, who has since died, fought with terminal cancer for nine years
*  in a wheelchair. Literally at the end came out of hospice to go finalize getting us this coverage.
*  Detective Luis Alvarez, who testified days before he died in front of Congress,
*  and a bunch of other guys that were really, really sick. And we had to shame these people
*  into signing on. And luckily we had John Stewart come on and literally just hound these guys and
*  shame them and embarrass them. And what it all stemmed from was in 2006, the first
*  death that was determined to be linked to 9-11, there was others, but the first one that was
*  officially linked was a New York City police detective who initially the city said he died
*  of advanced lung disease. His lungs were protruding out of his body and he was on painkillers. And it
*  was so bad at the end that the doctor said, just grind them up, snort them, drink it, whatever you
*  need to do to get instant relief. So when they found the talcum from the pill lining in his lungs,
*  they said, oh no, this is opiate abuse. He didn't die of lung disease.
*  So they said, and the mayor was quoted as saying, he is not a hero. Well, shame on you, Mr. Mayor.
*  He was a hero. And his father, who was a retired police chief, married up with the Feel Good
*  Foundation and John Stewart and Ray Pfeiffer, Detective Alvarez. And they got us all covered.
*  But it took so long. Lexi was so heartbreaking. These people who were lining up three deep,
*  politicians three deep to catch a picture with a responder so they can tweet, hashtag never forget
*  and hashtag look at me and hey, how am I doing? All that bull crap. But they did not. They were
*  nowhere to be freaking found. I literally witnessed them hiding in cloak rooms,
*  running down hallways away from us, those freaking cowards. That's cowardice.
*  Can I just linger on the John Stewart thing? The comedian actor, John Stewart,
*  his testimony before Congress over the benefits for 9-11 first responders. I mean, there's a lot
*  of important human beings in this story, but he has a big voice and he spoke from the heart.
*  What do you make of that testimony? Oh, it was heartfelt. I mean, he spoke. Look, I mean,
*  John was a polarizing guy. There's certain things like over the years, he was cutting edge and I
*  might not have agreed with all of his... Oh yeah? Well, some stuff, some not, right? But I tell you,
*  I found him as funny. I enjoy this humor. I would love the two of you to have a conversation.
*  No, but again, I love a guy where you can have a difference in opinions. That's the beautiful
*  thing about the Firehouse Kitchen. I mean, it could get raucous and now I don't know, it's a
*  little different situation, but back in the day, some funny stuff. But yeah, John literally just
*  took his talents. You would think he was speaking from the heart of a fireman or a cop or soldier
*  or a Marine or someone who was there, but I think he especially got to know Ray so well.
*  And Ray had this stack of mass cards from the funeral cards they give out. It looks like a
*  larger business card that's laminated. And Ray had a stack of them he would carry around. I think
*  it was close to a hundred cards. And John saw it and he said, what's that? He says, these are my
*  cards. He said, for what? He says, for my brother's funerals. He was like, oh my God, you've been to
*  that many funerals? He goes, yeah, this is just the ones I made. And John, I think, was just stunned.
*  And John actually had that stack of cards after Ray passed and said, look at these. There's going
*  to be more of these cards. We have one guy a week or girl, one responder or recovery worker or
*  someone who actually resided down there. There's more than one a week dying. It's one a day dying
*  dying on average. And on average, two people are diagnosed with a 9-11 cancer or disease.
*  Right now, the worst part is there's autoimmune diseases flying off the graph
*  and they're not covered under the legislation. By the grace of God, my cancer is covered. If my
*  cancer comes back, I mean, I'm in remission. It's technically incurable, but I've been blessed. I'm
*  staying ahead of this stuff going on 10 years. But if it comes back with a vengeance tomorrow
*  and takes me, at least my wife will get my pension and be able to live her life without fear.
*  But my friends who are suffering from these advanced autoimmunes, their wives get nothing.
*  Their pension dies with them. And we're hoping that John and his army can shame these politicians
*  once again to have the kindness and decency to cover these autoimmunes. They're throwing a lot
*  of money around at a lot of things lately. And this is one that they won't. And these are lives
*  in the balance who really need it. And John had this strong line. They did their jobs,
*  do yours. Talking to the politicians. Yeah. And it's a strong wake-up call that
*  it's not about the Twitter or the social media or all that kind of stuff. You have a job to do.
*  And it's that compassion implemented in the form of money, of helping people
*  that were there for you when you needed help. Well, we had a guy, I mean, I might get audited
*  out of this one. I hope not. But we had a congressman from out west, I won't say where,
*  but he prided himself on saying he was a retired cop. Busy cop, 22 years. He said no on the
*  legislation. I witnessed a cop who was dying get out of his wheelchair and said, hey brother,
*  I got a half a million dollars in medical bills and I'm a short timer. I got a few months to live.
*  Who the F is going to pay him? Do the right thing. You say you're a cop, you show me you're a cop and
*  you sign that paper. And the guy started tearing up, the congressman, and he signed it. But he had
*  to be freaking shamed. And you know what he said? Well, this doesn't really confront me. This is pork
*  as far as my district is concerned. He goes, oh yeah? Do you know there's 10 guys from your
*  district who came across the country to help us that are also dying? He had no idea. He had no
*  idea. And that's the sad part about Alex. It's a failure in leadership. I mean, I think some people
*  would vote for Mickey Mouse just because if he ran. I mean, no offense against Mickey Mouse,
*  I like him. He's a good guy, right? I mean, but like-
*  Allegedly.
*  Allegedly, supposedly.
*  We don't know.
*  But seriously, I look at some of the leaderships sometimes and go, we're in trouble.
*  And also you lose, I think the way government is structured is people who are senators or
*  people who are in congress, they start playing a game between each other and they lose track of
*  the connection to the people, to the basic humanity. So you forget, even when you think
*  of yourself as a cop, you forget what are the cops and the other people servicing the community
*  actually experiencing all the troubles they're going through and how they can actually be helped
*  because you lose touch with that because you're not actually living, you're not talking to them,
*  you're not living among them. I mean, that's a natural part of the system, but I think that's
*  why character and great leadership is important is you say, you leave the game of congress and
*  you go back to the people. I mean, that's what the country, it's like the George Washington ideal,
*  is you're not playing a game of power. You ultimately see yourself as somebody who's
*  servicing this country, servicing the community, and that requires talking to the people
*  in their time of hardship.
*  Well, you have some people serving in congressional districts don't even live in that district.
*  I mean, so how are they going to empathize? They're not even driving through there on a
*  daily basis. Again, when anything becomes lucrative from a financial standpoint,
*  it blurries people's vision. You have to take the potential of becoming rich out of
*  politics. Politics is public service. Police and fire and EMS are public service,
*  but cops and firemen and medics don't walk out of their career with gazillion dollar contracts with
*  this company and that company on that board of directors and this board of directors.
*  They walk out with a pension and that's it. You have to wonder the intentions of people
*  getting into politics. Are they truly going into to help the human condition or are they
*  trying to help their own damn condition with their wallet and their pocketbook?
*  I try to lean toward the latter lately with what I'm seeing out there.
*  Some of them are the good ones and that's our job as a society is to elevate the good ones.
*  And that has to do with the ideals that we elevate.
*  There are a number of conspiracy theories around the events of 9-11. Do any of these
*  hold true to you or do they just frustrate you, even anger you?
*  I've been asked this by a few different people in my life.
*  This is my take on it. You're a man of science and a man of education.
*  Allegedly.
*  Allegedly, but yes. You're a very, very intelligent man.
*  And what I believe took place is this. Structural steel will fail at a sustained
*  temperature of 1500 degrees Fahrenheit. And I don't know exactly how long that would have
*  to be sustained, but that's the temp, right? Diesel fuel, kerosene fuel, kerosene-based jet fuel,
*  which was the ignition there, burns at 2200 degrees Fahrenheit. So that continued burning
*  of that diesel, that jet fuel, but kerosene-based, it's all kind of similar,
*  exceeded the temperature needed for that steel in the structural members of the trade center to fail.
*  In my heart of hearts, I would hate to ever think that somebody affiliated with our government,
*  with some sort of agenda, would perpetrate that crime and that tragic just destruction of humanity
*  and property for some other form of gain. Those planes rammed into those buildings at 450 miles
*  an hour. They were loaded with thousands and thousands of gallons of jet fuel.
*  Number seven trade center had the backup for the emergency management system for the city.
*  And it was an emergency generator in that complex, which had a 25,000 gallon tank of diesel fuel
*  to continually run for weeks to keep the 911 system, the backup system going in the case of a
*  catastrophic event. Well, that tank in seven heated up from the fire that was already going
*  on from the aircraft debris coming into the building. So once that diesel became ignited in seven,
*  now you had enough temperature to fail that steel in that building. So I would like to truly believe
*  what I've learned from the minimal fire science knowledge I have from my career,
*  that it was just a matter of it burned too long, it burned too hot, and it failed.
*  I mean, if you look at the way it came down, it came down as it was designed to, in the God forbid
*  event that it was to collapse, it came down pancaking upon itself. If it had failed horizontally
*  and just sprayed out side to side, those buildings would have dropped for a quarter, half a mile up
*  to Canal Street.
*  And the fire and the destruction that could have resulted from that is-
*  Oh my gosh, it could have been so much worse. I mean, you would have taken out every building
*  from that point all the way up. But in my heart, I'd like to just believe that it was just a fire
*  that burned too long and too hot. These planes caused structural damage upon impact in both
*  buildings, and it was just a matter of time. And then you think about it, you add all the plastics
*  all the carpeting, all of the stuff that was burning on those floors, you add that to that fire load,
*  I think it just had enough to collapse it.
*  And you were in building seven for part of that day.
*  I was just after it came down as well. We were aside it and we weren't in it or next to it when
*  it actually did come down, but moments after we were there. And again, I would like to believe
*  that it was just that that fuel was going and physics took its course and it failed.
*  So physics and science aside, it's both I would like to believe and it's hard to imagine that
*  anybody would be so evil as to orchestrate parts of this from within the United States government.
*  That's very difficult for me to imagine.
*  You know what, there's people and I won't elaborate, I won't get into it, any controversial
*  subjects, but what have you. There's some people that don't have any problem at all
*  perpetrating any level of evil. People like you and I who have hearts and we have depth of soul,
*  we couldn't imagine it, but there's other people wouldn't even be a second thought.
*  I've seen some horrific incidents in my career that I go home shaking my head at night going,
*  human beings are just, they're not wired right. I look at animals, I love animals, I love dogs
*  especially. And I see this dog park when I train to fly airplanes now and something I wanted to do.
*  And there's a dog park across from the airport and there's 60 dogs and there's bones flying up in the
*  air and chew toys and sticks and they're running around having a time of their life.
*  And they're all getting along and they're not hurting each other, they're not violating each
*  other, they're not canceling each other. And I'm going, we really need to learn from these dogs.
*  Sometimes it sounds crazy, but I think they're a better species than people.
*  Unless they're rabid, they don't hurt on purpose, they don't cut you off in traffic and throw you
*  in the middle finger. They just don't do these acts of humanity that sometimes are so vicious.
*  Why do you think these conspiracy theories of which there's a lot take hold? Why do you think
*  so many people believe some version of different conspiracy theories around 9-11?
*  Well, like many things in life, it leaves me a little conflicted. I have to say this,
*  I am at the point now I don't know who to believe anymore. So I could see that lending a hand to
*  someone who's already a doubter going, oh yeah, look, exactly, that's what they're doing. Look at
*  this whole virus, who do you believe? Where did it come from? And if you plant that seed,
*  it's like that little campfire we were talking about earlier. You just toss a little gas into
*  those embers, you got a fire now. I also think there's a lot of people with a hell of a lot of
*  extra time on their hands, and they're really bored. And the two are combined.
*  Alex, yeah, man. Look, I was a three job Charlie, right? One guy used to say to me,
*  anything but home. I go, no, I got deadlines, responsibilities. That's what it comes down to
*  is like, I mean, look, we all have our hobbies and things we like and little nuances, and that's what
*  makes us special, we're unique. Every person is a unique being. But I also think some people,
*  they want to cling to something. We all want to feel accepted and belong to something. So
*  all of a sudden you group up with these people and you all believe this fervently like, yeah, yeah,
*  yeah, they did it, they took it down, they took it down. And now you start going, yeah. And I think
*  what happens is when you're in company of people and you start telling each other the same thing
*  often, you freaking believe it. I mean, if you keep telling me, I got a gray head of hair, I'm
*  going to go, you know what, I do. But no, I don't. I got that wave and bye bye do. But I think when
*  you start hearing something often, you start believing it. But I'm not going to doubt their
*  intelligence, I'm not going to doubt their intentions, but I just don't see it as being
*  implausible. It would be too big of an operation to successfully happen. I mean, look, there's
*  other things that, I won't say it on the interview there, but I have my doubts with certain things.
*  I mean, conspiracy theories take hold for a reason because some of them are true.
*  No, yeah.
*  The hard thing is just to know which ones is the problem.
*  When you don't have facts, right?
*  You don't know who to trust.
*  Sometimes when you don't have facts, when you don't have figures and you don't have science,
*  it's hard to take someone's word on it. I had a conversation with someone a while back, right?
*  And the guy's like a dedicated atheist and he thinks I'm an idiot for believing in God.
*  And he's like, yo, you're one of those jerks who believe in creation. And I said, well, I do.
*  Well, what about the Big Bang Theory? He's going on this diatribe about the science and the gases
*  and the chemistry. And I'm going, dude, I barely got through high school chemistry slow down.
*  And he went on a tangent and all of a sudden I stopped. I went,
*  who created the gas and the molecules and the stuff you're talking about in the collisions?
*  And he was furious and stomped off. And I got him. And again, I had no facts. I had no figure.
*  He didn't either. But I stumped him. But sometimes when you can't show something,
*  people need to see something tangible. They need to see it in their hand to believe it.
*  And that's the real hard thing about faith. I see it in action. People restore my faith.
*  And then I say to myself, well, there can't be that many dummies in this world if there's so
*  many billions of us believing in this higher power, this higher beat, right? And you said earlier,
*  you believe most people are good. And I do too. The bad outshine the good because the bad get the
*  press. If it bleeds, it leads. Think about it. How many more damn zombie apocalypse movies can
*  we make? I didn't even know there was that many zombies. And it just seems like every other show
*  is just guys bashing each other's heads in with bats with nails in it. And it's like after a while,
*  it's like, oh, gosh, you got to get a new boogeyman here, you know, right? But seriously,
*  But meanwhile, human civilization is getting better and better. We just like making Hollywood
*  movies that just- No, we're getting better and better, but we're treating each other worse and
*  worse. You would think with all this technology and all the knowledge and all the- It's like,
*  what the hell is going on sometimes? I really want to see the good. And I think maybe the level of
*  bad that we're seeing was always existent. It's just now everything is instantaneous news and
*  flashes and tweets and this and this. Like, you know- Well, with the technology we have,
*  it's also come to the light. So you get to see all these fights. I think that's step one of
*  dealing with the problem is revealing it in its full, beautiful light.
*  Oh yeah. How much of a bickering species we are.
*  50 years ago, a guy like me who loves to talk, how the hell would I have gotten an opportunity
*  to have someone listen to me and have it, right? I love this. This is amazing.
*  Right. I think it's cool. But you didn't have that arena. You didn't have all these things.
*  My grandfather Nels, God rest him, he died in 1979. I mean, that dude didn't even want to
*  have a checking account. He would walk to each store, each, the phone company, the gas company,
*  this company, and pay the bill in person. He didn't trust the bank. And it was like,
*  now ATMs, this, that he would be overwhelmed. He'd be just like, I mean, I love my dad,
*  but to watch him on his iPad is comical, right? He calls my niece's boyfriend, who's a tech guy,
*  Matt, if you listen, he's the greatest. He'll have this poor guy on the phone for like hours.
*  Like the second you'll walk in to see my father, my kids, hey, do me a favor,
*  you freaking straighten out this pad. And it's comical because I'm looking at my dad, I'm going,
*  he was born when Hitler started World War II. And I'm going, he's seen all of that. Oh,
*  my wife's grandmother was born in 1900, Czechoslovakia, and she died in 1998. I'm going,
*  holy, the stuff she saw in the span of her life, it's just incredible. But what troubles me
*  sometimes is with all of these advances and all these devices, this is what I say to my kids,
*  look up from the phone and look up, right? Because we don't talk anymore. I saw a girl,
*  literally, I shouldn't say girl, guy, whatever. I saw a person literally just about walk into an
*  open manhole, cover texting. And I'm going, that's scary, because your awareness is gone. And I've
*  been at restaurants with groups of people, and they're texting, they're texting each other,
*  just sitting on the other side of the table. I'm like, put the freaking thing down and have
*  a conversation. And that's the thing, we've lost the art of conversation. My wife, she has this
*  running joke school, there's a lot going on up there. And I'm like, yeah, because I really,
*  I'm inquisitive, I'm excited about life. I love to meet people, I love to learn. And the only way
*  you can do that is to have a conversation. The hilarious thing about this, so you're obviously
*  very charismatic, you got great stories, you're a great human being. And you're talking to a guy
*  who spent most of his life behind a computer hiding from people. But we're trying to bridge this.
*  But I don't mean that as a rip, but I would never know that. I would never know that,
*  because you're very engaging. I would not know, you don't have any impediments to your
*  social skills, your personal. And again, I don't mean it as a knock to you and these young people.
*  But this is me trying to look up from a smartphone, is having these conversations,
*  talking to people. I think it's important. I mean, some of it could be, it's always hard to know.
*  Some of it could be just you and I being old school. Because you grew up before the internet.
*  Maybe there is joy and deep human connection to be discovered inside the smartphone. It doesn't
*  seem that way. Because the smartphone is so new, maybe we just haven't figured out those things.
*  Because there's a globalizing aspect. There's an opportunity for you to connect with people
*  from across the world in ways that... I have cousins in Ireland and England. I love it. I get
*  a FaceTime or WhatsApp and it's like, holy crap, they're three, four thousand miles away and I'm
*  having a conversation now. I used to send my grandma in Ireland a letter. I adored her. She
*  passed when I was 10. No, I'm sorry, I was 11. I sent her a letter, airmail and I'd wait and I'd
*  wait. About two weeks later, this airmail letter would come back and she called me Master Nils
*  William Jorgensen. I would be so excited, open up that letter. Handwritten just like...
*  Yeah. Then I'd write her another one and I just couldn't wait for letters from granny.
*  And now it's like, that's kind of faded away. I still write letters by the way, handwritten.
*  I do too. The way this all came about was I wrote a letter to someone to say thank you
*  for cancer research. I'm blessed to be alive. That's a good starting point for any story.
*  I'm blessed to be alive. And my cancer was one that if I got it 15 years prior to
*  2000, I was a dead man. 15, 20 years before there was no drug to treat. I was gone, going home
*  to see him. So there's this wonderful gentleman that donated hundreds of millions of dollars to
*  cancer research, Mr. David Koch. He's since God rest his soul passed away. And he's a controversial
*  guy, big time business titan. And the press was just brutalizing him one day over something to do
*  his politics. Now I'm a union guy, proudly served in unions, still in a union. And he was not...
*  Most business guys don't like unions, right? But most guys like me don't like working for $3 an
*  hour. So we like our unions, right? And I reached out across the table, so to speak, and I sent him
*  a handwritten letter to thank him, to say, we may not agree on everything, but I can't thank you
*  enough. There's just this regular dude out there who is now living his life, watching his kids grow.
*  Thanks to generous people like you, who believe enough in cancer research, you've saved my life.
*  Maybe I can't say his exact dollars, but people like him. And he reached back out and his secretary
*  said, oh, he'd like to talk to you on the phone. I go, well, he's kind of a busy guy. He wants to
*  talk to me. He's a billionaire. And he got on the phone. He was like the greatest guy in the world.
*  Invited me up to Sloan Kettering to dedicate a new cancer wing. It was like I was hanging out
*  with my dad. And the sweetest man, just so kind, so empathy, because he was a cancer survivor.
*  But now he's got the means to help people who've suffered his fate to a better place.
*  And he was so real and it was so beautiful just to get to know, say, hey, you know what? This guy is
*  a big time guy, but yet he's just a regular human like you and I. I'm a guy who went to night college
*  and I went to the army and I'm a blue collar kind of dude. And here's this guy who went to MIT like
*  you. And he's a wildly successful billionaire, a genius, but yet he can sit down and mix it up with
*  me and know that I was truly grateful. And that to me was just like one of the coolest
*  little relationships I've ever had. It wasn't like we were hanging out, having barbecues together,
*  but like, you know, it was just, I was so touched by his decency.
*  Well, the basics of the like cancer reveals, you know, it's like fundamental to the human experience
*  is trauma is tragedy. It's like money. Who gives a shit about money? Education. All that is like
*  weird new inventions. You know, life is short. You suffer with the various diseases. And that
*  is a reminder that life is short and a reminder of the basic human connection. And that's why
*  you can bridge that gap. Oh yeah. All sparked by handwritten letter, which just is makes for a
*  hell of a story. And you know what, Lex, this is the commonality between us. A guy with three jobs
*  to a billionaire. We both had that sense of a sledgehammer to the chest. Boom, you have cancer
*  and you can't breathe for like 30 seconds. And then when your heart's just about to kick off and
*  you, you take a breath and you go, I'm sorry, what'd you say doc? You have cancer and it don't matter
*  what kind. One of my, one of my best buddies, Bobby's going through right now, a prostate,
*  and I got way too many of my buddies with cancer, right? My buddy Hugh, who became a vet since his
*  first cancer, he was a fireman. He's now a veterinarian, right? He diagnosed me actually
*  over the phone, by the way. When they couldn't figure out what was wrong with me. Well, Dr. Hugh,
*  he nailed it to the T. And we talk. And the same thing that the dozen of my close friends that
*  have cancer, the same thing we say is the fear. So Mr. Coke and I, we shared that same sledgehammer
*  to the chest and that same fear. And it didn't matter how much money he had and how much I
*  didn't. And you know, it's just like the morning of the trade center. There was big time brokers
*  who went to their demise, right? Working in these firms, God rest them. And there was
*  dishwashers, excuse me, dishwashers up on the windows on the world restaurant on 107th floor,
*  making five bucks an hour. And they died together. It didn't matter. It didn't matter.
*  You had an armored car loaded with bills. You were done that day. And that's, I think, where people
*  need to humanize each other. Just because you drive around in a nice car and you got your own jet and
*  you got this and you got that, don't mean nothing. When you're going, when you're in that vulnerable
*  spot, you could have more money than the US reserves, federal reserve, or you could have
*  a welfare check. You're going. I learned that in a cancer ward. I had people in my ward that died
*  on me. I was going around as a little bit of an ambassador because I was putting on a fake,
*  I was putting on a fake like, I got this. I got this. I was so scared. But when I got
*  past that seven days of torture and the days leading up to it, I'd go around and try to
*  comfort the other cancer patients. I had this one older African American gentleman. He couldn't
*  talk because he had such advanced throat cancer. He was my roommate for a little while, but then
*  he got worse so they had to put him by himself. And you couldn't understand what he was saying
*  because his throat was just so radiated from the radiation. But if you put your ear
*  down to him, you could make out what he was saying. And I'm not faulting the nurses for maybe not
*  wanting to do that. They're busy. They got a ton going on. They can't spend. So if he was in need,
*  I'd put my ear down and I'd find out and I'd go get it for him. So when they moved me down the hall,
*  they asked me to come down with my IV tower. He needed me. And I knew it was bad because his look
*  was gone. I said, sir, what do you need? And he whispered, call my sister, I'm going. He had only
*  one survivor in his whole life. And she was in North Carolina and he wanted her to know that
*  he couldn't get up. She was elderly. And I got the nurse and I got on the phone and I called his
*  sister and I said, ma'am, I explained who I was. And I said, he can't really verbalize too well
*  right now, but he wants to say he loves you. And I put the phone down and he told her he loved her
*  and he said, I'm going home. And that was it. And I hung the phone up and I said, ma'am, I'm so sorry.
*  I said, they'll notify you. And I stayed with him for a while holding his hand and then they wanted
*  him to rest. And then I left and then I got the tap an hour later and they said, I'm sorry he's
*  gone. And then there was another girl and she was a young girl from one of the areas I worked,
*  young African-American girl where I used to respond that I didn't know her, but I knew her
*  neighborhood. And she had what I had, but they weren't sure which one, leukemias, there's an
*  elusive beast, there's 49 of them, right? And each one of them is like, they got their own little
*  nuances, own specific treatments. So if they don't know what you have, they don't know what to do for
*  you. And she refused to let him drill into her hip to take the marrow because it's vicious,
*  it hurts so much. It's like someone's boring into your hip with a wood drill and it's no joke.
*  And they asked me to try to convince her to let her, let them do that or she was going to die.
*  Because if they couldn't figure it out, it was advancing quickly. So I talked to her and she said,
*  I can't, I can't, I'm too scared. I said, but are you more scared to die? And she said, I am.
*  I said, okay, I'll stay with you. I'll hold your hand. You squeeze it as hard as you want.
*  I said, if you want, they'll give you like a towel or something to bite on, whatever. I said,
*  but you get that pain out, but you need to do this so you can get saved.
*  And she said, okay. And they came in and they, this huge thick needle, they just bore it into
*  you. And she's screaming for her life and she's squeezing my fingers so hard and so hard. And I
*  said, that's okay, hon, you keep going, you keep going. We got it. It's just 10 more seconds,
*  10 more seconds. They got it. They figured out her treatment and they got her onto her road to
*  recovery. And then I spent a long time asking God, why do I have cancer? But then I stopped
*  and then went, wait a minute. I didn't die that day with my friends. Shame on me for asking why
*  I have cancer. I had 10 years after 9-11 with such great years. And I got to watch my little
*  girl being born when John never got to see his son. So it was all gravy after that. And I said,
*  but now I know why I have my cancer. Because I can empathize with people who have it. And I can try
*  to be their voice when they can't talk, be their shield to try to take that pain.
*  Because I can understand, I can walk their walk. And now I thank God for my cancer
*  because it's made me a better human being. It's made me, I'm not going to lie, it brought a lot
*  of anger for a while and my family suffered it. But I really tried to go past that and heal and
*  part of living out in the country. It's very, very healing for the mind and the soul. But
*  I now thank God for the cancer because it humbled me. I didn't really need humbling. I wasn't an
*  arrogant, puffed up type of person at all. But maybe I was running away myself a little bit,
*  working on a TV show. I'm fine, man. 30 at the time, well, I was 42 and got sick. Life was
*  cruising, man. It was great. And then all of a sudden it was like a blowout on the highway in
*  the middle of the night and you're just veering off towards the guardrail.
*  Yeah. You remembered, you're reminded that you're mortal. And that's ultimately a connection to
*  all the rest of us. Oh yeah. It's a good thing though. Because that's the problem, I think.
*  There's a lot of people running around and thinking they're immortal. When you look at it,
*  you look at the heartache in a lot of segments of people. And anytime someone that's got fame
*  and wealth and success and they die tragically, a lot of times it's from substance abuse or just
*  some horrible death. And I used to say to myself, how the hell would someone with that much money
*  and that much fame and this freaking mansion and I love cars, my son and I were just big car heads.
*  I'm like, this guy's got a collection of cars and he overdosed because he was sad. And I'm going,
*  how the frig are you sad? But then I stop and I go, okay, because maybe he doesn't have any
*  idea who loves him. He's got a lot of people clinging on to him because of his success.
*  And he just, he can't fill that void. And then they fill the void with something destructive.
*  I'm not bashing people that have substance abuse problems or alcohol problems. I don't mean it that
*  way. But what I mean is it's just sad that their level of despair is so high. On the surface,
*  they look like they just got everything going on. It's all great.
*  They're still humans, still guys that deal with the same-
*  Yeah, exactly. Because they want love. They want love.
*  They still want love.
*  And they can't really find it.
*  Well, first of all, that's true for all of us. I think we're deeply lonely and looking for love.
*  And when we find it, that's what friendship is. That's what we need.
*  Absolutely.
*  And then that's true for whether you're super rich or super poor. It's all the same journey.
*  My dad said it all the time, kid, you're going to end up working with hundreds of guys and you'll
*  love a lot of them. But he says when it's all said and done and you're all like me and if you still
*  got two or three of them that you talk to and you'll love. And I tell you what, I have
*  thanked the Lord more than two or three of them. And I have my six. I call it my six.
*  Six guys that are going to carry my coffin when I'm gone. Because I know this cancer is going to
*  come back. I know it. We get multiples. My friend, Yvette, just got his second. My friend Mike said
*  five of them. My other Mike is two. But I wasn't ready to accept it in 2011. There was so much
*  more to do. I was so scared. I'm like, wow, who's going to take care of my kids? They were little.
*  9, 11, and 14. It's like, what the hell? I have two girls and a boy in between and they're beautiful
*  kids. They're such good, good children. Adults now. But my wife's a drill sergeant. She's tough.
*  She don't mess. She's big.
*  So you're the softy in the family. I'm just kidding.
*  You know, it's funny because my son said to me, my son's 21 now. He's a good kid.
*  He says to me back when he's like 12, he goes, dad, I don't want you to be offended,
*  but I'm really scared of mom. I'm not really that scared of you. I cracked up because it's true.
*  She's got to stand on a milk crate to reach him because she's tiny and he's tall. But it's true.
*  But she was hard but fair, but loved. See, this is the thing. You take any child anywhere
*  from any background, if you love them, you nurture them, you teach them and you guide them,
*  you have a successful adult. And see, that's the problem in our society. It's not judgmental. I'm
*  not judging anyone. But we need to try harder as parents, as siblings, as friends. But especially
*  when we're blessed with a child, it's like you got to put that child first. It's like being a
*  military personnel responder. It's not about you anymore. Now it's the team. So that little child
*  is now the team and your wife or your significant other. It's not about you anymore.
*  And see, that's the problem is people have a hard time not making it about them. Now it's really
*  weird. My kids are 19, 21 and 24 and they hardly want to hang with me because they're busy in their
*  life. We love each other. They're probably tired of hearing me go on and preach and whatever,
*  but they're adults. We did pretty much the crux of what we had to do to put them into adulthood.
*  And I look back and I go, wow, I wish I didn't work so much. But then I say no, but it was okay.
*  You know, my wife stayed home, good lessons, good, you know, just-
*  But ultimately, like you said, it's love.
*  It is. It's the common... Love is the most important ingredient on this earth. And that's
*  the problem with what's going on right now. Take politics out of it. Take polarizing each
*  other against each other. Take all that crap out of it and just airdrop a bunch of love.
*  When I worked on Rescue Me, I loved those people so much. They were such great. We had such a great
*  crew and they worked so hard. You're a celebrity.
*  No, no, no, not at all. If I was, it didn't really work out so good. I went on to be in
*  the stage hand that way. No, I'm not pretty. They don't want old guys waving by hairdos.
*  But it was funny. The crew, we became really tight. We had like, shoot, like 80, 90 people
*  on a set, right? And you know, the first few episodes, everybody's trying to feel each other
*  out because you work with different crews, different people. And this is going back,
*  starting in 2004, it was a different time. And I love to hug people because to me, a hug
*  is a true expression of love and caring. You may not know a person a long time,
*  but you say, I care about you with a hug. Can I just, a tiny tangent. This is in the midst
*  of COVID when I was in Boston and it was, you know, masks, like triple masks. And when I went
*  to see Joe here when he was trying to convince me to move to Austin, Joe Rogan. And then the first
*  time I see him, he's like, ah, you motherfucking big ass hug. And it felt so good. People probably
*  looked horrified. They're hugging. It was just him and I. But if you do it in public now, it's
*  like you committed a crime. But that expression, because I was so, you forget how powerful that is.
*  Oh, I got some of my buddies. I give them a huge hug and a big sloppy kiss on their cheek. And I
*  cause I love them. They're my brothers, you know? But on this set, I swear to God, it got to the
*  point and I'm not trying to whatever, but there was people that would come up to me for the daily
*  hug. And I said, what are you doing? And they said, come on, bring it in. And I give them the hug.
*  And they said, you don't understand. It just makes me feel so good. It makes me feel like you give a
*  crap about me. I really do. I said, but it touched my heart that people were seeking me out to get
*  that hug to start the day. And I remember there was a guy in Manhattan, he was selling hugs for
*  50 cents. And I think he got arrested. It was just before COVID. But I wouldn't sell them.
*  Yeah, you're giving them away for free.
*  Well, now I got leukemia. I'd be kind of concerned to get into COVID. But I really think we need
*  that. We need hugging booths in each city or each town. Because there's so many people that just
*  want to know someone gives a shit about them. And that's the problem. That's what I love about
*  small little towns like where I am now in Tennessee. And I'm not knocking New York,
*  I'm not knocking big towns. But I guess it's easier to do in a smaller area, because it's
*  just not this massive humanity. But they'll stop and check on you. Like you're out in the road and
*  you know, like I'm cutting and cleaning or whatever. Occasionally, I'll roll a lawnmower or a tractor
*  into a ditch because I'm not a farmer too good. But it's easier to drive a fire truck in New York.
*  But they literally, oh, I was worried I haven't seen you. And I'm like, no, no, I'm okay. But
*  they literally like check on you. They're worried about you. And I'm going, people hardly know me,
*  but yet they're so caring. And that's the problem. Like this is what I love about my life.
*  I spent a lot of time as especially as a young boy and a lot of time in Ireland at my grandma's
*  farm. And my mom comes from this tiny, tiny little village. She's out in the middle of nowhere.
*  And the childhood home she grew up in is still my aunt and uncle live in it still.
*  I just love it there so much because everyone waves. Tennessee is similar. They wave, driving
*  by and like, who the hell is that? And I just wave, you know, but my cousin will point it out.
*  That's your third cousin, second removed by, you know, Johnny. Like, holy shoot, I'm related to
*  everyone here. Right. But like everyone stops to say hello and how are you. And I have a problem
*  doing that because my wife goes, people think you're crazy. Why are you talking to everybody?
*  I said, like I'll literally stop someone and say, how's your day going? Like, I mean, I'll
*  randomly on the sidewalk. Then it looks a little nuts. But like if I'm buying a cup of coffee.
*  Oh, that happens here in Austin all the time. That's why I love it here. On the sidewalk,
*  randomly. Yeah, no, it's just so nice. They'll say hi to me. I thought they recognized me or
*  something. I don't give a shit who you are. They're just being nice.
*  I was on the road, coming back, driving from my family up north down to Tennessee last week.
*  I stopped in a bathroom and it was closed. The girl was cleaning it, whatever. She's working
*  so hard, whatever. She goes, sir, if you go down the hall, there's a family restroom. Feel free to
*  use it. She didn't have to do that. And I went down and I'm old. You need a bathroom, you need
*  a bathroom. Right. And I walked back out and I said, ma'am, I said, I want to thank you for being
*  here today. I said, the bathroom was immaculate. It was. It was like my army bathroom in the barracks.
*  It was spotless. And I gave her $10. I said, I'd really like you to buy lunch with me today. I said,
*  you really didn't have to do me that favor. And she goes, no, sir. I said, no, no. I said, I want.
*  And it was like I gave her a million bucks. And I say to my wife now, I've been praying to be a
*  billionaire. She goes, that's a sin. I said, no, no, you don't understand. Right. And she goes,
*  oh, you're Mr. Guy. I said, no, no, no. I said, you're getting it wrong. I said, I'm praying
*  to be like a multi-gazillionaire because I want to give it all away.
*  We used to have a sign in ladder 114 until some other rival truck company stole it. Right. Because
*  that's what we do. You get sent to cover your district when you're out of fire and now your
*  stuff's missing. And the old timers had a sign that says, I am content because if you got to
*  ladder 114, that was considered such a great place, such a great assignment, such great guys.
*  You had to be vetted to get there. You couldn't just randomly go. And it was a little exclusionary,
*  but they wanted good guys. And I said to myself, that's who I am in life right now. I am content,
*  but I'm restless because I want to really do a lot more good. It's like this podcast. I want to
*  make sure that it's not forgotten. And I want to make sure that these charities that are really,
*  really helping people get recognized. But I'd like to take it a step further. Right. A friend of mine
*  runs this foundation for young folks suffering mental illness and in crisis. It's for someone
*  that we love dearly. And he's on a mission now to get therapy dogs for really, really
*  mentally wounded warriors. Right. There's a lot of these young soldiers are having a really hard
*  time and now they could be out a while. They may have come back in country two, three years ago.
*  Now it's just starting to set in. And there's a waiting list for thousands of therapy dogs.
*  And he said that they can't get enough of them quick enough, but he said, when you see the response,
*  the way these veterans just light up when they get these dogs, it just changes their life
*  radically, immediately. And I said, that's it. God, I don't know how I'm going to do it,
*  but I want to be a gazillionaire. And I don't want any picture, photo ops, this, that. I just want to
*  go, there's a dog, there's a dog, there's a dog, there's a dog. And then I want to build Veterans
*  Land. And then I want to build Veterans Land for these vets who just need a nice clean place to
*  live. So why don't we take these old army bases and Marine bases and Navy bases that have been
*  shut down. They're just sitting there rotting away. I was in the army in Alabama. My old Fort
*  McClellan is three quarters vacant. It's sitting there. They just did a documentary on it. It just
*  looks like zombie land going back to zombies. So why don't we take that and renovate it and say to
*  vets who are struggling, hey guys, you're going to live here. And they take the old army, the places
*  where they had all the supplies, there's massive buildings where you could just retrofit it and
*  make light manufacturing within two weeks. Give these guys jobs. There they live, there they work.
*  They'll take care of it. Military guys, they teach you how to take care of stuff. How the hell in
*  this country should any vet come back home and be homeless? Because now after dedicating their lives
*  for six, seven, 10, 12 years, five, six deployments making $750 an hour. And then they spend seven
*  years or they get a whopping $16 an hour. They walk out making 35 grand and now no one gives them a
*  job. No one gives them a chance. So very quickly they end up homeless by no fault of their own.
*  And I don't know how that's even possible. The people in this country who've given the very most
*  and they're struggling, they're hurting. That's not fair. And my whole thing is if I can
*  have this dream of succeeding, so to speak, I want to try to change it.
*  And just, so that's why I'm praying to be a billionaire.
*  A billionaire.
*  My Irish mother probably wouldn't agree either because you're not supposed to, right?
*  Well, I'm the same with you. The more money you have, the more you're able to help people.
*  You can put smiles on people's faces.
*  I have to ask you, the U.S. invaded Afghanistan in October 2001 in response to terror attacks.
*  Now 20 years later we still had a presence and abruptly withdrew all troops. What do you think
*  about this war across the world that was sparked by this tragedy?
*  Whenever you do something quickly without thinking it out, thinking it through and planning,
*  it doesn't succeed. I understand that we needed to exit. I mean, how long were you going to stay
*  over there? And we've lost over 7,000 of our young souls over there. For sometimes people,
*  I don't know if they're grateful for it or not, right? I mean, I don't know.
*  So there's the other element, and sorry to interrupt, one is the financial of $6 trillion
*  and that money is not just money, it's education, it's everything. It's money that could have gone
*  towards, first of all, the first responders, but all the service men and women of all kinds
*  throughout this country. And then there's the other side, which is the over 800,000 people who
*  died in direct result of this conflict. So not just the American side of the troops,
*  but just people who died. And those humans, many of them civilians, that's spreading hate,
*  especially if you have leaders on the other side who frame the death of those civilians in certain
*  ways that just spreads hate throughout the world. And so you think about this kind of 20-year saga
*  and think, what are the ways that money could have been spent better? And what was the way that we
*  could have spread more love in the world versus hate? And you wonder. But then the other side,
*  what is it? I'm not sure who says this line, but it's something like, we sleep at night
*  because there's rough men out there ready to fight for you. There is some sense in which we
*  have to make sure that there's strength coupled with the love. Otherwise, evil men will do evil
*  onto the world. So it's a very difficult decision, but then you look at the final picture and say,
*  what have we gotten for this $6 trillion? What have we gotten for this 20 years?
*  The thousands of American soldiers who died, the hundreds of thousands of civilians who have died.
*  You know, it's a troubling subject for me. I'm a patriot. I love this country. I love it with my
*  soul. And I was just about to head over to the first Iraqi war and we went out for desert warfare
*  training and then it ended. I was at that time a combat medic assigned to an armored cavalry unit.
*  So basically tanks driving around an armored personnel carrier and when it gets hit, then you
*  tend to that guy, try to save his life. I didn't want to go. I may sound like a coward. I did not
*  want to go to war. I would have went willingly if I was sent to defend my country. I took my oath.
*  I didn't join the military to kill, but if necessary, I would. I'll use the analogy of
*  cancer. If you have a cancer and you're aware of its presence and you don't annihilate those cells
*  and take them out quickly, it's going to spread and it's going to kill you.
*  Those evil bastards that flew those airplanes, one of those airplanes had a little three year old
*  child in it from Ireland where my mom's hometown. A friend of mine who since died of a heart attack
*  from 9-11 toxins, he found her shoe with human remains in it. And he thought someone was messing
*  with us because we didn't know there was any kids in the building. He says, boss, there's a baby shoe
*  and it looks like there's something in it, but there's no kids in the trade center. I went,
*  the plane, it's a little girl shoe. I can never get that shoe out of my mind.
*  The evil bastards who perpetrated that needed to have missiles strike and rain down upon them and
*  annihilate them like a cancer that they are. What just fascinates me is they'll show videos of these
*  guys flying around and pick up trucks with 50 cows on the back. It's like, well, wait a minute,
*  if a camera crew can get this footage, you think all these freaking drones and planes and radar
*  assisted systems can't just go, good night, you're gone. So kill the cancer, kill the cells,
*  get rid of it, get rid of it quickly and go into remission. Like an undeniable show of force that
*  sends a message that gets rid of most of the obvious centers of terrorism. And then, no,
*  that's because we offline mentioned a discussion with Jaco and maybe a romanticized view
*  and mentioning Brothers in Arms by Dias Straits and saying we're all brothers in arms,
*  even when it's on the opposite side of fighting, which is more of a vision. And growing up in the
*  Soviet Union, you saw about World War II that it's all just kids thrown into the kids sent to die in
*  all sides. But then presenting that to Jaco, who was in Iraq, he did not see it as Brothers in Arms,
*  which is there's his basic statement is there's evil people and some people don't deserve the
*  compassion. You give them a few chances, they don't take the chances they have to go because
*  they're spreading evil onto the world. And so it's not, we're not, all of us deserve a chance.
*  Oh no, absolutely. But the difference though, and believe me, I'm from a way, way minor league
*  compared to him. I mean, this man was right there in the firing line, but I can understand his
*  analogy because when you think about it, those young conscripts back in Germany and Russia and
*  all the countries where they were being drafted, even our guys were being drafted and thrown into
*  this. They were gallantly and bravely defending their country. Now, I'm sure the young Germans
*  felt, well, hey, Hitler must be right. Right. And the young Russians felt, hey, Stalin must be right.
*  And the young Americans figured, hey, President Roosevelt must be right. So they were romantically
*  in a sense, defending the honor of their country, of their motherland. The difference between those
*  they did have that commonality. If you and I were firing across each other from France to Germany,
*  or from Germany to Russia, we're just these two kids who got thrown into this. We didn't freaking
*  ask for this. But the difference with Jocko's enemy is no one was attacking their country
*  over there. No one was taking their country over. Maybe in their mind that they didn't want people
*  trying to build their government. I don't know enough about the history there to
*  really elaborate. We didn't attack them. And if a soldier attacks a soldier, that's an understood
*  concept amongst warriors. But when a soldier attacks a civilian, now you're after a different beast.
*  And you've written that beast off, if that makes any sense. Yeah. And then the enemy, I mean,
*  as Jocko explains, the enemy in Iraq and just certain parts of the Middle East is essentially
*  terrorists who don't value the lives of the civilians of their own country. They don't.
*  And so it becomes like this weird guerrilla warfare slash game of violence that ultimately allows them
*  to gain more power within their country. But they don't care if they're playing with civilian lives
*  as pawns. If you have a child who dies that's a civilian in their country, that could be seen as
*  a positive for them because they can use that to leverage for more and more power within that
*  country. So when you're fighting an enemy like that, that's a vicious, that's an evil enemy.
*  Absolutely. It's like snakes are beautiful, but if you go pet a rattler, you're getting bit and you're
*  getting dead, right? Yeah. And that's what terrorists, you've got to cut the head of the snake off.
*  And I feel, no, don't commit our guys to me there anymore. But what we need to do is go with tech
*  warfare. If we have Intel from drones or planes or whatever it is that so-and-so and so-and-so
*  and so-and-so are driving down in that pickup or whatever, take it out and do it again tomorrow
*  and tomorrow and tomorrow. And maybe they'll get the message after a while, oh shit, these guys
*  aren't messing around. Instead of throwing wave after wave of our brave warriors, brave SEALs,
*  brave special ops guys, and God bless them for what they do. I couldn't do it. I could not have
*  done it. But they have to be now sitting home going, what the hell? My friends, my body,
*  myself, they must feel so betrayed because they passionately went over there to cure a cancer,
*  the cancer of terrorism. And now the cancer is back. And I hate to say it, but I think the cancer
*  might start running wild. We need to change our tactics up. This is just my opinion.
*  I can't see committing all of our guys to a continuous eternal war. But I think what we
*  need to do is hit surgically and hit hard at that cancer that is over there. We are never going to
*  rebuild that region. It's just, it's thousands of years of traditions that you're not going to
*  change. It's just some people are unchangeable because they don't want to. And we have so many
*  social problems here in our country, I think, that we need to fix first. I heard this spoken
*  in the past by many people. It's like the garden theory. You have your garden with a fence around
*  it. You tend to your garden. There may be weeds on the outside of the fence, but as long as they're
*  not inside your garden, your garden will prosper. And I know some people don't agree to that,
*  America First and the whole take care of our own, but it's like, how are we going to take in more
*  people now? And I have a human feeling for them, but it's almost like the lifeboat theory. How
*  many people can we take into the lifeboat before the lifeboat itself sinks as the ship is going
*  now? So if we can't take care of our own homeless vets and our own homeless people, and it's just
*  going to become worse and it doesn't make any sense. It's just like we need to just take a time
*  out and I think switch our tactics a little bit. And invest into helping people here at home.
*  Absolutely. There's very few as obvious of cases as the first responders in 9-11.
*  One of the things I really want to talk about at least a little bit, we've already talked about the
*  amazing project that you're doing, the 2420 podcast that you host. We mentioned one story,
*  Stephen Siller. Is there other stories, or maybe you can speak out at a high level, what are you
*  hoping to tell? And all these different stories that are weaved about that connect the world
*  that connect the tragedies and the triumphs, the heroism of that day and the days and the
*  years that followed. It seems like the common few themes, the common threads are being selfless,
*  helping out others even though they might be a stranger in acts of kindness, acts of love,
*  and it seems to all be weaved together with faith. They all seem to have some sort of faith.
*  We have one gentleman, Mark Hanna, and he's a Coptic Egyptian priest, and he's an immigrant
*  to the United States. He was a Port Authority building engineer. And with his crew, who
*  subsequently passed away, the crew did, he was effectively rescuing dozens of people on the
*  upper floors and his boss ordered him to assist an elderly gentleman who was 89 down 78 flights of
*  stairs to get him out. And in stopping on the 21st floor, he figured they would just wait there
*  for medics. He came across Captain Patty Brown of Ladder Company Three, who told him, no, sir,
*  you need to evacuate. And Captain Brown picked his brain a little bit about the structure because he
*  found out he was an engineer. And Captain Patty Brown continued on to effect rescues and he and
*  his crew were killed. But Father, he's now, Mark was able to effectively evacuate this gentleman.
*  They were the two known last survivors to come out of the tower. He now has dedicated his life
*  to becoming a Coptic priest in St. Mary's Church in East Brunswick, New Jersey. He did this for a
*  total stranger. And he said he was inspired by his bosses who died and his friends. One of his best
*  friends was an Italian man. The other man was a retired Navy SEAL, Hispanic man. And they were
*  part of this melting pot. And no one looked at each other that day, what color, what race,
*  what belief were you? They just said, hey, you're a human in need, let's go. And we have the story
*  about John Field on his mission to help the responders. We have a young lady, Mariah, whose
*  birth father was on Flight 93. She had not even met him. And she had this premonition that somebody
*  in her family was killed that day. And her adoptive mom said, no, everyone's fine. Three
*  years later, when she was legally able to find out who her dad was, she found out that her dad,
*  Tom, was actually on that plane as part of the Let's Roll team. And we have a gentleman, Robert
*  Burke, who's an actor, sweetheart of a man. He's a gentleman. And he's a very, very popular actor
*  in Hollywood. He was on Rescue Me, Blue Bloods, Gossip Girls. And Bobby, my friend, as I call him,
*  is a volunteer fireman now. This man doesn't need to get out of bed at two o'clock in the morning
*  and help people with a stroke or a burning garage or a burning house, but he does because he wants
*  to. Because his best friend was Captain Patty Brown. And his other best friend was Father Michael
*  Judge, who was our chaplain, who was killed literally blessing victims at the site, had just
*  given last rites to the firefighter I mentioned earlier, Danny, who was killed. And Father Judge
*  was in the lobby of the building giving a blessing, praying to God to please stop this. And he was
*  struck by debris and he was killed. And Bobby goes on to elaborate about Father Judge's story.
*  Father Judge used to walk the streets of New York City helping AIDS patients just with whatever they
*  needed. And he was a Franciscan friar. They wear sandals and a robe. They just live very humble
*  lives. And it's just the common denominator is loving each other and helping each other,
*  regardless of you know the person or not. And really, when you think about it, that's how
*  America was made. We fought for independence. Stranger fought next to stranger and fought
*  tyranny because they wanted freedom. They wanted to be able to live, love, pray, and prosper.
*  And they fought and died alongside of strangers. And it's sort of symbolic of what happened that
*  day. And then strangers from around this great country just flocked in by the thousands to help.
*  They didn't know who was in that pile, but they didn't care. That was another American.
*  And what I ultimately am trying to do involved in this beautiful project
*  is spread the message of doing the right thing. Look at these examples. These brave people who
*  didn't have to, especially the civilians, they weren't paid to run back in there and help person
*  after person. They had no obligation. They could have just said, hey man, I'm out of here and just
*  bolted. But they didn't. So we're just trying to say to people, let's bring back that unity
*  and that feeling of 9-12. As strange as 9-12 of a day it was, it was so sad because
*  it was the first dawn of the sun where we realized this wasn't a dream. This was real,
*  and it's not going away. But the beauty of it was there was thousands of people lined up along the
*  West Side Highway with signs and American flags. And they were from every country and every race
*  and every creed. And it didn't matter who they were, but they all shared one bond, love. And they
*  were hugging and crying and thanking rescuers. And it brought the morale so high for a group of
*  people that was so beaten down the day before. It just started lifting the morale and making us
*  realize, you know what? People really do give a crap. They really do love each other. And now,
*  I'm going to be honest with you, I've been doubting that a little bit lately. I still have these
*  examples of it. That lady who helped me last night with the phone and just, I know there's these
*  shining little examples, but sometimes I think, I don't know, are we running out of them?
*  Well, I got to give you some advice. So there's two words that were repeated often
*  in the days and the years after 9-11, which is never forget. So might I remind you to never forget
*  about 9-12? I mean, those words you talked about that, you know, there's people, what is it, college
*  freshmen? They weren't even born. They weren't even born. And there's people in the 20s that were too
*  young to remember, to understand the events of that day. But I think what that day, as you're
*  describing, means it's not about a terrorist attack. It's about the unity that followed.
*  It was tremendous, Lex. I never felt so proud. I was always proud of this country.
*  You know, I remember my grandpa Nels used to walk by, I'd see a flag, a hair style,
*  spangled banner, and he'd tear up. And I'd say, Grant, why are you crying? He said,
*  I'm not crying. It's a tears of joy. I love this country so much. And I just remember like feeling
*  that way. I felt that way 9-10. I felt that way on 9-11. But then on 9-12, I was just so proud
*  of just the people, the way they stepped up. And I just want to try to see if that can happen again.
*  And I hope it's not necessary for us to have another tragedy to bring that about.
*  Let's do that without the tragedy. Let's just stop and say, hey, you know what? Let me listen
*  to what this guy has to say. And maybe he probably won't convince me, but maybe I'll go,
*  I never thought of it that way. Stop the finger pointing, the bickering, the tantrums, the fighting.
*  It's just not necessary. It gets you nowhere. It's like, you know, I was two years old and I'd
*  stomp around because I wanted a cookie or a piece of candy. I still didn't get it. Turned blue in
*  the face and whatever. Got a squat in the rear end, but it didn't get the candy. And that's what
*  we got going on right now. Everybody's just stomping around, being a baby. Stop. Just stop.
*  We're really lucky. Look, the country's not perfect, right? But it's damn good. It gives
*  us all these opportunities. Like I said, no one's rushing out the gates to get out of here.
*  They're freaking... I got a cousin of mine. I love him dearly. My cousin Tony in Ireland.
*  And he said, he's just a little older than me. He's in his 50s. He said, man,
*  I should have done it. I should have went to America. My dad said, go to America. I went to
*  England. And he went back to Ireland. But he's happy in Ireland. It's his home. But he said,
*  wow, what a place of opportunity. And I said, it's never too late. He goes, yeah, but you know what?
*  You get tied down. And I understand that. I thank God my mom came here at 16. I thank God my grandpa
*  got on that ship in his 20s, 27, I think, with not a nickel to rub together. I thank God they did
*  it because I don't know where else I would have ended up. There's no place else I want to be.
*  And I thank God that there's people like you who rushed towards ground zero to help other human
*  beings. And I believe that human spirit ultimately represents the best of this country and the best
*  of this world. Thank you for the stories you're telling, for your perseverance in that. And thank
*  you for welcoming me to the crew. You're very welcome. I'm proud. And it'll take you any day.
*  You look like you could do the job just fine. I love lifting heavy things and doing dangerous
*  things. So I'm proud to be part of this country and part of the battalion now. Well, you are
*  definitely an attribute to America. And we're glad you chose to come here. You know, Alex, it's such
*  a beautiful place. It's a beautiful melting pot. You know, if we were all the same, it would be
*  kind of a boring place, right? Kind of boring. It really would. But it's just such a great place.
*  And I just want to say thanks. It's an honor. It's an honor to have someone to let me sound off. And
*  it'll be even bigger honor if somebody will listen to me and just say, hey, you know, let me just try
*  to do something good today. And you know, that's the tunnel to towers mantra is let us do good.
*  And I just, you know, I got a really big credit card with God, a big balance, right? I need to
*  pay him back a lot and I need to pay him forward. And I'm just going to spend the rest of my days
*  trying my best. I don't know where this is going to go, what it'll lead into. But I really would
*  like to get those dogs with those vets, build them that village and just keep going on from project
*  to project. Just say when my final day comes and I'm laying there and I say, you know what,
*  I really made the most of that second chance God gave me way back in 2011. I hope it's 30,
*  40 years from now, but even if it's 30 months from now, giving it the best shot. So thank you,
*  sir. I appreciate it and wishing you blessings and success in your career.
*  Keep up the good fight. And you're always welcome back to Texas.
*  Well, I love it. It's great food and a little hot, a little hot, but I can deal with it.
*  We don't do so good Irish in the sun, you know, but.
*  Well, the barbecue and the people are worth it.
*  No, they are. They're awesome. I was down here for some storm relief a few years ago.
*  And I tell you what, I fell in love with it. The people are great. It's a great state. And
*  yeah, I'll definitely, definitely be back again for sure.
*  Thanks for talking to me. Thank you, sir. Appreciate it.
*  Thanks for listening to this conversation with Niels Jorgensen. To support this podcast,
*  please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from
*  Franklin D. Roosevelt. Human kindness has never weakened the stamina or softened the fiber of a
*  free people. A nation does not have to be cruel to be tough. Thank you for listening. I hope to see
*  you next time.
