---
Date Generated: April 12, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 8001s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence', 'artificial intelligence podcast', 'cumrun vafa', 'electrons', 'general relativity', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex podcast', 'mit ai', 'multidimensional', 'physics', 'quantum gravity', 'quantum physics', 'quarks', 'string theory']
Video Views: 337212
Video Rating: None
---

# Cumrun Vafa: String Theory | Lex Fridman Podcast #204
**Lex Fridman:** [July 25, 2021](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j4_VyRDOmN4)
*  The following is a conversation with Kamran Vafa, a theoretical physicist at Harvard specializing in
*  string theory. He is the winner of the 2017 Breakthrough Prize in Fundamental Physics,
*  which is the most lucrative academic prize in the world. Quick mention of our sponsors,
*  Headspace, Jordan Harmadishow, Squarespace, and Allform. Check them out in the description
*  to support this podcast. As a side note, let me say that string theory is a theory of quantum
*  gravity that unifies quantum mechanics and general relativity. It says that quarks,
*  electrons, and all other particles are made up of much tinier strings of vibrating energy.
*  They vibrate in 10 or more dimensions, depending on the flavor of the theory.
*  Different vibrating patterns result in different particles. From its origins, for a long time,
*  string theory was seen as too good not to be true, but has recently fallen out of favor in
*  the physics community, partly because over the past 40 years it has not been able to make any
*  novel predictions that could then be validated through experiment. Nevertheless, to this day,
*  it remains one of our best candidates for a theory of everything, or a theory that unifies
*  the laws of physics. Let me mention that a similar story happened with neural networks in the field
*  of artificial intelligence, where it fell out of favor after decades of promise and research,
*  but found success again in the past decade as part of the deep learning revolution.
*  So, I think it pays to keep an open mind, since we don't know which of the ideas in physics may
*  be brought back decades later and be found to solve the biggest mysteries in theoretical physics.
*  String theory still has that promise. This is the Lex Friedman Podcast,
*  and here is my conversation with Kamran Vafa.
*  What is the difference between mathematics and physics?
*  Well, that's a difficult question, because in many ways math and physics are unified in many ways,
*  so to distinguish them is not an easy task. I would say that perhaps the goals of math and physics
*  are different. Math does not care to describe reality, physics does. That's the major difference,
*  but a lot of the thoughts, processes, and so on which goes to understanding the nature and reality
*  are the same things that mathematicians do. So, in many ways they are similar.
*  Mathematicians care about deductive reasoning, and physicists or physics in general,
*  we care less about that. We care more about interconnection of ideas, about how ideas support
*  each other, or if there's a puzzle discord between ideas. That's more interesting for us.
*  Part of the reason is that we have learned in physics that the ideas are not sequential,
*  and if we think that there's one idea which is more important and we start with there and go to
*  the next idea, the next one, and deduce things from that like mathematicians do, we have learned that
*  the third or fourth thing we deduce from that principle turns out later on to be the actual
*  principle. From a different perspective, starting from there leads to new ideas which the original
*  one didn't lead to, and that's the beginning of a new revolution in science. So, this kind of thing
*  we have seen again and again in the history of science, we have learned to not like deductive
*  reasoning because that gives us a bad starting point to think that we actually have the original
*  thought process should be viewed as the primary thought, and all these are deductions like the
*  way mathematicians sometimes do. So, in physics, we have learned to be skeptical of that way of
*  thinking. We have to be a bit open to the possibility that what we thought is a deduction
*  of a hypothesis actually the reason that's true is the opposite, and so we reverse the order.
*  And so, this switching back and forth between ideas makes us more fluid about a deductive fashion. Of
*  course, it sometimes gives a wrong impression like physicists don't care about rigor. They just say
*  random things. They are willing to say things that are not backed by the logical reasoning.
*  That's not true at all. So, despite this fluidity in seeing which one is a primary thought,
*  we are very careful about trying to understand what we have really understood in terms of
*  relationship between ideas. So, that's an important ingredient, and in fact, solid math being behind
*  physics is I think one of the attractive features of a physical law. So, we look for beautiful math
*  underpinning it. Can we dig into that process of starting from one place and then ending up at
*  the fourth step and realizing all along that the place you started at was wrong? So, does that
*  happen when there's a discrepancy between what the math says and what the physical world shows?
*  Is that how you then can go back and do the revolutionary idea for a different starting place
*  altogether? Perhaps I'll give an example to see how it goes. And in fact, the historical example
*  is Newton's work on classical mechanics. So, Newton formulated the laws of mechanics,
*  the force F equals to ma and his other laws, and they look very simple, elegant, and so forth.
*  Later, when we studied more examples of mechanics and other similar things,
*  physicists came up with the idea that the notion of potential is interesting. Potential was an
*  abstract idea which kind of came. You could take its gradient and relate it to the force,
*  so you don't really need a tapirary, but it solved, helped some thoughts. And then later, Euler and
*  Lagrange reformulated Newtonian mechanics in a totally different way in the following fashion.
*  They said if you want to know where a particle at this point and at this time, how does it get to
*  this point at the later time, is the following. You take all possible paths connecting this
*  particle from going from the initial point to the final point, and you compute the action. And what
*  is an action? Action is the integral over time of the kinetic term of the particle minus its
*  potential. So, you take this integral, and each path will give you some quantity. And the path it
*  actually takes, the physical path, is the one which minimizes this integral or this action.
*  Now, this sounded like a backwards step from Newton's. Newton's formula seemed very simple.
*  F equals to MA, and you can write F is minus the gradient of the potential. So, why would anybody
*  start formulating such a simple thing in terms of this complicated looking principle? You have to
*  study the space of all paths and all things and find the minimum, and then you get the same
*  equation. So, what's the point? So, Euler and Lagrange's formulation of Newton, which was kind
*  of recasting in this language, is just a consequence of Newton's law. F equals MA gives you the same
*  fact that this path is a minimum action. Now, what we learned later, last century, was that
*  when we deal with quantum mechanics, Newton's law is only an average correct. And the particle going
*  from one to the other doesn't take exactly one path. It takes all the paths with the amplitude,
*  which is proportional to the exponential of the action times an imaginary number,
*  i. And so, this fact turned out to be the reformulation of quantum mechanics. We should
*  start there as the basis of the new law, which is quantum mechanics, and Newton is only an
*  approximation and the average correct. When we say amplitude, do you mean probability?
*  Yes. The amplitude means if you sum up all these paths with exponential i times the action,
*  if you sum this up, you get the number, complex number. You square the norm of this complex
*  number, gives you a probability to go from one to the other. Is there ways in which mathematics
*  can lead us astray when we use it as a tool to understand the physical world?
*  Yes. I would say that mathematics can lead us astray as much as all physical ideas can lead
*  us astray. So, if you get stuck in some thing, then you can easily fool yourself that just like
*  the thought process, we have to free ourselves of that. Sometimes math does that role. Like say,
*  oh, this is such a beautiful math. I definitely want to use it somewhere. And so, you just get
*  carried away and you just get maybe carried too far away. So, that is certainly true. But I
*  wouldn't say it's more dangerous than all physical ideas. To me, new math ideas is as much potential
*  to lead us astray as all physical ideas, which could be long held principles of physics. So,
*  I'm just saying that we should keep an open mind about the role the math plays, not to be antagonistic
*  towards it and not to over-over-welcoming it. We should just be open to possibilities.
*  What about looking at a particular characteristic of both physical ideas and mathematical ideas,
*  which is beauty? Do you think beauty leads us astray? Meaning, and you offline showed me a
*  really nice puzzle that illustrates this idea a little bit. Maybe you can speak to that or another
*  example where beauty makes it tempting for us to assume that the law and the theory we found is
*  actually one that perfectly describes reality. I think that beauty does not lead us astray because
*  I feel that beauty is a requirement for principles of physics. So, beauty is fundamental in the
*  universe? I think beauty is fundamental. At least that's the way many of us view it. It's not emergent.
*  It's not emergent. I think Hardy is the mathematician who said that there's no permanent
*  place for ugly mathematics. And so, I think the same is true in physics. That if we find the
*  principle which looks ugly, that's not the end stage. So, therefore, beauty is going to lead us
*  somewhere. Now, it doesn't mean beauty is enough. It doesn't mean if you just have beauty, if I just
*  look at something that's beautiful, then I'm fine. No, that's not the case. Beauty is certainly a
*  criteria that every good physical theory should pass. That's at least the view we have. Why do
*  we have this view? That's a good question. It is partly, you could say, based on experience of
*  science over centuries, partly is a philosophical view of what reality is or should be. And
*  in principle, it could have been ugly and we might have had to deal with it, but we have gotten maybe
*  confident through examples after examples in the history of science to look for beauty.
*  And our sense of beauty seems to incorporate a lot of things that are essential for us to solve
*  some difficult problems like symmetry. We find symmetry beautiful and the breaking of symmetry
*  beautiful. Somehow, symmetry is a fundamental part of how we conceive of beauty at all layers
*  of reality, which is interesting. In both the visual space, where we look at art, we look at
*  each other as human beings, the way we look at creatures in the biological space, the way we
*  look at chemistry and then to the physics world as the work you do. It's kind of interesting.
*  It makes you wonder like, which one is the chicken or the egg? Is symmetry the chicken
*  and our conception of beauty the egg or the other way around? Or somehow the fact that every
*  the symmetry is part of reality is it somehow creates a brain that then is able to perceive it?
*  Or maybe this is just because we, maybe it's so obvious, it's almost trivial,
*  that symmetry of course will be part of every kind of universe that's possible.
*  And then any kind of organism that's able to observe that universe is going to appreciate
*  symmetry. Well, these are good questions. We don't have a deep understanding of why we get
*  attracted to symmetry. Why do laws of nature seem to have symmetries underlying them? And the
*  reasoning or the examples of whether if there wasn't symmetry, we would have understood it or
*  not. We could have said that, yeah, if there were things which didn't look that great,
*  we could understand them. For example, we know that symmetries get broken and we have appreciated
*  nature in the broken symmetry phase as well. The world we live in has many things which do not look
*  symmetric, but even those have underlying symmetry when you look at it more deeply. So we have gotten
*  maybe spoiled perhaps by the appearance of symmetry all over the place and we look for it. And
*  I think this is perhaps related to the sense of aesthetics that scientists have. And we don't
*  usually talk about it among scientists. In fact, it's kind of a philosophical view of why do we
*  look for simplicity or beauty or so forth. And I think in a sense, scientists are a lot like
*  philosophers. Sometimes I think, especially modern science seems to shun philosophers and
*  philosophical views. And I think at their peril, I think in my view, science owes a lot to philosophy
*  and in my view, many scientists, in fact, probably all good scientists are perhaps amateur
*  philosophers. They may not state that they are philosophers or they may not like to be labeled
*  philosophers, but in many ways, what they do is like what is philosophical takes of things.
*  Looking for simplicity or symmetry is an example of that in my opinion,
*  or seeing patterns. You see, for example, another example of the symmetry is like how you come up
*  with new ideas in science. You see, for example, an idea A is connected with an idea B. Okay,
*  so you study this connection very deeply and then you find the cousin of an idea A, let me call it
*  A prime, and then you immediately look for B prime. If A is like B and if there's an A prime,
*  then you look for B prime. Why? Well, it completes the picture. Why? Well, it's philosophically
*  appealing to have more balance in terms of that. And then you look for B prime and lo and behold,
*  you find this other phenomenon, which is a physical phenomenon, which you call B prime.
*  So this kind of thinking motivates asking questions and looking for things. And it has guided
*  scientists, I think, through many centuries. And I think it continues to do so today.
*  And I think if you look at the long arc of history, I suspect that the things that will be remembered
*  is the philosophical flavor of the ideas of physics and chemistry and computer science and
*  mathematics. Like, I think the actual details will be shown to be incomplete or maybe wrong,
*  but the philosophical intuitions will carry through much longer. There's a sense in which,
*  if it's true that we haven't figured out most of how things work currently, that it'll all be
*  shown as wrong and silly, almost be a historical artifact. But the human spirit, whatever,
*  the longing to understand the way we perceive the world, the way we conceive of it,
*  of our place in the world, those ideas will carry on. I completely agree. In fact, I believe that
*  almost, well, I believe that none of the principles or laws of physics we know today
*  are exactly correct. All of them are approximations to something. They're better than the previous
*  versions that we had, but none of them are exactly correct and none of them are going to
*  stand forever. So I agree that that's the process we are heading. We are improving.
*  And yes, indeed, the thought process and that philosophical take is common. So when we look at
*  older scientists or maybe even all the way back to Greek philosophers and the things that the way
*  they thought and so on, almost everything they said about nature was incorrect. But the way they
*  thought about it and many things that they were thinking is still valid today. For example, they
*  thought about symmetry breaking. They were trying to explain the following. This is a beautiful
*  example, I think. They had figured out that the Earth is round and they said, okay, Earth is round.
*  They have seen the length of the shadow of a meter stick and they have seen that if you go from the
*  equator upwards north, they find that depending on how far away you are, the length of the shadow
*  changes. And from that, they had even measured the radius of the Earth to good accuracy.
*  That's brilliant, by the way, the fact that they did that. Very brilliant, very good. So these Greek
*  philosophers are very smart. And so they had taken it to the next step. They asked, okay, so the Earth
*  is round. Why doesn't it move? They thought it doesn't move. They were looking around. Nothing
*  seemed to move. So they said, okay, we have to have a good explanation. It wasn't enough for them to
*  be there. So they really want to deeply understand that fact. And they come up with a symmetry
*  argument. And the symmetry argument was, oh, if the Earth is a spherical, it must be at the center
*  of the universe for sure. So they said the Earth is at the center of the universe. That makes sense.
*  And they said, you know, if the Earth is going to move, which direction does it pick? Any direction
*  it picks, it breaks that spherical symmetry because you have to pick a direction. And that's not good
*  because it's not symmetrical anymore. So therefore the Earth decides to sit put because it would break
*  the symmetry. So they had the incorrect science. They thought Earth doesn't move. And what they had
*  this beautiful idea that symmetry might explain it. But they were even smarter than that. Aristotle
*  didn't agree with this argument. He said, why do you think symmetry prevents it from moving? Because
*  the preferred position? Not so. He gave an example. He said, suppose you are a person and we put you
*  at the center of a circle and we spread food around you on a circle around you, loaves of bread,
*  let's say. And we say, okay, stay at the center of the circle forever. Are you going to do that just
*  because of the symmetric point? No, you are going to get hungry. You're going to move towards one of
*  those loaves of bread, despite the fact that it breaks the symmetry. So from this way, he tried
*  to argue being at the symmetric point may not be the preferred thing to do. And this idea of
*  spontaneous symmetry breaking is something we just use today to describe many physical phenomena. So
*  spontaneous symmetry breaking is the feature that we now use. But this idea was there thousands of
*  years ago, but applied incorrectly to the physical world. But now we are using it. So these ideas are
*  coming back in different forms. So I agree very much that the thought process is more important
*  and these ideas are more interesting than the actual applications that people may find today.
*  Did they use the language of symmetry and symmetry breaking and spontaneous symmetry? But that's
*  really interesting because I could see a conception of the universe that kind of tends towards perfect
*  symmetry and is stuck there. Not stuck there, but achieves that optimal and stays there. The idea
*  that you would spontaneously break out of symmetry, like have these perturbations,
*  like jump out of symmetry and back. That's a really difficult idea to load into your head.
*  Where does that come from? And then the idea that you may not be at the center of the universe,
*  that is a really tough idea. Right. So symmetry is sometimes an explanation of being at the
*  symmetric point is sometimes a simple explanation of many things. Like if you have a ball,
*  a circular ball, then the bottom of it is the lowest point. So if you put a pebble or something,
*  it will slide down and go there at the bottom and stays there at the symmetric point because the
*  preferred point, the lowest energy point. But if that same symmetric circular ball that you had,
*  had a bump on the bottom, the bottom might not be at the center. It might be on a circle on the table,
*  in which case the pebble would not end up at the center, will be the lower energy point,
*  symmetrical, but it breaks the symmetry once it takes a point on that circle.
*  So we can have symmetry reasoning for where things end up or symmetry breakings,
*  like this example would suggest. We talked about beauty. I find geometry to be beautiful.
*  You have a few examples that are geometric in nature in your book. How can geometry in ancient
*  times or today be used to understand reality? And maybe how do you think about geometry as a
*  distinct tool in mathematics and physics? Yes, geometry is my favorite part of math as well.
*  And Greeks were enamored by geometry. They tried to describe physical reality using
*  geometry and principles of geometry and symmetry. Platonic solids, the five solids they had
*  discovered, had these beautiful solids, they thought it must be good for some reality. There
*  must be explaining something. They attached one to air, one to fire, and so forth. They tried to
*  give physical reality to symmetric objects. These symmetric objects are symmetries of rotation
*  and discrete symmetry groups we call today of rotation group in three dimensions.
*  Now, we know now, we kind of laugh at the way they were trying to connect that symmetry to
*  laws of the realities of physics. But actually it turns out in modern days, we use symmetries
*  in not too far away exactly in these kinds of thoughts processes in the following way.
*  In the context of string theory, which is the field life study, we have these extra dimensions.
*  And these extra dimensions are compact, tiny spaces typically, but they have different shapes
*  and sizes. We have learned that if these extra shapes and sizes have symmetries, which are
*  related to the same rotation symmetries that the Greek were talking about, if they enjoy those
*  discrete symmetries, and if you take that symmetry and caution the space by it, in other words,
*  identify points under these symmetries, you get properties of that space at the singular points,
*  which force emanates from them. What forces? Forces like the ones we have seen in nature
*  today, like electric forces, like strong forces, like weak forces. So these same principles that
*  were driving them to connect geometry and symmetries to nature is driving today's physics,
*  now much more modern ideas, but nevertheless the symmetries connecting geometry to physics.
*  In fact, often we sometimes we ask the following question, suppose I want to get this particular
*  physical reality, I want to have these particles with these forces and so on, what do I do?
*  It turns out that you can geometrically design this space to give you that. You say, oh, I
*  put the sphere here, I would do this, I will shrink them. So if you have two spheres touching each other
*  and shrinking to zero size, that gives you strong forces. If you have one of them, it gives you the
*  weak forces. If you have this, you get that. And if you want to unify forces, do the other thing. So
*  these geometrical translation of physics is one of my favorite things that we have discovered in
*  modern physics in the context of string theory. The sad thing is when you go into multiple
*  dimensions and we'll talk about it is we start to lose our capacity to visually intuit the world
*  we're discussing. And then we go into the realm of mathematics and we'll lose that. Unfortunately,
*  our brains are such that we're limited. But before we go into that mysterious, beautiful world,
*  let's take a small step back. And you also in your book have this kind of
*  through the space of puzzles, through the space of ideas, have a brief history of physics,
*  of physical ideas. Now we talked about Newtonian mechanics,
*  leading all through different Lagrangian Hamiltonian mechanics. Can you describe some of the key ideas
*  in the history of physics, maybe lingering on each from electromagnetism to relativity to
*  quantum mechanics and to today, as we'll talk about with quantum gravity and string theory?
*  Sure. So I mentioned the classical mechanics and the Euler-Lagrangian formulation.
*  One of the next important milestones for physics were the discoveries of laws of
*  electricity and magnetism. So Maxwell put the discoveries all together in the context of what
*  we call the Maxwell's equations. And he noticed that when he put these discoveries that Faraday's
*  and others had made about electric and magnetic phenomena in terms of mathematical equations,
*  it didn't quite work. There was a mathematical inconsistency. Now, one could have two attitudes.
*  Okay, who cares about math? I'm doing nature, electric force, magnetic force,
*  math I don't care about. But it bothered him. It was inconsistent. The equations he were writing,
*  the two equations he had written down did not agree with each other. And this bothered him.
*  But he figured out, you know, if you add this jiggle, this equation by adding one little term
*  there, it works. At least it's consistent. What is the motivation for that term? He said, I don't
*  know. Have we seen it in experiments? No. Why did you add it? Well, because of mathematical consistency.
*  So he said, okay, math forced him to do this term. He added this term, which we now today call the
*  Maxwell term. And once he added that term, his equations were nice, you know, differential
*  equations, mathematically consistent, beautiful. But he also found a new physical phenomena.
*  He found that because of that term, he could now get electric and magnetic waves moving
*  through space at a speed that he could calculate. So he calculated the speed of the wave
*  and lo and behold, he found it's the same as the speed of light, which puzzled him because he
*  didn't think light had anything to do with electricity and magnetism. But then he was
*  courageous enough to say, well, maybe light is nothing but these electric and magnetic fields
*  moving around. And he didn't, he wasn't alive to see the verification of that prediction. And indeed
*  it was true. So this mathematical inconsistency, which we could say, you know, this mathematical
*  beauty drove him to this physical, very important connection between light and
*  electrical magnetic phenomena, which was later confirmed. So then physics progresses and it
*  comes to Einstein. Einstein looks at Maxwell's equation. It's beautiful. These are nice equations,
*  except we get one speed light. Who measures this light speed? And he asked the question, are you
*  are you moving? Are you not moving? If you move the speed of light changes, but
*  Maxwell's equation has no hint of different speeds of light. It doesn't say, oh, only if you're not
*  moving, you get the speed. It's just, you always get the speed. So Einstein was very puzzled and
*  he, he was daring enough to say, well, you know, maybe everybody gets the same speed for light.
*  Yeah. And that motivated his theory of special relativity. And this is an interesting example,
*  because the idea was motivated from physics, from Maxwell's equations, from the fact that
*  people try to, try to measure the properties of ether, which was supposed to be the medium in
*  which the light travels through. And the idea was that only in that, in that medium, the speed,
*  the speed of, if you're at rest with respect to the ether, the speed, the speed of light.
*  Then if you're moving, the speed changes and people did not discover it. Michael's and
*  Morley's experiment showed there is no ether. So then Einstein was courageous enough to say,
*  you know, life is the same speed for everybody, regardless of whether you're moving or not.
*  And the interesting thing is about special theory of relativity is that the, on the math,
*  underpinning it is very simple. It's linear algebra, nothing terribly deep. You can teach it
*  at the high school level, if not earlier. Okay. Does that mean Einstein's special
*  relativity is boring? Not at all. So this is an example where simple math, you know,
*  linear algebra leads to deep physics. Einstein's theory of special relativity motivated by this
*  inconsistency at Maxwell equation would suggest for the speed of light, depending on who observes.
*  What's the most daring idea there that, that the speed of light could be the same everywhere?
*  That's the basic, that's the guts of it. That's the core of Einstein's theory. That statement
*  underlies the whole thing. Speed of light is the same for everybody. It's hard to swallow.
*  It doesn't sound right. It sounds completely wrong on the face of it. And it was took Einstein to
*  make, to make this daring statement. It would be, it would be laughing in some sense. How could
*  possibly, how could anybody make this possibly ridiculous claim? And it turned out to be true.
*  How does that make you feel? Cause it still sounds ridiculous. It sounds ridiculous until you learn
*  that our intuition is at fault about the way we conceive of space and time. The way we think about
*  space and time is wrong because we think about the nature of time as absolute. And part of it is
*  because we live in a situation where we don't go with very high speeds. There are speeds are small
*  compared to the speed of light. And therefore the phenomena we, we observe does not distinguish the
*  relativity of time. The time also depends on who measures it. There's no absolute time. When you
*  say it's noon today, now it depends on who's measuring it. And it, it, not everybody would
*  agree with that statement. And to see that you will have to have fast observer moving, you know,
*  speeds, close to the speed of light. So, so this shows that our intuition is at fault. And a lot of
*  the discoveries in physics precisely is getting rid of the wrong old intuition. And it is funny
*  because we get rid of it, but it's always lingers in us in some form. Like even when I'm describing
*  it, I feel like a little bit like, isn't it funny as you're just being the same way it is. Yes,
*  it is. But we kind of replace it by an intuition. And actually there's a very beautiful example of
*  this, how physicists do this, try to replace their intuition. And I think this is one of my favorite
*  examples of how physicists develop intuition. It goes to the work of Galileo. So, you know, again,
*  let's go back to Greek philosophers or maybe Aristotle in this case. Now, again, let's make
*  a criticism. He thought that objects, the heavier objects fall faster than the lighter objects.
*  Makes sense. It kind of makes sense. And, you know, people say about feather and so on, but
*  that's because of the air resistance. But you might think like if you have a heavy
*  stone and a light pebble, the heavy one will fall first. If you don't, you know, do any experiments,
*  that's the first gut reaction. I would say everybody would say that's the natural thing.
*  Galileo did not believe this and he kind of did the experiment. Famously, it said he went on the
*  top of Pisa Tower and he dropped, you know, these heavy and light stones and they fell at the same
*  time when he dropped it at the same time from the same height. Okay, good. So he said, I'm done. You
*  know, I've showed that the heavy and lighter objects fall at the same time. I did the experiment.
*  Scientists at that time did not accept it. Why was that? Because at that time, science was not
*  just experimental. The experiment was not enough. They didn't think that they have to soil their
*  hands in doing experiments to get to the reality. They said, why is it the case? Why? So Galileo had
*  to come up with an explanation of why heavier and lighter objects fall at the same rate. This is the
*  way he convinced them using symmetry. He said, suppose you have three bricks, the same shape,
*  the same size, same as everything. And we hold these three bricks at the same height
*  and drop them. Which one will fall to the ground first? Everybody said, of course,
*  we know it's symmetry tells you, you know, they're all the same shape, same size, same height. Of
*  course, they fall at the same time. Yeah, we know that next. Next is trivial. He said, okay, what if
*  we move these bricks around with the same height? Does it change the time they hit the ground?
*  They said, if it's the same height again by the symmetry principle, because the height
*  translation horizontal transitions the symmetry. No, it doesn't matter. They all fall the same rate.
*  Good. Doesn't matter how close I bring them together. No, it doesn't. Okay. Suppose I make
*  the two bricks touch and then let them go. Do they fall at the same rate? Yes, they do. But they said,
*  well, the two bricks that touch are twice more mass than this other brick. And you just agreed
*  that they fall at the same rate. They say, yeah, yeah, we just agreed. That's right. That's strange.
*  Yes. So he de confused them by the symmetry reasoning. So this way of repackaging some
*  intuition, a different intuition, when the intuitions clash, then you, then you side on the,
*  you replace the intuition. That's brilliant. I, and some of these diff, more difficult physical
*  ideas, physics ideas in the 20th century, in the 21st century, it starts becoming more and more
*  difficult to then replace the intuition. You know, what, what does the world look like for an object
*  traveling close to the speed of light? You start to think about like the edges of super massive
*  black holes and you start to think like, what, what's that look like? Or a memory into gravitational
*  ways or something. It's like when the fabric of space time is being morphed by gravity,
*  like what's that actually feel like if I'm writing a gravitational wave, what's that feel like?
*  Um, I mean, I think some of those are more sort of hippie, not useful, uh, intuitions to have, but
*  if you're an actual physicist or whatever the particular discipline is, I wonder if it's
*  possible to meditate, to sort of, um, escape through thinking, prolonged thinking and meditation on a
*  on a world like live in a visualized world. That's not like our own in order to understand
*  a phenomenon deeply. So like replace the intuition, like through rigorous meditation on the idea
*  in order to conceive of it. I mean, if we talk about multiple dimensions, I wonder if there's a,
*  a way to escape with a three dimensional world in our mind in order to then start to reason about
*  it. It's, uh, the more I talk to topologists, the more they seem to not operate at all in the
*  visual space. They really trust the mathematics, which is really annoying to me because topology
*  and differential geometry feels like it has a lot of potential for beautiful pictures.
*  Yes, I think they do actually. I would not be able to do my, my research if I don't have an
*  intuitive feel about geometry and we'll get to it. As you mentioned late before that,
*  how, for example, in strength there, you deal with these extra dimensions and I'll be very happy
*  to describe how we do it because without intuition, we will not get anywhere. And I,
*  I don't think you can just rely on formalism. I don't, I don't think any physicist just relies
*  on formalism. That's not physics. That's not understanding. So we have to intuit it and that's
*  crucial. And there are steps of doing it and we learned it might not be trivial, but we learn how
*  to do it. Similar to with this Galileo picture I just told you, you have to build these gradually,
*  but you have to connect the bricks. Exactly. You have to connect the bricks literally. Yeah. So,
*  yeah. So then, so going back to your question about the, the path of the history of the science,
*  so I was saying about the electricity of the magnetism and the special relativity where
*  simple idea led to special relativity, but then he went further thinking about acceleration
*  in the context of relativity and he came up with general relativity where he talked about, you know,
*  the fabric of space-time being curved and so forth and matter affecting the curvature of
*  the space and time. So, so this gradually became a connection between geometry and physics, namely,
*  he replaced Newton's, you know, gravitational force with a very geometrical, beautiful picture.
*  It's much more elegant than Newton's, but much more complicated mathematically. So, so when we
*  say simpler, we mean in some form it's simpler, but not in pragmatic terms of equation solving.
*  The equations are much harder to solve in Einstein's theory and in fact, so much, so much harder that
*  Einstein himself couldn't solve many of his, many of the cases he thought, for example, you couldn't
*  solve the equation for a spherical symmetric matter like, like if you had a symmetric sun,
*  he didn't think you can actually write the solve his equation for that. And a year after he said
*  that it was solved by, by Schwarzschild. So it was, it was that hard that he didn't think it's
*  going to be that easy. So yeah, the form is in his heart, but the contrast between the special
*  relativity and general relativity is very interesting because one of them has almost trivial math and
*  the other one has super complicated math. Both are physically amazingly important. And so, so we have
*  learned that, you know, the physics may or may not require complicated math. We should not shy
*  from using complicated math like Einstein did. Nobody, Einstein wouldn't say, I'm not going to
*  touch this math because it's too much, you know, tensors or, you know, curvature and I don't like
*  the four dimensional space time because I can't see four dimension. He wasn't doing that. He was
*  willing to abstract from that because physics drove him in that direction, but his motivation
*  was physics. Physics pushed him just like Newton pushed to develop calculus because physics pushed
*  him that he didn't have the tools. So he had to develop the tools to answer his physics questions.
*  So his motivation was physics again. So to me, those are examples would show that math and physics
*  have this symbiotic reality relationship, which, which kind of reinforce each other. Here I'm using,
*  I'm giving you examples of both of them, namely Newton's work led to development of mathematics,
*  calculus. And in the case of Einstein, he didn't develop the Riemannian geometry, just use them.
*  So, so it goes both ways. And in the context of modern physics, we see that again and again,
*  it goes both ways. Let me ask a ridiculous question. You know, you talk about your favorite
*  soccer player to bar. I'll ask the same question about Einstein's ideas, which is, which one do
*  you think is the biggest leap of genius? Is it the equals MC squared? Is it Brownian motion? Is it
*  special relativity? Is it general relativity? Which, which of, of the famous set of papers
*  he's written in 1905 and in general, his work was the biggest leap of genius.
*  In my opinion, is special relativity. The idea that speed of light is the same for everybody is
*  the beginning of everything he did. The beginning is the beginning. Once you embrace that weirdness,
*  all the weirdness, I would say that's, that's even though he says the most beautiful moment for him,
*  he says that is when he realized that if you fall in an elevator, you don't know if you're
*  falling or whether you're in the, whether you're in the falling elevator or whether you're near
*  next to the earth gravitational field, that, that to him was his aha moment, which inertial mass and
*  gravitational mass being identical geometrically and so forth as part of the theory, not because of,
*  you know, some, some funny coincidence that's for him. But I feel from outside, at least it feels
*  like the speed of light being the same is that is the really aha moment.
*  The general relativity to you is not like the conception of space time.
*  In a sense, the conception of space time already was part of the special relativity when you talk
*  about length contraction. So general relativity takes that to the next step, but beginning of it
*  was already space length contracts, time dilates. So once you talk about those, then you can dilate
*  more or less different places than it's curvature. So you don't have a choice. So it's kind of started
*  just with that same simple thought. Speed of light is the same for all.
*  Where does quantum mechanics come into view?
*  Exactly. So this is the next step. So Einstein's, you know,
*  developed general relativity and he's beginning to develop the foundation of quantum mechanics at
*  the same time, the photoelectric effects on others. And so quantum mechanics overtakes,
*  in fact, Einstein in many ways, because he doesn't like the probabilistic interpretation of quantum
*  mechanics and the formulas that's emerging. But physicists march on and try to, for example, combine
*  Einstein's theory of relativity with quantum mechanics. So Dirac takes special relativity,
*  tries to see how is it compatible with quantum mechanics.
*  Can we pause and briefly say what is quantum mechanics?
*  Oh, yes, sure. So quantum mechanics. So I discussed briefly when I talked about the connection
*  between Newtonian mechanics and the Euler-Lagrange reformulation of the Newtonian mechanics and
*  interpretation of this Euler-Lagrange formulas in terms of the paths that the particle take.
*  So when we say a particle goes from here to here, we usually think it classically follows
*  a specific trajectory. But actually in quantum mechanics, it follows every trajectory with
*  different probabilities. And so there's this fuzziness. Now, most probable, it's the path
*  that you actually see. And deviation from that is very, very unlikely and probabilistically very
*  minuscule. So in everyday experiments, we don't see anything deviated from what we expect.
*  But quantum mechanics tells us that things are more fuzzy. Things are not as precise as the line
*  you draw. Things are a bit like cloud. So if you go to microscopic scales like atomic scales and
*  lower, these phenomena become more pronounced. You can see it much better. The electron is not
*  at the point, but the clouds spread out around the nucleus. And so this fuzziness, this probabilistic
*  aspect of reality is what quantum mechanics describes. Can I briefly pause on that idea?
*  Do you think this is quantum mechanics is just a really damn good approximation,
*  a tool for predicting reality? Or does it actually describe reality? Do you think reality is fuzzy at
*  that level? Well, I think that reality is fuzzy at that level, but I don't think quantum mechanics
*  is necessarily the end of the story. So quantum mechanics is certainly an improvement over classical
*  physics. That much we know by experiments and so forth. Whether I'm happy with quantum mechanics,
*  whether I view quantum mechanics, for example, the thought, the measurement description of quantum
*  mechanics, am I happy with it? Am I thinking that's the end stage or not? I don't. I don't
*  think we're at the end of that story. And many physicists may or may not view this way. Some do,
*  some don't. But I think that it's the best we have right now. That's for sure. It's the best
*  approximation for reality we know today. And so far we don't know what it is the next thing that
*  improves it, replaces it, and so on. But as I mentioned before, I don't believe any
*  of the laws of physics we know today are exactly correct. It doesn't bother me. I'm not like
*  dogmatic and say, I have figured out this is the law of nature. I know everything. No, no. That's
*  the beauty about science that we are not dogmatic. And we are willing to, in fact, we are encouraged
*  to be skeptical of what we ourselves do. So you were talking about Dirac. Yes, I was talking about
*  Dirac. Right. So Dirac was trying to now combine this Schrodinger's equations, which was described
*  in the context of trying to talk about how these probabilistic waves of electrons move for the
*  atom, which was good for speeds which were not too close to the speed of light, to what happens when
*  you get to the near the speed of light. So then you need relativity. So then Dirac tried to combine
*  Einstein's relativity with quantum mechanics. So he tried to combine them and he wrote this
*  beautiful equation, the Dirac equation, which roughly speaking, take the square root of the
*  Einstein's equation in order to connect it to Schrodinger's time evolution operator, which is
*  first order in time derivative to get rid of the naive thing that Einstein's equation would have
*  given, which is second order. So you have to take a square root. Now square root usually has a plus
*  or minus sign when you take it. And when he did this, he originally didn't notice this,
*  didn't pay attention to this plus or minus sign, but later physicists pointed out to Dirac, says,
*  look, there's also this minus sign. And if you use this minus sign, you get negative energy.
*  In fact, it was very, very annoying that somebody else tells you this obvious mistake you make.
*  Pauli, famous physicist told Dirac, this is nonsense. You're going to get negative energy
*  with your equation, which negative energy without any bottom. You can go all the way down to negative
*  infinite energy. So it doesn't make any sense. Dirac thought about it. And then he remembered
*  Pauli's exclusion principle. Just before him, Pauli had said, you know, there's this principle
*  called the exclusion principle that two electrons cannot be in the same orbit. And so Dirac said,
*  okay, you know what? All these negative energy states are filled orbits, occupied. So according
*  to you, Mr. Pauli, there's no place to go. So therefore they only have to go positive.
*  Sounded like a big cheat. And then Pauli said, oh, you know what? We can change orbits from one
*  orbit to another. What if I take one of these negative energy orbits and put it up there?
*  Then it seems to be a new particle, which has opposite properties to the electron,
*  has positive energy, but it has positive charge. What is that?
*  Dirac was a bit worried. He said, maybe that's proton because proton has plus charge.
*  He wasn't sure, but then he said, well, maybe it's proton. But then they said, no, no, no,
*  it has the same mass as the electron cannot be proton because proton is heavier.
*  Dirac was stuck. He says, well, then maybe another part we haven't seen.
*  By that time, Dirac himself was getting a little bit worried about his own equation and his own
*  crazy interpretation. Until a few years later, Anderson in the photographic place that he had
*  gotten from these cosmic rays, he discovered a particle which goes in the opposite direction
*  that the electron goes when there's a magnetic field and with the same mass, exactly like what
*  Dirac had predicted. And this was what we call now positron. And in fact, beginning with the work of
*  Dirac, we know that every particle has an antiparticle. And so this idea that there's
*  an antiparticle came from the simple math. There's a plus and a minus from the Dirac's
*  quote unquote mistake. So again, trying to combine ideas. Sometimes the math is smarter than the
*  person who uses them to apply it and we try to resist it. And then you kind of confront it by
*  criticism, which is the way it should be. So physicists come and say, no, no, that's wrong.
*  And you correct it and so on. So that is a development of the idea there's particle,
*  there's antiparticle and so on. So this is the beginning of development of quantum mechanics
*  and the connection with relativity. But the thing was more challenging because we had to also
*  describe how electric and magnetic fields work with quantum mechanics. This was much more
*  complicated because it's not just one point. Electric and magnetic fields were everywhere.
*  So you had to talk about fluctuating and a fuzziness of electrical field and magnetic
*  fields everywhere. And the math for that was very difficult to deal with. And this led to a
*  subject called quantum field theory. Fields like electric and magnetic fields had to be quantum,
*  had to be described also in a wavy way. Feynman in particular was one of the pioneers along
*  with Schringers and others to try to come up with a formalism to deal with fields like electric and
*  magnetic fields interacting with electrons in a consistent quantum fashion. And they
*  developed this beautiful theory, quantum electrodynamics from that. And later on that
*  same formalism, quantum field theory led to the discovery of other forces and other particles,
*  all consistent with the idea of quantum mechanics. So that was how physics progressed. And so basically
*  we learned that all particles and all the forces are in some sense related to particle exchanges.
*  And so, for example, electromagnetic forces are mediated by a particle we call photon
*  and so forth. And same for other forces that they discovered, strong forces and the weak forces.
*  So we got the sense of what quantum field theory is. Is that a big leap of an idea that particles
*  are fluctuations in the field? Like the idea that everything is a field? Is the old Einstein,
*  light is a wave, both a particle and a wave kind of idea? Is that a huge leap in our understanding
*  of conceiving the universe's fields? I would say so. I would say that on
*  viewing the particles, this duality that Bohr mentioned between particles and waves,
*  that waves can behave sometimes like particles, sometimes like waves, is one of the biggest
*  leaps of imagination that quantum mechanics made physicists do. So I agree that that is
*  quite remarkable. Is duality fundamental to the universe or is it just because we don't understand
*  it fully? Like will eventually collapse into a clean explanation that doesn't require duality?
*  That a phenomena could be two things at once and both to be true. That seems weird. So in fact,
*  I was going to get to that when we get to string theory, but maybe I can comment on that now.
*  Duality turns out to be running the show today is the whole thing that we are doing in string
*  theory. Duality is the name of the game. So it's the most beautiful subject. I want to talk about.
*  Let's talk about in the context of string theory. So we do want to take a next step into,
*  because we mentioned general relativity, we mentioned quantum mechanics. Is there something
*  to be said about quantum gravity? Yes, that's exactly the right point to talk about. So namely,
*  we have talked about quantum fields and I talked about electric forces,
*  photon being the particle carrying those forces. So for gravity, quantizing gravitational field,
*  which is this curvature of space time, according to Einstein, you get another particle called
*  graviton. So what about gravitons should be there? No problem. So then you start computing it.
*  What do I mean by computing it? Well, you compute scattering of one graviton off another graviton,
*  maybe with graviton with an electron and so on, see what you get. Feynman had already mastered
*  this quantum electrodynamics. He said, no problem, let me do it. Even though these are such weak
*  forces, the gravity is very weak. So therefore to see them, these quantum effects of gravitational
*  waves was impossible. It's even impossible today. So Feynman just did it for fun. He usually had
*  this mindset that I want to do something, which I will see an experiment, but this one, let's just
*  see what it does. And he was surprised because the same techniques he was using for doing
*  the same calculations, quantum electrodynamics, when applied to gravity failed. The formulas
*  seemed to make sense, but he had to do some integrals and he found that when he does those
*  integrals, he got infinity and it didn't make any sense. Now there were similar infinities in the
*  other pieces that, but he had managed to make sense out of those before. This was no way he
*  could make sense out of it. He just didn't know what to do. He didn't feel it's an urgent issue
*  because nobody could do the experiment. So he was kind of said, okay, there's this thing, but okay,
*  we don't know how to exactly do it, but that's the way it is. So in some sense, a natural conclusion
*  from what Feynman did could have been like gravity cannot be consistent with quantum theory,
*  but that cannot be the case because gravity is in our universe, quantum mechanics in our universe,
*  they both together somehow should work. So it's not acceptable to say they don't work together.
*  So that was a puzzle. How does it possibly work? It was left open. And then we get to the string
*  theory. So this is the puzzle of quantum gravity. The particle description of quantum gravity failed.
*  So the infinity shows up. What do we do with infinity? Let's get to the fun part. Let's talk
*  about string theory. Yes. Let's discuss some technical basics of string theory. What is string
*  theory? What is a string? How many dimensions are we talking about? What are the different states?
*  How do we represent the elementary particles and the laws of physics using this new framework?
*  So string theory is the idea that the fundamental entities are not particles,
*  but extended higher dimensional objects like one dimensional strings, like loops. These loops could
*  be open like two ends, like an interval or a circle without any ends. So and they're vibrating
*  and moving around in space. So how big they are? Well, you can of course stretch it and make it big,
*  or you can just let it be whatever it wants. It can be as small as a point because the circle can
*  shrink to a point and be very light, or you can stretch it and it becomes very massive,
*  or it could oscillate and become massive that way. So it depends on which kind of state you have. In
*  fact, the string can have infinitely many modes depending on which kind of oscillation it's doing.
*  Like a guitar has different harmonics, string has different harmonics, but for the string,
*  each harmonic is a particle. So each particle will give you, ah, this is a more massive harmonic.
*  This is a less massive. So the lightest harmonic, so to speak, is no harmonics, which means like
*  the string shrunk to a point, and then it becomes like a massive particles or light particles like
*  photon and graviton and so forth. So when you look at tiny strings, which are shrunk to a point,
*  the lightest ones, they look like the particles that we think they're like particles. In other
*  words, from far away, they look like a point. But of course, if you zoom in, there's this tiny little
*  circle that's there, that's shrunk to almost a point. Should we be imagining, this is to the
*  visual intuition, should we be imagining literally strings that are potentially connected as a loop
*  or not? We knew, and when somebody outside of physics is imagining a basic element of string
*  theory, which is a string, should we literally be thinking about a string? Yes, you should literally
*  think about string, but string with zero thickness. With zero thickness. So notice it's a loop of
*  energy, so to speak, if you can think of it that way. And so there's a tension like the regular
*  string. If you pull it, there's, you know, you have to stretch it, but it's not like a thickness,
*  like you're made of something. It's just energy. It's not made of atoms or something like that,
*  but it is very, very tiny, very much smaller than elementary particles of physics, much smaller.
*  So we think if you let the string to be by itself, the lowest state, there'll be like fuzziness or a
*  size of that tiny little circle, which is like a point about could be anything between, we don't
*  know the exact size, but in different models have different sizes, but something of the order of 10
*  to the minus, let's say 30 centimeters. So 10 to the minus 30 centimeters, just to compare with the
*  size of the atom, which is 10 to the minus eight centimeters is 22 orders of magnitude smaller.
*  So unimaginably small, very small. So we basically think from far away, string is like a point
*  particle. And that's why a lot of the things that we learned about point particle physics carries
*  over directly to strings. So therefore there's not much of a mystery why particle physics was
*  successful because the string is like a particle when it's not stretched. But it turns out having
*  this size being able to oscillate, get bigger, turned out to be resolving these puzzles that
*  Feynman was having in calculating his diagrams and it gets rid of those infinities. So when you're
*  trying to do those infinities, the regions that give infinities to Feynman, as soon as you get to
*  those regions, then this string starts to oscillate and these oscillation structure of the strings
*  resolves those infinities to find answer at the end. So the size of the string, the fact that it's
*  one dimensional gives a finite answer at the end, resolves this paradox. Now, perhaps it's also useful
*  to recount of how string theory came to be because it wasn't like somebody say, well, let me
*  solve the problem of Einstein's, solve the problem that Feynman had with unifying Einstein's theory
*  with quantum mechanics by replacing the point by a string. No, that's not the way the thought
*  process, the thought process was much more random. Physicist, Venetiano in this case, was trying to
*  describe the interactions they were seeing in colliders, in accelerators. And they were seeing
*  that some process, in some process when two particles came together and joined together and
*  when they were separately in one way and the opposite way, they behaved the same way. In some
*  way, there was a symmetry, a duality, which he didn't understand. The particles didn't seem to
*  have that symmetry. He said, I don't know what it is, what's the reason that these colliders and
*  experiments we're doing seems to have the symmetry, but let me write the mathematical formula,
*  which exhibits that symmetry. He used gamma functions, beta functions and all that, you know,
*  complete math, no physics, other than trying to get symmetry out of his equation. He just wrote
*  down a formula as the answer for a process, not a method to compute it. Just say, wouldn't it be
*  nice if this was the answer? Yes. Physicist looked at this one, that's intriguing, it has the symmetry
*  all right, but what is this? Where is this coming from? Which kind of physics gives you this? So I
*  don't know. A few years later, people saw that, oh, the equation that you're writing, the process
*  you're writing in the intermediate channels that particles come together seems to have all the
*  harmonics. Harmonics sounds like a string. Let me see if what you're describing has anything to do
*  with the strings, and people try to see if what he's doing has anything to do with the strings.
*  Oh, yeah, indeed. If I study scattering of two strings, I get exactly the formula you wrote down.
*  That was the reinterpretation of what he had written in the formula as a string,
*  but still had nothing to do with gravity. It had nothing to do with resolving the problems of
*  gravity with quantum mechanics. It was just trying to explain a process that people were
*  seeing in hadronic physics collisions. So it took a few more years to get to that point.
*  They noticed that, physicists noticed that whenever you try to find the spectrum of strings,
*  you always get a massless particle which has exactly properties that the graviton is supposed
*  to have, and no particle in hadronic physics that had that property. You are getting a massless
*  graviton as part of the scattering without looking for it. It was forced on you. People
*  were not trying to solve quantum gravity. Quantum gravity was pushed on them. I don't want this
*  graviton. Get rid of it. They couldn't get rid of it. They gave up trying to get rid of it.
*  Physicists, Sherkin and Schwartz said, you know what? String theory is theory of quantum gravity.
*  They changed the perspective altogether. We are not describing the hadronic physics. We are
*  describing this theory of quantum gravity. That's when string theory probably got
*  exciting that this could be the unifying theory. Exactly. It got exciting, but at the same time,
*  not so fast. Namely, it should have been fast, but it wasn't because particle physics through
*  quantum field theory were so successful at that time. This is mid-70s. Standard model of physics,
*  electromagnetism and unification of electromagnetic forces with all the other forces were beginning
*  to take place without the gravity part. Everything was working beautifully for particle physics.
*  That was the shining golden age of quantum field theory and all the experiments, standard model,
*  this and that, unification, spontaneous symmetry breaking was taking place. All of them was nice.
*  This was kind of like a side show and nobody was paying so much attention.
*  This exotic string is needed for quantum gravity. Maybe there's other ways. Maybe we
*  should do something else. It wasn't paid much attention to. This took a little bit more effort
*  to try to actually connect it to reality. There are a few more steps. First of all,
*  there was a puzzle that you were getting extra dimensions. String was not working well with
*  three spatial dimensions at one time. It needed extra dimension. Now, there are different versions
*  of strings, but the version that ended up being related to having particles like electron,
*  what we call fermions, needed 10 dimensions, what we call super string. Now, why super? Why
*  the word super? It turns out this version of the string, which had fermions, had an extra symmetry,
*  which we call supersymmetry. This is a symmetry between a particle and another particle with
*  exactly the same properties, same mass, same charge, et cetera. The only difference is that
*  one of them has a little different spin than the other one. One of them is a boson. One of them is
*  a fermion because of that shift of spin. Otherwise, they're identical. So there was this symmetry.
*  String theory had this symmetry. In fact, supersymmetry was discovered through string
*  theory, theoretically. Theoretically, the first place that this was observed when you were
*  describing these fermionic strings. That was the beginning of the study of supersymmetry was the
*  via string theory. Then it had remarkable properties that the symmetry meant and so forth,
*  that people began studying supersymmetry after that. That was a tangent direction at the beginning
*  for string theory. But people in particle physics started also thinking, oh, supersymmetry is great.
*  Let's see if we can have supersymmetry in particle physics and so forth. Forget about strings. They
*  developed on a different track as well. Supersymmetry in different models became a subject
*  on its own, right? Understanding supersymmetry and what does this mean? Because it unified bosons
*  and fermions, unified some ideas together. So photon is a boson, electron is a fermion. Could
*  things like that be somehow related? It was a kind of a natural kind of a question to try to kind of
*  unify because in physics, we love unification. Now, gradually string theory was beginning to
*  show signs of unification. It had graviton, but people found that they also have things like
*  photons in them. Different excitations of string behave like photons. Another one behaved like
*  electron. So a single string was unifying all these particles into one object. That's remarkable.
*  It's in 10 dimensions, though. It is not our universe because we live in three plus one
*  dimension. How could that be possibly true? So this was a conundrum. It was elegant. It was
*  beautiful, but it was very specific about which dimension you're getting, which structure you're
*  getting. It wasn't saying, oh, you just put d equals to four, you'll get your space time dimension
*  that you want. No, it didn't like that. It said, I want 10 dimensions, and that's the way it is.
*  So it was very specific. Now, so people try to reconcile this by the idea that, you know,
*  maybe these extra dimensions are tiny. So if you take three macroscopic spatial dimensions on one
*  time and six extra tiny spatial dimensions, like tiny spheres or tiny circles, then it avoids
*  contradiction with manifest fact that we haven't seen extra dimensions in experiments today.
*  So that was a way to avoid conflict. Now, this was a way to avoid conflict, but it was
*  not observed in experiments. String observed in experiments? No, because it's so small.
*  So it's beginning to sound a little bit funny. Similar feeling to the way perhaps Dirac had felt
*  about this positron, plus or minus. It was beginning to sound a little bit like,
*  oh yeah, not only I have to have 10 dimension, but I also have to have this. And so conservative
*  physicists would say, hmm, you know, I haven't seen these experiments. I don't know if they
*  are really there. Are you pulling my leg? Do you want me to imagine things that are not there?
*  So this was an attitude of some physicists towards string theory, despite the fact
*  that the puzzle of gravity and quantum mechanics merging together work, but still was this skepticism.
*  You're putting all these things that you want me to imagine. There are these extra dimensions
*  that I cannot see. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. And you want me to believe that string that you have not even seen
*  experiments are real. Uh-huh. Okay. What else do you want me to believe? So this kind of beginning
*  to sound a little funny. Now I will pass forward a little bit further. A few decades later, when
*  string theory became the mainstream of efforts to unify the forces and particles together,
*  we learned that these extra dimensions actually solved problems. They weren't a nuisance the way
*  they originally appeared. First of all, the properties of these extra dimensions reflected
*  the number of particles we got in four dimensions. If you took these six dimensions to have like six,
*  five holes or four holes, it changed the number of particles that you see in four-dimensional
*  space-time. You get one electron and one muon if you had this, but if you did the other J
*  shape, you get something else. So geometrically, you could get different kinds of physics. So it
*  was kind of a mirroring of geometry by physics down in the macroscopic space. So these extra
*  dimensions were becoming useful. Fine, but we didn't need extra dimensions to just write an
*  electron in three dimensions. We did rewrote it. So what? Was there any other puzzle? Yes, there were.
*  Hawking had been studying black holes in the mid-70s following the work of Bekenstein,
*  who had predicted that black holes have entropy. So Bekenstein had tried to attach entropy to the
*  black hole. If you throw something into the black hole, the entropy seems to go down because you
*  had something entropy outside the black hole and you throw it. Entropy was unique, so the entropy
*  did not have any, black hole had no entropy. So the entropy seemed to go down. And so that's
*  against the laws of thermodynamics. So Bekenstein was trying to say, no, no, therefore black hole
*  must have an entropy. So he was trying to understand that he found that if you assign
*  entropy to be proportional to the area of the black hole, it seems to work. And then Hawking
*  found not only that's correct, he found the correct proportionality factor of a one quarter
*  of the area in Planck units is the correct amount of entropy. And he gave an argument using
*  quantum semi-classical arguments, which means basically using a little bit of quantum mechanics
*  because he didn't have the full quantum mechanics of strength there. He could do some aspects of
*  approximate quantum arguments. So heuristic quantum arguments led to this entropy formula.
*  But then he didn't answer the following question. He was getting a big entropy for the black hole,
*  the black hole with the size of the horizon of a black hole is huge, has a huge amount of entropy.
*  What are the microstates of this entropy? When you say, for example, the gasses entropy,
*  you count where the atoms are, you count this bucket or that bucket, there's an information
*  about there and so on, you count them. For the black hole, the way Hawking was thinking, there
*  was no degree of freedom. You throw them in and there was just one solution. So where are these
*  entropy? What are these microscopic states? They were hidden somewhere. So later in string theory,
*  the work that we did with my colleague, Strominger, in particular, showed that these ingredients in
*  string theory of black hole arise from the extra dimensions. So the degrees of freedom are hidden
*  in terms of things like strings wrapping these extra circles in these hidden dimensions. And then
*  we started counting how many ways like the strings can wrap around this circle and the extra dimension
*  or that circle and counted the microscopic degrees of freedom. And lo and behold, we got
*  the microscopic degrees of freedom that Hawking was predicting four dimensions. So the extra
*  dimensions became useful for resolving a puzzle in four dimensions. The puzzle was, where are the
*  degrees of freedom of the black hole hidden? The answer, hidden in the extra dimensions,
*  the tiny extra dimensions. So then by this time, it was beginning to see, we see aspects that
*  extra dimensions are useful for many things. It's not a nuisance. It wasn't to be kind of,
*  you know, be ashamed of. It was actually in the welcome features, new feature, nevertheless.
*  How do you intuit the 10 dimensional world? So yes, it's a feature for describing certain phenomena
*  like the entropy in black holes. But what you said that to you, a theory becomes
*  real or becomes powerful when you can connect it to some deep intuition. So how do we intuit
*  10 dimensions? Yes. So I will explain how some of the analogies work. First of all,
*  we do a lot of analogies and by analogies, we build intuition. So I will start with this example.
*  I will try to explain that if we are in 10 dimensional space, if we have a seven dimensional
*  plane and eight dimensional plane, we ask typically in what space do they intersect each other and
*  what dimension? That might sound like, how do you possibly give an answer to this? So we start with
*  lower dimensions. We start with two dimensions. We say if you have one dimension and a point,
*  do they intersect typically on a plane? The answer is no. So a line one dimensional, a point zero
*  dimension on a two dimensional plane, they don't typically meet. But if you have a one dimensional
*  line and another line, which is one plus one on a plane, they typically intersect at a point.
*  Typically means if you are not parallel, typically they intersect at a point.
*  So one plus one is two and in two dimension, they intersect at a zero dimensional point. So you see
*  two dimension one and one two, two minus two is zero. So you get point out of intersection. Okay.
*  Let's go to three dimension. You have a plane, two dimensional plane and a point. Do they intersect?
*  No, two and zero. How about the plane and a line? A plane is two dimensional and a line is one,
*  two plus one is three. In three dimension, a plane and a line meet at points, which is zero
*  dimensional. Three minus three is zero. Okay. So plane and a line intersect at a point in three
*  dimension. How about the plane and a plane in 3D? A plane is two and this is two, two plus two is four.
*  In 3D, four minus three is one, they intersect on a one dimensional line. Okay. We're beginning to
*  see the pattern. Okay. Now come to the question. We're in 10 dimension. Now we have the intuition.
*  We have a seven dimensional plane and eight dimensional plane in 10 dimension.
*  They intersect on a plane. What's the dimension? What's seven plus eight is 15 minus 10 is five.
*  We draw the same picture as two planes and we write seven dimension, eight dimension,
*  but we have gotten the intuition from the lower dimensional one. What to expect.
*  It doesn't scare us anymore. So we draw this picture. We cannot see all the seven dimensions
*  by looking at this two dimensional visualization of it, but it has all the features we want.
*  We draw this picture, which is seven, seven and they meet at a five dimensional plane.
*  It says five. So we have built this intuition. Now, this is an example of how we come up with
*  intuition. Let me give you more examples of it because I think this will show you that
*  people have to come up with intuitions to visualize it. Otherwise we will be a little bit lost.
*  So what you just described is kind of in these high dimensional spaces, focus on the meeting
*  place of two planes in high dimensional spaces. Exactly. How the planes meet, for example,
*  what's the dimension of their intersection and so on. So how do we come up with intuition? We
*  borrow examples from lower dimensions, build up intuition and draw the same pictures as if we are
*  talking about 10 dimensions, but we are drawing the same as a two dimensional plane because we
*  cannot do any better. But our words change, but not our pictures. So your sense is we can have
*  a deep understanding of reality by looking at its slices, at lower dimensional slices. Exactly.
*  This brings me to the next example I want to mention, which is sphere. Let's think about how
*  do we think about the sphere? Well, the sphere is a sphere, the round nice thing, but sphere has a
*  circular symmetry. Now I can describe the sphere in the following way. I can describe it by an
*  interval, which is think about this going from the north of the sphere to the south, and at each point
*  I have a circle attached to it. So you can think about the sphere as a line with a circle attached
*  with each point, the circle shrinks to a point at end points of the interval. So I can say, oh,
*  one way to think about the sphere is an interval where at each point on that interval there's
*  another circle I'm not drawing, but if you like you can just draw it. Say, okay, I want to draw it.
*  So from now on, there's this mnemonic. I draw an interval when I want to talk about the sphere,
*  and you remember that the end points of the interval mean a strong circle. That's all. And
*  you say, yeah, I see, that's a sphere. Good. Now we want to talk about the product of two spheres.
*  That's four dimensional. How can I visualize it? Easy. You just take an interval and another
*  interval. That's just going to be a square. A square is a four dimensional space. Yeah, why is
*  that? Well, at each point on the square, there's two circles, one for each of those directions you
*  drew. And when you get to the boundaries of each direction, one of the circles shrank on each edge
*  of that square. And when you get to the corners of the square, all both circles shrink. This
*  is a sphere times a sphere. I have defined an interval. I just described for you a four
*  dimensional space. Do you want a six dimensional space? No problem. Take a corner of a room.
*  In fact, if you want to have a sphere times a sphere, take a cube. A cube is a rendition
*  of this six dimensional space. A sphere times another sphere times another sphere, where three
*  of the circles I'm not drawing for you. For each one of those directions, there's another circle.
*  Each time you get to the boundary of the cube, one circle shrinks. When the boundaries meet,
*  two circles shrinks. When three boundaries meet, all the three circles shrink. So I just give you
*  a picture. Now, mathematicians come up with amazing things like, you know what, I want to take a point
*  in space and blow it up. These concepts like topology and geometry are complicated. How do you
*  do? In this picture, it's very easy. Blow it up in this picture means the following. You think about
*  this cube, you go to the corner and you chop off a corner. Chopping off the corner replaces a point.
*  It replaces a point by a triangle. That's called blowing up a point. And then this triangle is what
*  they call P2, projective two space. But these pictures are very physical and you feel it.
*  There's nothing amazing. I'm not talking about six dimension. Four plus six is 10, the dimension of
*  string theory. So we can visualize it. No problem. Okay. So that's building the intuition to a
*  complicated world of string theory. Nevertheless, these objects are really small. And just like you
*  said, experimental validation is very difficult because the objects are way smaller than anything
*  that we currently have the tools and accelerators and so on to, um, to reveal through experiment.
*  So there's a kind of skepticism that's not just about the nature of the theory because of the
*  10 dimensions as you've explained, but in that we can't experimentally validate it.
*  And it doesn't necessarily to date, maybe you can correct me, predict something fundamentally new.
*  So it's, it's beautiful as an explaining theory, which means that it's very possible that it is a
*  fundamental theory that describes reality and unifies the laws, but there's still a kind of
*  skepticism and, um, me from a sort of an outside observer perspective have been observing a little
*  bit of a growing cynicism about string theory in the, in the recent few years. Can you describe
*  the cynicism about sort of by cynicism, I mean a cynicism about the hope for this theory of pushing
*  theoretical physics forward? Yes. Uh, can you do describe why the cynicism and how do we reverse
*  that trend? Yes. First of all, the criticism, uh, for string theory, uh, is healthy in some,
*  in a sense that in science we, we have to have different viewpoints and that's good. So I don't,
*  I welcome criticism. Uh, and the, the, the reason for criticism, and I think that is a valid reason
*  is that there has been zero experimental evidence for string theory. That is no experiment has been
*  done to show that there's, you know, there's this loop of energy moving around. And so that's a
*  valid, valid, uh, objection and valid worry. And if I were to say, you know what, string theory can
*  never be verified or experimentally checked, that's the way it is. They would have every right to say
*  what you're talking about is not science because in science we will have to have experimental
*  consequences and checks. The difference between string theory and something which is not scientific
*  is that string theory has predictions. The problem is that the predictions we have today of string
*  theory is hard to access by experiments available with the energies we can achieve with the colliders
*  today. It doesn't mean there's a problem with string theory. It just means technologically we're
*  not that far ahead. Now we can have two attitudes. You say, well, if that's the case, why are you
*  studying this subject because you can't do experiment today? Now this is becoming a little
*  bit more like mathematics in that sense. You say, well, I want to learn. I want to know how the
*  nature works, even though I cannot prove it today that this is it because of experiments.
*  That should not prevent my mind not to think about it. So that's the attitude many string
*  theories follow that, that, that should be like this now. So that's it. That's the answer to the
*  criticism, but there's actually a better answer to the criticism. I would say we don't have
*  experimental evidence for string theory, but we have theoretical evidence for string theory.
*  And what do I mean by theoretical evidence for string theory? String theory has connected
*  different parts of physics together. It didn't have to. It has brought connections between part
*  of physics. Although suppose you're just interested in particle physics. Suppose you're not even
*  interested in gravity at all. It turns out there are properties of certain particle physics models
*  that string theory has been able to solve using gravity, using ideas from string theory, ideas
*  known as holography, which is relating something which has to do with particles to something having
*  to do with gravity. Why did it have to be this rich? The subject is very rich. It's not something we
*  were smart enough to develop. It came at us. As I explained to you, the development of string theory
*  came from accidental discovery. It wasn't because we were smart enough to come up with ideas. Oh,
*  yes, string of course has gravity in it. No, it was accidental discovery. So some people say
*  it's not fair to say we have no evidence for string theory. Graviton, gravity is evidence for
*  string theory. It's predicted by string theory. We didn't put it by hand. We got it. So there's a
*  qualitative check. Okay, gravity is a prediction of string theory. It's a post-diction because we
*  know gravity existed. But still, logically, it is a prediction because really we didn't know it had
*  gravity. We later learned that, oh, that's the same as gravity. So literally that's the way it was
*  discovered. It wasn't put in by hand. So there are many things like that. There are different facets
*  of physics, like questions in condensed matter physics, questions of particle physics, questions
*  about this and that have come together to find beautiful answers by using ideas from string
*  theory at the same time as a lot of new math has emerged. That's an aspect which I wouldn't
*  emphasize as evidence to physicists necessarily because they would say, okay, great, you got some
*  math, but what does it do with reality? But as I explained, many of the physical principles we know
*  of have beautiful math underpinning them. So it certainly leaves further confidence that we may
*  not be going astray, even though that's not the foolproof as we know. So there are these aspects
*  that give further evidence for string theory, connections between each other, connection with
*  the real world, but then there are other things that come about and I can try to give examples
*  of that. So these are further evidences and these are certain predictions of string theory.
*  They are not as detailed as we want, but there are still predictions.
*  Why is the dimension of space and time three plus one? Say, I don't know, just deal with it,
*  three plus one, but in physics we want to know why. Well, take a random dimension from one to
*  infinity. What's your random dimension? A random dimension from one to infinity would not be four.
*  Eight would most likely be a humongous number if not infinity. I mean, if you choose any
*  reasonable distribution which goes from one to infinity, three or four would not be your pick.
*  The fact that we are in three or four dimension is already strange.
*  The fact that strings are sorry, I cannot go beyond 10 or maybe 11 or something. The fact
*  that there's this upper bound, the range is not from one to infinity, it's from one to 10 or 11 or
*  whatnot. It already brings a natural prior, oh yeah, three or four is just on the average. If
*  you pick some of the compactifications, then it could easily be that. So in other words,
*  it makes it much more possible that it could be three of our universe. So the fact that the
*  dimension already is so small should be surprising. We don't ask that question. We should be
*  surprised because we could have conceived of universes with our pre-dimension. Why is it that
*  we have such a small dimension? That's number one. So a good theory of the universe should give you
*  an intuition of the why it's four or three plus one, and it's not obvious that it should be. That
*  should be explained. We take that as an assumption, but that's a thing that should be explained.
*  Yeah, so we haven't explained that in string theory. Actually, I did write a model within string
*  theory to try to describe why we end up with three plus one space-time dimensions, which are big
*  compared to the rest of them. And even though this has not been, the technical difficulties to prove
*  it is still not there, but I will explain the idea because the idea connects to some other piece of
*  elegant math, which is the following. Consider a universe made of a box, a three-dimensional box,
*  or in fact, if we start in string theory, nine-dimensional box because we have nine
*  spatial dimensions at one time. So imagine a nine-dimensional box. So we should imagine the box
*  of the typical size of the string, which is small. So the universe would naturally start with a very
*  tiny nine-dimensional box. What do strings do? Well, strings go around the box and move around
*  and vibrate and all that, but also they can wrap around one side of the box to the other because
*  I'm imagining a box with periodic boundary conditions, so what we call the torus.
*  So the string can go from one side to the other. This is what we call the winding string. The string
*  can wind around the box. Now, suppose you now evolve the universe. Because there's energy,
*  the universe starts to expand, but it doesn't expand too far. Why is it? Well, because there
*  are these strings which are wrapped around from one side of the wall to the other. When the
*  walls of the universe are growing, it is stretching the string and the strings are becoming very,
*  very massive. So it becomes difficult to expand. It kind of puts a halt on it.
*  In order to not put a halt, a string which is going this way and a string which is going that
*  way should intersect each other and disconnect each other and unwind. So a string which winds
*  this way and a string which finds the opposite way should find each other to reconnect and this
*  way disappear. So if they find each other and they disappear, but how can strings find each other?
*  Well, the string moves and another string moves. A string is one-dimensional, one plus one is two,
*  and one plus one is two, and two plus two is four. In four-dimensional space time,
*  they will find each other. In a higher dimensional space time, they typically miss each other.
*  Oh, interesting. So if the dimension were too big, they would miss each other. They wouldn't be able
*  to expand. So in order to expand, they have to find each other and three of them can find
*  each other and those can expand and the other one will be stuck. So that explains why within
*  string theory, these particular dimensions are really big and full of exciting stuff.
*  That could be an explanation. That's the model we suggested with Michael Brandenberger. But it
*  turns out to be related to a deep piece of math. You see, for mathematicians, manifolds of dimension
*  bigger than four are simple. Four dimension is the hardest dimension for math, it turns out.
*  And it turns out the reason it's difficult is the following. It turns out that in higher dimension,
*  you use what's called surgery in mathematical terminology, where you use these two-dimensional
*  tubes to maneuver them off of each other. So you have two plus two becoming four. In higher than
*  four dimension, you can pass them through each other without them intersecting. In four dimension,
*  two plus two doesn't allow you to pass them through each other. So the same techniques that work in
*  higher dimension don't work in four dimension because two plus two is four. The same reasoning
*  I was just telling you about strings finding each other in four ends up to be the reason why four is
*  much more complicated to classify for mathematicians as well. So there might be these things. So I
*  cannot say that this is the reason that string theory is giving you three plus one, but it could
*  be a model for it. And so there are these kinds of ideas that could underlie why we have three extra
*  dimensions, which are large and the rest of them are small. But absolutely, we have to have a good
*  reason. We cannot leave it like that. Can I ask a tricky human question?
*  So you are one of the seminal figures in string theory. You got the breakthrough prize. You've
*  worked with Edward Witten. There is no Nobel prize that has been given on string theory.
*  You know, credit assignment is tricky in science. It makes you quite sad, especially big like LIGO,
*  big experimental projects when so many incredible people have been involved.
*  And yet the Nobel prize is annoying in that it's only given to three people. Who do you think gets
*  the Nobel prize for string theory at first? If it turns out that it, if not in full, then in part
*  is a good model of the way the physics of the universe works. Who are the key figures? Maybe
*  let's put Nobel prize aside for the key figures. I like the second version of the question. I think
*  to try to give a prize to one person in string theory doesn't do justice to the diversity of
*  the subject. That to me is so there was quite a lot of incredible people there in the history.
*  Quite a lot of people. I mean, starting with Ferencino, who wasn't talking about strings.
*  I mean, he wrote down the beginning of the strings. We cannot ignore that for sure. And so
*  you start with that and you go on with various other figures and so on. So there are different
*  epochs in string theory and different people have been pushing it. So for example, the early epoch,
*  we just told you people like Veniziano and Nambu and the Susskind and others were pushing it green
*  and shorts were pushing it and so forth. So this was or Sherk and so on. So these were the initial
*  periods of pioneers, I would say of string theory. And then there were the mid-80s that Edward Witten
*  was the major proponent of string theory and he really changed the landscape of string theory in
*  terms of what people do and how we view it. And I think his efforts brought a lot of attention to
*  the community about high energy community to focus on this effort as the correct theory of
*  unification of forces. So he brought a lot of research as well as of course the first rate work
*  he himself did to this area. So that's in mid-80s and onwards and also in mid-90s where he was one
*  of the proponents of the duality revolution in string theory. And with that came a lot of these
*  other ideas that led to breakthroughs involving, for example, the example I told you about black
*  holes and holography and the work that was later done by Maldacena about the properties of duality
*  between particle physics and quantum gravity and the deeper connections of holography and it
*  continues. And there are many people within this range which I haven't even mentioned. They have
*  done fantastic important things. How it gets recognized I think is secondary in my opinion
*  than the appreciation that the effort is collective. That in fact that to me is the more important
*  part of science that gets forgotten. For some reason humanity likes heroes and science is no
*  exception. We like heroes but I personally try to avoid that trap. I feel in my work, most of my work
*  is with colleagues. I have much more collaborations than solo author papers and I enjoy it and I think
*  that that's to me one of the most satisfying aspects of science is to interact and learn and
*  debate ideas with colleagues because that influx of ideas enriches it. And that's why I find it
*  interesting. To me science, if I was on an island and if I was developing string theory by myself and
*  had nothing to do with anybody it would be much less satisfying in my opinion. Even if I could
*  take credit I did it, it won't be as satisfying. Sitting alone with a big metal drinking champagne.
*  No. I think to me the collective work is more exciting and you mentioned my getting the
*  breakthrough. When I was getting it I made sure to mention that it is because of the joint work
*  that I've done with colleagues. At that time it was around 180 or so collaborators and I
*  acknowledged them in the web page for them. I wrote all of their names and the collaborations
*  that led to this. So to me science is fun when it's collaboration and yes there are more important
*  and less important figures as in any field and that's true. That's true in string theory as well
*  but I think that I would like to view this as a collective effort. So setting the heroes aside,
*  the Nobel Prize is a celebration of, what's the right way to put it, that this idea turned out
*  to be right. So like you look at Einstein didn't believe in black holes and then black holes
*  got their Nobel Prize. Do you think string theory will get its Nobel Prize, Nobel Prizes?
*  If you were to bet money, if this was like, if this was an investment meeting and we had to bet all
*  our money, do you think he gets the Nobel Prizes? I think it's possible that none of the living
*  physicists will get the Nobel Prize in string theory but somebody will because unfortunately
*  the technology available today is not very encouraging in terms of seeing directly evidence
*  for string theory. Do you think it ultimately boils down to the Nobel Prize will be given when
*  there is some direct or indirect evidence? There would be but I think that part of this breakthrough
*  prize was precisely the appreciation that when we have sufficient evidence, theoretical as it is,
*  not experiment, because of this technology lag you appreciate what you think is the correct path.
*  So there are many people who have been recognized precisely because they may not be around when it
*  actually gets experimented even though they discovered it. So there are many things like
*  that that's going on in science. So I think that I would want to attach less significance
*  to the recognitions of people and I have a second review on this which is there are people who
*  look at these works that people have done and put them together and make the next big breakthrough
*  and they get identified with, perhaps rightly with many of these new visions.
*  But they are on the shoulders of these little scientists which don't get any recognition,
*  yeah you did this little work, oh yeah you did this little work, oh yeah five of you, oh yeah,
*  this short this pattern and then somebody else, it's not fair. To me those little guys which kind
*  of like seem to do a little calculation here, a little thing there which doesn't rise to the
*  occasion of this grandiose kind of thing, doesn't make it to the New York Times headlines and so on,
*  deserve a lot of recognition and I think they don't get enough. I would say that there should
*  be this Nobel Prize for, you know they have these doctors without borders, they should be similar
*  thing and the string players without borders, kind of everybody is doing a lot of work and I think
*  that I would like to see that effort recognized. I think in the long arc of history we're all
*  little guys and girls standing on the shoulders of each other. I mean it's all going to look tiny in
*  retrospect if we celebrate the New York Times as a newspaper or the idea of a newspaper in a few
*  centuries from now will be long forgotten. Yes I agree with that, especially in the context of
*  strength theory we should have a very long term view. Yes exactly, just as a tiny tangent we
*  mentioned Edward Witten and he in a bunch of walks of life for me as an outsider comes up as a person
*  who is widely considered as like one of the most brilliant people in the history of physics,
*  just as a powerhouse of a human, like the exceptional places that a human mind can rise to.
*  Yes. You've gotten a chance to work with him, what's he like? Yes more than that, he was my advisor,
*  PhD advisor, so I got to know him very well and I benefited from his insights. In fact
*  what you said about him is accurate, he's not only brilliant but he's also multifaceted in terms of
*  the impact he has had in not only physics but also mathematics. He's gotten the Fields Medal
*  because of his work in mathematics and rightly so, he has used his knowledge of physics in a way
*  which impacted deep ideas in modern mathematics and that's an example of the power of these ideas
*  in modern high energy physics and string theory, the applicability of it to modern mathematics.
*  So he's quite an exceptional individual, we don't come across such people a lot in history,
*  so I think yes indeed he's one of the rare figures in this history of the subject. He has had great
*  impact on a lot of aspects of not just string theory, a lot of different areas in physics
*  and also yes in mathematics as well. So I think what you said about him is accurate,
*  I had the pleasure of interacting with him as a student and later on as colleagues writing
*  papers together and so on. What impact did he have on your life, like what have you learned from him?
*  If you were to look at the trajectory of your mind of the way you approach science and physics
*  and mathematics, how did he perturb that trajectory? Yes he did actually, so I can explain
*  because when I was a student I had the biggest impact by him clearly as a grad student at
*  Princeton. So I think that was a time where I was a little bit confused about the relation
*  between math and physics. I got a double major in mathematics and physics at MIT
*  and because I really enjoyed both and I liked the elegance and the rigor of mathematics
*  and I liked the power of ideas in physics and its applicability to reality and what it teaches about
*  the real world around us. But I saw this tension between rigorous thinking in mathematics
*  and lack thereof in physics and this troubled me to no end. I was troubled by that. So I was
*  at crossroads when I decided to go to graduate school in physics because I did not like some of
*  the lack of rigors I was seeing in physics. On the other hand to me mathematics even though it was
*  rigorous and things it sometimes were I didn't see the point of it. In other words when I see
*  when I you know the math theorem by itself could be beautiful but I really wanted more than that.
*  I want to say okay what does it teach us about something else something more than just math.
*  So I wasn't that enamored with just math but physics was a little bit
*  bothersome. Nevertheless I decided to go to physics and I decided to go to Princeton
*  and I started working with Edward Witten as my thesis advisor and at that time I was trying to
*  put physics in rigorous mathematical terms. I took quantum field theory. I tried to make
*  rigorous out of it and so on and no matter how hard I was trying I was not being able to do that
*  and I was falling behind from my classes. I was not learning much physics and I was not making
*  it rigorous and to me it was this dichotomy between math and physics. What am I doing? I like math but
*  this is not exactly this. There comes Edward Witten as my advisor and I see him in action
*  thinking about math and physics. He was amazing in math. He knew all about the math. It was no
*  problem with him but he thought about physics in a way which did not find this tension between the
*  two. It was much more harmonious for him. He would draw the Feynman diagrams but he wouldn't view it
*  as a formalism. He was viewed oh yeah the particle goes over there and this is what's going on and
*  so wait you're thinking really as this particle this is really electron going there. Oh yeah yeah
*  it's not taking them literally perturbation. No no no you just feel like the electron you're moving
*  with this guy and do that and so on and you're thinking invariantly about physics or the way he
*  thought about relativity like you know I was thinking about you know this momentum system. He
*  was thinking invariantly about physics just like the way you think about invariant concepts in
*  relativity which don't depend on the frame of reference. He was thinking about the physics
*  in invariant ways that the way that doesn't that gives you a bigger perspective. So this gradually
*  helped me appreciate that interconnections between ideas and physics replaces mathematical
*  rigor that the different facets reinforce each other. We say oh I cannot rigorously define what
*  I mean by this but this thing connects with this other physics I've seen and this other thing
*  and they together form an elegant story and that replaced for me what I believed as a solidness
*  which I found in math as a rigor you know solid I found that replaced the rigor and solidness in
*  physics so I found okay that's the way you can hang on to it is not wishy-washy it's not like
*  somebody is just not being able to prove it just making up a story it was more than that and it
*  was no tension with mathematics. In fact mathematics was helping it like friends and so much more
*  harmonious and gives insights to physics so that's I think one of the main things I learned from
*  interactions with Witten and I think that now perhaps I have taken that to a far extreme maybe
*  he wouldn't go this far as I have namely I use physics to define new mathematics in a way which
*  would be far less rigorous than a physicist might necessarily believe because I take the physical
*  intuition perhaps literally in many ways that could teach us a lot so now I've gained so much
*  confidence in physical intuition that I make bold statements that sometimes you know takes math
*  math friends off guard so for an example of it is mirror symmetry so we were studying these
*  compact fiational string geometry this is after my PhD now I've by the time I've come to Harvard
*  we're studying these aspects of string compactification on these complicated
*  manifolds six dimensional spaces called Calabi-Yau manifolds very complicated and I noticed with a
*  couple other colleagues that there was a symmetry in physics suggested between different Calabi-Yau's
*  suggested that you couldn't actually compute the Euler characteristic of a Calabi-Yau. Euler
*  characteristic is counting the number of points minus the number of edges plus the number of faces
*  minus so you can count the alternating sequence of properties of the space which is the topological
*  property of a space so Euler characteristic of the Calabi-Yau was a property of the space and so
*  we noticed that from the physics formalism if string moves in a Calabi-Yau you cannot distinguish
*  we cannot compute the Euler characteristic you can only compute the absolute value of it
*  now this bothered us because how could it you not compute the actual sign
*  unless the both sides were the same so I conjectured maybe for every Calabi-Yau with
*  the Euler characteristic positive there's one with negative I told this to my colleague Yao
*  who was whose whose namesake is Calabi-Yau that I'm making this conjecture is it possible that for
*  every Calabi-Yau there's one with the opposite Euler characteristic sounds not reasonable I said
*  why I said well we know more Calabi-Yau's with negative Euler characteristics than positive
*  I said but physics says we cannot distinguish them at least I don't see how so we conjectured
*  that for every Calabi-Yau with one sign there's the other one despite the mathematical evidence
*  despite the mathematical evidence despite the expert telling us is not the right idea
*  if a few years later this symmetry mirror symmetry between the sign with the opposite sign was later
*  confirmed by mathematicians so this is actually the opposite view that is physics is so sure about it
*  that you're going against the mathematical wisdom telling them they better look for it
*  so taking the the the the physical intuition literally and then having that drive the the
*  mathematics exactly and by now we are so confident about many such examples that has affected modern
*  mathematics in ways like this that we are much more confident about our understanding of what
*  string theories these are another aspects other aspects of why we feel string theory is correct
*  is doing these kind of things I've been hearing you talk quite a bit about string theory landscape
*  and the swampland what the heck are those two concepts okay very good question so let's go back
*  to what I was describing about Feynman yes Feynman was trying to do these diagrams for graviton
*  and electrons and all that he found that he's getting infinities he cannot resolve
*  okay the natural conclusion is that field theories and gravity and quantum theory don't go together
*  and he cannot have it so in other words field theories and gravity are inconsistent with quantum
*  mechanics period string theory came up with examples but didn't address the question more
*  broadly that is it true that every field theory can be coupled to gravity in a quantum mechanical
*  way it turns out that Feynman was essentially right all almost all particle physics theories
*  no matter what you add to it when you put gravity in it doesn't work only rare exceptions work
*  so string theory are those rare exceptions so therefore the general principle that Feynman
*  found was correct quantum field theory and gravity and quantum mechanics don't go together
*  except for jewels exceptional cases there are exceptional cases okay the total vastness of
*  quantum field theories that are there we call the set of quantum field theories possible things
*  which ones can be consistently coupled to gravity we call that subspace the landscape
*  the rest of them we call the swampland it doesn't mean they are bad quantum field
*  theories they're perfectly fine but when you couple them to gravity they don't make sense
*  unfortunately and it turns out that the ratio of them the number of theories which are consistent
*  with gravity to the ones which without the ratio of the area of the landscape to the swampland in
*  other words is measure zero and so the swampland is infinitely large the swampland is infinitely
*  large so let me give you one example take a theory in four dimension with matter with maximum
*  amount of supersymmetry can you get it turns out a theory with four dimension with maximum amount
*  of supersymmetry is characterized just with one thing a group what we call the gauge group once
*  you pick a group you have to find the theory okay so does every group make sense yeah as far as
*  quantum field theory every group makes sense there are infinitely many groups there are
*  infinitely many quantum field theories but it turns out there are only finite number of them
*  which are consistent with gravity out of that same list so you can take any group but only
*  finite number of them the ones who's what we call the rank of the group the ones whose rank
*  is less than 23 anyone bigger than rank 23 belongs to the swampland there are infinitely many of them
*  they're beautiful field theories but not when you include gravity so so then this becomes a
*  hopeful thing so in other words in our universe we have gravity therefore we are part of that dual
*  subset now is this jewel subset small or large yeah it turns out that subset is humongous
*  but we believe still finite the set of possibilities is infinite but the set of
*  consistent ones i mean the set of quantum features are infinite but the consistent ones are finite
*  but humongous the fact that they're humongous is the problem we are facing in string theory
*  because we do not know which one of these possibilities the universe we live in if we
*  knew we could make more specific predictions about our universe we don't know and that is one of the
*  challenges with string theory which point on the landscape which corner of this landscape do we live
*  in we don't know so what do we do well there are there are principles that are beginning to emerge
*  so i will give you one example of it you look at the patterns of what you're getting in terms of
*  these good ones the ones which are in the landscape compared to the ones which are not
*  you find certain patterns i'll give you one pattern you find in the all the ones that you
*  get from string theory gravitational force is always there but it's always always the weakest force
*  however you could easily imagine field theories for which gravity is not the weakest force for
*  example take our universe if you take a mass of the electron if you increase the mass of
*  electron by a huge factor the gravitational attraction of the electrons will be bigger
*  than the electric repulsion between two electrons and the gravity will be stronger that's all
*  if it happens that it's not the case in our universe because electron is very tiny in mass
*  compared to that just like our universe gravity is the weakest force we find in all these other
*  ones which are part of the good ones the gravity is the weakest force this is called the weak
*  gravity conjecture we conjecture that all the points in the landscape have this property
*  our universe being just an example of it so there are these qualitative features that we are beginning
*  to see but how do we argue for this just by looking patterns just by looking strictly as this no
*  that's not enough we need more more reason more better reasoning and it turns out there is
*  the reasoning for this turns out to be studying black holes ideas of black holes turn out to put
*  certain restrictions of what a good quantum field theory should be it turns out using black hole
*  the fact that the black holes evaporate the fact that the black holes evaporate gives you a way
*  to to check the relation between the mass and the charge of elementary particle because what you can
*  do you can take a charged particle and throw it into a charged black hole and wait it to evaporate
*  and by the looking at the properties of evaporation you find that if it cannot evaporate particles
*  whose mass is less than their charge then it will never evaporate you will be stuck and so the
*  possibility of a black hole evaporation forces you to have particles whose mass is sufficiently small
*  so that the gravity is weaker so you connect this fact to the other fact so we begin to find
*  different facts that reinforce each other so different parts of the physics reinforce each
*  other and once they all kind of come together you believe that you're getting the principle
*  correct so weak gravity conjecture is one of the principles we believe in as a necessity of these
*  conditions so these are the predictions string three are making is that enough well it's qualitative
*  it's a semi-quantity it's just the mass of the electron should be less than some number
*  but that number is if i call that number one the mass of the electron turns out to be 10 to the
*  minus 20 actually so it's much less than one it's not one but on the other hand there's a similar
*  reasoning for a big black hole in our universe and if that evaporation should take place gives you
*  another restriction tells you the mass of the electron is bigger than 10 to the is now in this
*  case bigger than something it shows bigger than 10 to the minus 30 in the flank unit so you find
*  aha the mass of the electron should be less than one but bigger than 10 to the minus 30 in our
*  universe the mass of the electrons tends to minus 20 okay now this kind of you could call post
*  fiction but i would say it follows from principles that we now understand from string theory first
*  principle so we are making beginning to make these kinds of predictions which are very much
*  connected to aspects of particle physics that we didn't think are related to gravity we thought
*  just take any electron mass you want what's the problem it has a problem with gravity and so that
*  conjecture has also a happy consequence that it explains that our universe like why the heck is
*  gravity so weak as a force and that's not only an accident but almost a necessity if these forces
*  are to coexist effectively exactly so that's that's that's the reinforcement of of of what we know in
*  our universe but we are finding that as a general principle so we want to know what aspects of our
*  universe universe is forced on us like the weak gravity conjecture and other aspects do we how
*  much of them do we understand can we have particles lighter than neutrinos or maybe that's
*  not possible you see the neutrino mass it turns out to be related to dark energy in a mysterious
*  way naively there's no relation between dark energy and the mass of a particle we have found
*  arguments from within the swampland kind of ideas why it has to be related and so so they're beginning
*  to be these connections between grab consistency of quantum gravity and aspects of our universe
*  gradually being sharpened but we are still far from a precise quantitative prediction like we
*  have to have such and such but that's the hope that we are going in that direction coming up with
*  the theory of everything that unifies general relativity and quantum field theories is one of
*  the big dreams of human civilization us descendants of apes wondering about how this world works
*  so a lot of people dream what are your thoughts about sort of other out there ideas
*  on theories of everything or unifying theories so there's a quantum loop gravity
*  there's also more sort of like a friend of mine eric weinstein beginning to propose something
*  called geometric unity so these kinds of attempts whether it's through mathematical physics or
*  through other avenues or with steven wolfram a more computational view of the universe again
*  in his case it's these hypo graphs that are very tiny objects as well similarly a string theory
*  in trying to grapple with this world what do you think is there any of these theories that
*  are compelling to you they're interesting that may turn out to be true or at least may turn out to
*  contain ideas that are useful yes i think the latter i would say that the containing ideas
*  that are true is my opinion was what these some of these ideas might be for example loop quantum
*  gravity is to me not a complete theory of gravity in any sense but they have some nuggets of truth
*  in them and typically what i expect happen i have seen examples of this within string theory
*  aspects which we didn't think are part of string theory come to be part of it for example i give
*  you one example string was believed to be 10 dimensional and then there was this 11 dimensional
*  supergravity and nobody know what the heck is that why are we getting 11 dimensional super gravity
*  whereas string is saying it should be 10 dimensional 11 was the maximum dimension you can have a super
*  gravity but string was saying sorry we are we're 10 dimensional so for a while we thought that
*  theory is wrong because how could it be because string theory is definitely of everything we later
*  learned that one of the circles of string theory itself was tiny that we had not appreciated that
*  fact and we discovered by doing thought experiments in string theory that there's got to be an extra
*  circle and that circle is connected to an 11 dimensional perspective and that's what later on
*  got called m theory so so so there are these kind of things that you know we do not know what exactly
*  string theory is we're still learning so we do not have a final formulation of string theory
*  it's very well could be that different facets of different ideas come together like loop quantum
*  gravity or whatnot but i wouldn't put them on par namely loop quantum gravity is a scatter of ideas
*  about what happens to space when they get very tiny for example you replace things by discrete
*  data and try to quantize it and so on and you know it sounds like a natural idea to quantize space
*  you know if you were naively trying to do quantum space you might think about trying to take points
*  and put them together in some discrete fashion in some way that is reminiscent of loop quantum gravity
*  string theory is more subtle than that for example i would just give you an example and this is the
*  kind of thing that we didn't put in by hand we got it out and so it's more subtle than so what
*  happens if you squeeze the space to be smaller and smaller well you think that after a certain
*  distance the notion of distance should break down you know when it goes smaller than plank scale
*  should break down what happens in string theory we do not know the full answer to that but we know
*  the following namely if you take a space and bring it smaller and smaller if the box gets smaller
*  than the plank scale by a factor of 10 it is equivalent by the duality transformation to a
*  space which is 10 times bigger so there's a symmetry called t-duality which takes l to 1
*  over l well l is measured in plank units or more precisely string units this inversion is a very
*  subtle effect and i would not have been or any physics would not have been able to design a
*  theory which has this property that when you make the space smaller it is as if you're making it
*  bigger that means there is no there's no experiment you can do to distinguish the size of the space
*  this is remarkable for example einstein would have said of course i can measure the size of
*  the space what do i do well i take a flashlight i i send the light around measure how long it takes
*  for the light to go around the space and bring back and find the radius or circumference of the
*  the universe what's the problem i said well suppose you do that and you shrink it you say
*  well they get smaller and smaller so what i said well it turns out in string theory there are two
*  different kinds of photons one photon measures one over l the other one measures l and so this
*  duality reformulates and when the space gets smaller it says oh no you better use the bigger
*  perspective because the smaller one is harder to deal with so you do this one so so these examples
*  of loop quantum gravity have none of these features these features that i'm telling you about we have
*  learned from string theory but they nevertheless have some of these ideas like topological as
*  gravity aspects are emphasized in the context of loop quantum gravity in some form and so these
*  ideas might be there in some kernel in some corners of string theory in fact we i wrote a paper
*  about topological string theory and some connections with potentially loop quantum
*  gravity which could be part of that so there are little facets of connections i wouldn't say
*  they're complete but i would say most probably what will happen to some of these ideas the good
*  ones at least they will be absorbed within to string theory if they are correct let me ask a
*  crazy out there question can physics help us understand life so we spoke so confidently
*  about the laws of physics being able to explain reality but and we even said words like theory of
*  everything implying that the word everything is actually describing everything is it possible
*  that the four laws we've been talking about are actually missing they are accurate in describing
*  what they're describing but they're missing the description of a lot of other things like
*  emergence of life and emergence of perhaps consciousness so is there do you ever think
*  about this kind of stuff where we would need to understand extra physics to try to explain the
*  emergence of these complex pockets of interesting weird stuff that we call life and consciousness
*  in this big homogeneous universe that's mostly boring and nothing is happening so first of all
*  we don't claim that string theory is the theory of everything in the sense that we know enough what
*  this theory is we don't know enough about string theory itself we are learning it so i wouldn't say
*  okay give me whatever i will tell you what it how it works no however i would say by definition by
*  definition to me physics is checking all reality any form of reality i call it physics that's my
*  definition i mean i may not know a lot of it like maybe the origin of life and so on maybe a piece
*  of that but i would call that as part of physics to me reality is what we're after i don't claim i
*  know everything about reality i don't claim string theory necessarily has the tools right now to
*  describe all the reality either but we are learning what it is so i would say that i would not put a
*  border to say no you know from this point onwards it's not my territory somebody else's
*  but whether we need new ideas and string theory to describe other reality reality features for sure
*  i believe as i mentioned i don't believe any things any of the laws we know today is final so
*  therefore yes we will need new ideas this is a very tricky thing for us to understand
*  and be precise about but just because you understand the physics doesn't necessarily
*  mean that you understand the emergence of chemistry biology life intelligence consciousness
*  so those are built it's like you might understand the way bricks work yes but to understand what it
*  means to have a happy family right you don't construct you don't get from the bricks so
*  directly you right theory you could if you ran the universe over again but just understanding the
*  rules of the universe doesn't necessarily give you a sense of the weird beautiful things that emerge
*  right no so let me let me describe what you just said so there are two questions one is whether or
*  not the techniques i use and let's say quantum field theory and so on will describe how the
*  society works yes okay that's far distance far far different scales of questions that we're asking
*  here the question is is there a change of is there a new law which takes over that cannot be
*  connected to the older laws that we know or more fundamental laws that we know do you need new laws
*  to describe it i don't think that's necessarily the case in many of these phenomena like chemistry
*  or so on you mentioned so we do expect you know in principle chemistry can be described by quantum
*  mechanics we don't think there's going to be a magical thing but chemistry is complicated yeah
*  indeed there are rules of chemistry that you know chemists have put down which has not been
*  explained yet using quantum mechanics do i believe that they will be something described by quantum
*  mechanics yes i do i don't think they are going to be sitting there in the shows forever but maybe
*  it's too complicated and maybe you know we will wait for very powerful quantum computers or whatnot
*  to solve those problems i don't know but i don't think in that context we have no principles to be
*  added to fix those so by by by i'm perfectly fine in the intermediate situation to have rules of
*  thumb or you know principles that chemists have found which are working which are not founded on
*  the basis of quantum mechanical laws which does the job similarly as biologists do not found
*  everything in terms of chemistry but they think you know there's no reason why chemistry cannot
*  they don't think necessarily they're doing something amazingly not possible with chemistry
*  coming back to your question does consciousness for example bring this new ingredient if indeed
*  it needs a new ingredient i would call that new ingredient part of physical law we have to
*  understand it to me that so i wouldn't put a line to say okay from this point onward you can
*  it's disconnected it's totally disconnected from strength or whatever we have to do something else
*  it's not a line what i'm referring to is can physics of a few centuries from now that doesn't
*  understand consciousness be much bigger than the physics of today where the the textbook grows it
*  definitely will i would say i will grow i would not i don't know if it grows because of consciousness
*  being part of it or we have different view of consciousness i do not know where the consciousness
*  will fit i'm not it's going to be hard for me to to to to guess i mean i can make random guesses
*  now which probably most right most likely is wrong but let me just do just for the sake of discussion
*  you know i could say you know you know brain could be their quantum computer classical computer their
*  arguments against this being a quantum thing so it's probably classical and if it's classical
*  it could be like what we are doing in machine learning slightly more fancy and so on okay people
*  can go to this argument to no end and to some whether consciousness exists or not or life
*  does it have any meaning or is there is there a phase transition where you can say does electron
*  have a life or not at what level does the particle become life maybe there is no definite definition
*  of life in that same way that you know we cannot say electron if you you know a good i like this
*  example quite a bit you know we distinguish between liquid and a gas phase like water is liquid or
*  or vapor is gas we say they're different you can distinguish them actually that's not true
*  it's not true because we know from physics that you can change temperatures and pressure to go
*  from liquid to the gas without making any phase transition so there is no point that you can say
*  this was a liquid and this was a guess you can continuously change the parameters to go from one
*  to the other so at the end it's very different looking like you know i know that water is
*  different from vapor but you know there is no precise point this happens i feel many of these
*  things that we think like consciousness clearly that person is not conscious and the other one
*  is so there's a difference like water and vapor but there's no point you could say that this is
*  conscious there's no sharp transition so it could very well be that what we call heuristically in
*  daily life consciousness is is similar or life is similar to that i don't know if it's like that or
*  not i'm just hypothesizing it's possible like there's no there's no discrete phases there's no
*  discrete phase transition like that yeah yeah but this you might there might be you know concepts
*  of temperature and pressure that we need to understand to describe what the high consciousness
*  in life is that that we're totally missing yes i think that's not a useless question even those
*  questions that is back to our original discussion of philosophy i would say consciousness and free
*  will for example are topics that are very much so in the realm of philosophy currently yes i don't
*  think they will always be i agree with i agree with you and i think i am i'm fine with some topics
*  being part of a different realm than physics today because we don't have the right tools
*  just like biology was i mean before we had dna and all that genetics and all that gradually began to
*  take hold i mean at the when mandel when people were beginning with various experiments with
*  biology and chemistry and so on gradually they came together so it wasn't like together so yeah
*  i'll be perfectly understanding of a situation where we don't have the tools so do these
*  experiments that you think as is defines a conscience in different form and gradually
*  we will build it and connect it and yes we might discover new principles of nature that we didn't
*  know i don't know but i would say that if they are they will be deeply connected with the else we
*  we have never we have seen in physics we don't have things in isolation you cannot you cannot
*  compartmentalize you know this is gravity this is electricity this is that we have learned they all
*  talk to each other there's no way to make them you know in one corner and don't talk so the same
*  thing with anything anything which is real so consciousness is real so therefore we have to
*  connect it to everything else so to me once you connect it you cannot say it's not reality and
*  once it's reality is physics it's i call it physics it may not be the physics i know today for sure
*  it's not but but i wouldn't i would i would be surprised if there's disconnected realities that
*  you know you cannot you cannot imagine them as the part of the same soup so i guess god doesn't have
*  a biology or chemistry textbook and mostly or maybe he or she reads it for fun biology and
*  chemistry but when you're trying to get some work done it'll be going to the physics textbook
*  okay what advice let's put on your wise visionary hat what advice do you have for young people today
*  you've um you've dedicated your book actually to your kids to your family what advice would you
*  give to them what advice would you give to young people today thinking about their career thinking
*  about life of how to live a successful life how to live a good life yes uh yes i have three sons
*  and in fact to them i have uh i have tried not to give too much advice so uh even though i've tried
*  to kind of not give advice maybe indirectly it has been some impact my oldest one is doing
*  biophysics for example and the the second one is doing machine learning and the third one is doing
*  theoretical computer science so there are there are these facets of interest which which are not
*  too far from my area but i have not tried to to impact them in in that way but and they have
*  followed their own interests and i think that's the advice i would give to any young person follow
*  your own interests and let it that take you wherever it takes you and this i did in my own
*  case that i was planning to study economics and electrical engineering when i started at mit
*  and you know i discovered that i'm more passionate about math and physics and at that time i didn't
*  feel math and physics would make a good career and so i was kind of hesitant to go in that direction
*  but i did because i kind of felt that that's what i'm driven to do so i didn't i don't regret it and
*  i'm lucky in the sense that you know society supports people like me who are doing you know
*  these abstract stuff which which may or may not be experimentally verified even let alone apply to
*  the daily technology in our lifetime i'm lucky i'm doing that and i feel that uh if people follow
*  their interests they will find the niche that they're good at and this coincidence of hopefully
*  their interests and and abilities are kind of aligned at least some extent to be able to drive
*  them to something which is successful and not to be driven by things like you know this doesn't make
*  a good career or this doesn't do that and my parents expect that or what about this and i think
*  ultimately you have to live with yourself and you only have one life and it's short very short i can
*  tell you i'm getting i'm getting there so i know it's short so you really want not to not to not
*  do things that you don't want to do so i think follow your interests my strongest advice to young
*  people yeah it's scary when your interest doesn't directly map to a career of the past or of today
*  so you're almost anticipating future careers that could be created it's scary um but yeah there's
*  something to that especially when the interest and the ability align that you will pay you will pave
*  a path that will find a way to make money especially in this society in in in the
*  capitalistic united states society it feels like um ability and passion paves away yes
*  at the very least you can sell funny t-shirts yes you've mentioned uh life is short do you think
*  about um your mortality are you afraid of death uh i don't think about my mortality um i think
*  that i don't think about my death uh i don't think about death in general too much first of all it's
*  something that i can't too much about and i think it's something that it doesn't it doesn't drive
*  my everyday action it is natural to expect that it's somewhat like the time reversal situation so
*  we believe that we have this approximate symmetry in nature time reversal going forward we die going
*  backwards we get born yeah so what was it to get born it wasn't such a good or bad thing i have no
*  feeling of it so you know who knows what the death will feel like uh the moment of death or whatnot
*  so i don't know it is not known but uh in what form do we exist before or after again it's something
*  that it's a it's partly philosophical maybe i like how you draw comfort from symmetry it does seem
*  that there is something asymmetric here a breaking of symmetry because there's there's something
*  to the um creative force of the human spirit that goes only one way right that it seems the
*  finiteness of life is the thing that drives the creativity and so it does seem that that um
*  at least the contemplation of the finiteness of life of mortality is the thing that helps you get
*  stuff together yes i think that's true but actually i have a different perspective on that a little
*  bit yes namely uh suppose i told you you have you're immortal yes i think your life will be
*  totally boring after that because you will not there's i think part of the reason we have
*  enjoyment in life is the finiteness of it yes and so i think mortality might be a blessing
*  and immortality may not so i think that we value things because we have that finite life
*  we we appreciate things we want to do this we want to do that we have motivation if i told you
*  you know you have infinite life oh i don't i don't need to do this today i have another
*  it's a billion or trillion or infinite life so why do i do now there is no motivation a lot of
*  the things that we do are driven by that finiteness the finiteness of these resources so i think it's
*  the blessing in disguise i don't regret it that we have more finite life and i think uh i think that
*  the the process of being part of this thing that you know the the reality to me part of what attracts
*  me to science is to connect to that immortality kind of namely the laws the reality beyond us
*  to me i'm i'm i'm resigned to the fact that not only me everybody is going to die so this
*  gives a little bit of a consolation none of us are going to be around so therefore okay and none of
*  none of the people before me are around so therefore yeah okay this is this is something
*  everybody goes through so so taking that minuscule version of okay how tiny we are and how short time
*  it is and so on to connect to the deeper truth beyond us the reality beyond us is what sense of
*  quote unquote immortality i would get namely i at least i can hang on to this little piece of truth
*  even though i know i know it's not complete i know it's going to be
*  imperfect i know it's going to change and it's going to be improved but having a little bit
*  deeper insight than than just the naive thing around us little earth here and little galaxy
*  and so on makes me feel a little bit more more pleasure to to live this life so i think that's
*  the way i view my my role as a scientist yeah this the scarcity of this life helps us appreciate the
*  beauty of the the immortal the universal truths of that physics present us and maybe maybe one
*  day physics will will have something to say about that that beauty in itself explaining why the heck
*  it's so beautiful to appreciate the laws of physics and yet why it's so tragic that we
*  would die so quickly yes we die so quickly so that can be a bit longer that's for sure it
*  would be very nice maybe physics will help out well come on it was an incredible conversation
*  thank you so much once again for painting a beautiful picture of the history of physics
*  and it kind of presents a hopeful view of the future of physics so i really really appreciate
*  that it's a huge honor that you talk to me waste all your valuable time with me i really appreciate
*  thanks lex it was a pleasure and i loved talking with you and this is wonderful set of discussions
*  i really enjoyed my time with this discussion thank you thanks for listening to this conversation
*  with comrade vafa and thank you to headspace jordan harmer just show square space and all
*  form check them out in the description to support this podcast and now let me leave you with some
*  words from the great richard feinman physics isn't the most important thing love is thank you for
*  listening and hope to see you next time
*  you
