---
Date Generated: April 12, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 11829s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence', 'artificial intelligence podcast', 'bret weinstein', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex podcast', 'mit ai']
Video Views: 3356111
Video Rating: None
---

# Bret Weinstein: Truth, Science, and Censorship in the Time of a Pandemic | Lex Fridman Podcast #194
**Lex Fridman:** [June 25, 2021](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TG6BuSjwP4o)
*  The following is a conversation with Brett Weinstein, evolutionary biologist, author,
*  co-host of the Dark Horse podcast, and, as he says, reluctant radical. Even though we've never met
*  or spoken before this, we both felt like we've been friends for a long time. I don't agree on
*  everything with Brett, but I'm sure as hell happy he exists in this weird and wonderful world of ours.
*  Quick mention of our sponsors, Jordan Harbourage's show, ExpressVPN, Magic Spoon,
*  and Four Sigmatic. Check them out in the description to support this podcast.
*  As a side note, let me say a few words about COVID-19 and about science broadly. I think
*  science is beautiful and powerful. It is the striving of the human mind to understand and
*  to solve the problems of the world. But as an institution, it is susceptible to the flaws of
*  human nature, to fear, to greed, power, and ego. 2020 is the story of all of these that has both
*  scientific triumph and tragedy. We needed great leaders, and we didn't get them. What we needed
*  is leaders who communicate in an honest, transparent, and authentic way about the uncertainty of what
*  we know and the large-scale scientific efforts to reduce that uncertainty and to develop solutions.
*  I believe there are several candidates for solutions that could have all saved
*  hundreds of billions of dollars and lessened or eliminated the suffering of millions of people.
*  Let me mention five of the categories of solutions. Masks, at-home testing, anonymized
*  contact tracing, antiviral drugs, and vaccines. Within each of these categories, institutional
*  leaders should have constantly asked and answered publicly, honestly, the following three questions.
*  One, what data do we have on the solution and what studies are we running to get more and better data?
*  Two, given the current data and uncertainty, how effective and how safe is the solution? Three,
*  what is the timeline and cost involved with mass manufacturing and distribution of the solution?
*  In the service of these questions, no voices should have been silenced. No ideas left off the table.
*  Open data, open science, open, honest scientific communication and debate was the way.
*  Not censorship. There are a lot of ideas out there that are bad, wrong, dangerous. But the moment we
*  have the hubris to say we know which ideas those are is the moment we'll lose our ability to find
*  the truth, to find solutions, the very things that make science beautiful and powerful in the face of
*  all the dangers that threaten the well-being and the existence of humans on earth. This conversation
*  with Brett is less about the ideas we talk about. We agree on some, disagree on others. It is much
*  more about the very freedom to talk, to think, to share ideas. This freedom is our only hope.
*  Brett should never have been censored. I asked Brett to do this podcast to show solidarity and
*  to show that I have hope for science and for humanity. This is the Lex Friedman podcast,
*  and here's my conversation with Brett Weinstein. What to you is beautiful about the study of biology,
*  the science, the engineering, the philosophy of it? It's a very interesting question. I must say,
*  at one level, it's not a conscious thing. I can say a lot about why as an adult I find biology
*  compelling, but as a kid I was completely fascinated with animals. I loved to watch them and
*  think about why they did what they did, and that developed into a very conscious passion as an
*  adult. But I think in the same way that one is drawn to a person, I was drawn to the never-ending
*  series of near miracles that exists across biological nature. When you see a living organism,
*  do you see it from an evolutionary biology perspective of this entire thing that moves
*  around in this world, or do you see from an engineering perspective, the first principles
*  almost down to the physics, the little components that build up hierarchies that you have cells,
*  first proteins and cells and organs and all that kind of stuff. Do you see low level or do you see
*  high level? Well, the human mind is a strange thing, and I think it's probably a bit like a time
*  sharing machine in which I have different modules. We don't know enough about biology for them to
*  connect, right? So they exist in isolation, and I'm always aware that they do connect. But I
*  basically have to step into a module in order to see the evolutionary dynamics of the creature and
*  the lineage that it belongs to. I have to step into a different module to think of that lineage
*  over a very long time scale, a different module still to understand what the mechanisms inside
*  would have to look like to account for what we can see from the outside. And I think that probably
*  sounds really complicated, but one of the things about being involved in a topic like biology and
*  doing so for one, really not even just my adult life for my whole life, is that it becomes second
*  nature. And when we see somebody do an amazing parkour routine or something like that, we think
*  about what they must be doing in order to accomplish that. But of course, what they are doing
*  is tapping into some kind of zone, right? They are in a zone in which they are in such command of
*  their center of gravity, for example, that they know how to hurl it around a landscape so that
*  they always land on their feet. And I would just say, for anyone who hasn't found a topic on which
*  they can develop that kind of facility, it is absolutely worthwhile. It's really something that
*  human beings are capable of doing across a wide range of topics, many things our ancestors didn't
*  even have access to. And that flexibility of humans, that ability to repurpose our machinery
*  for topics that are novel means really the world is your oyster. You can figure out what your passion
*  is and then figure out all of the angles that one would have to pursue to really deeply understand
*  it. And it is well worth having at least one topic like that. You mean embracing the full adaptability
*  of both the body and the mind? I don't know what to attribute the parkour to,
*  biomechanics of how our bodies can move, or is it the mind? How much percent-wise is it the entirety
*  of the hierarchies of biology that we've been talking about, or is it just all the mind?
*  The way to think about creatures is that every creature is two things simultaneously.
*  A creature is a machine of sorts. It's not a machine in the, I call it an aqueous machine,
*  and it's run by an aqueous computer. So it's not identical to our technological machines. But
*  every creature is both a machine that does things in the world sufficient to accumulate enough
*  resources to continue surviving, to reproduce. It is also a potential. So each creature is
*  potentially, for example, the most recent common ancestor of some future clade of creatures that
*  will look very different from it. And if a creature is very, very good at being a creature,
*  but not very good in terms of the potential it has going forward, then that lineage will not
*  last very long into the future because change will throw at challenges that its descendants will not
*  be able to meet. So the thing about humans is we are a generalist platform, and we have the ability
*  to swap out our software to exist in many, many different niches. And I was once watching an
*  interview with this British group of parkour experts who were discussing what it is they do
*  and how it works. And what they essentially said is, look, you're tapping into deep monkey stuff,
*  right? And I thought, yeah, that's about right. And, you know, anybody who is proficient at
*  something like skiing or skateboarding, you know, has the experience of flying down the hill on skis,
*  for example, bouncing from the top of one mogul to the next. And if you really pay attention,
*  you will discover that your conscious mind is actually a spectator. It's there. It's involved
*  in the experience, but it's not driving. Some part of you knows how to ski, and it's not the part of
*  you that knows how to think. And I would just say that what accounts for this flexibility in humans
*  is the ability to bootstrap a new software program and then drive it into the unconscious
*  layer where it can be applied very rapidly. And, you know, I will be shocked if the exact thing
*  doesn't exist in robotics. You know, if you programmed a robot to deal with circumstances
*  that were novel to it, how would you do it? It would have to look something like this.
*  LW There's a certain kind of magic. You're right. With the consciousness being an observer,
*  when you play guitar, for example, or piano for me, music, when you get truly lost in it,
*  I don't know what the heck is responsible for the flow of the music, the kind of the loudness of
*  the music going up and down, the timing, the intricate, like even the mistakes, all those
*  things that doesn't seem to be the conscious mind. It is just observing and yet it's somehow
*  intricately involved more like because you mentioned parkour, the dance is like that too.
*  When you start up in tango dancing, if when you truly lose yourself in it, then it's just like
*  you're an observer and how the hell is the body able to do that? And not only that, it's the
*  physical motion is also creating the emotion, the like that damn is good to be alive feeling.
*  LW But then that's also intricately connected to the full biology stack that we're operating in.
*  I don't know how difficult it is to replicate that. We're talking offline about Boston Dynamics
*  robots. They've recently, they did both parkour, they did flips, they've also done some dancing
*  and it's something I think a lot about because what most people don't realize because they don't
*  look deep enough is those robots are hard coded to do those things. The robots didn't figure it
*  out by themselves and yet the fundamental aspect of what it means to be human is that process of
*  figuring out, of making mistakes and then there's something about overcoming those challenges and
*  the mistakes and like figuring out how to lose yourself in the magic of the dancing or just
*  movement is what it means to be human. That learning process, so that's what I want to do with the
*  almost as a fun side thing with the Boston Dynamics robots is to have them learn and see
*  what they figure out even if they make mistakes. I want to let Spot make mistakes and in so doing
*  discover what it means to be alive, discover beauty because I think that's the essential aspect of
*  mistakes. Boston Dynamics folks want Spot to be perfect because they don't want Spot to ever make
*  mistakes because they wants to operate in the factories, it wants to be you know very safe and
*  so on. For me if you construct the environment, if you construct a safe space for robots
*  and allow them to make mistakes something beautiful might be discovered but that requires a lot of
*  brain power so Spot is currently very dumb and I'm going to add it give it a brain. So first make
*  it see, currently it can't see meaning computer vision, it has to understand its environment,
*  has to see all the humans but then also has to be able to learn, learn about its movement, learn how
*  to use his body to communicate with others, all those kinds of things that dogs know how to do well,
*  humans know how to do somewhat well. I think that's a beautiful challenge but first you have to allow
*  the robot to make mistakes. Well I think your objective is laudable but you're going to realize
*  that the Boston Dynamics folks are right, the first time Spot poops on your rug.
*  I hear the same thing about kids and so on but I still want to have kids. No you should, it's a
*  great experience. So let me step back into what you said in a couple of different places. One I have
*  always believed that the missing element in robotics and artificial intelligence is a proper
*  development right, it is no accident, it is no mere coincidence that human beings are the most
*  dominant species on planet earth and that we have the longest childhoods of any creature on earth by
*  far right. The development is the key to the flexibility and so the capability of a human
*  at adulthood is the mirror image, it's the flip side of our helplessness at birth. So I'll be very
*  interested to see what happens in your robot project if you do not end up reinventing childhood
*  for robots which of course is foreshadowed in 2001 quite brilliantly. But I also want to point out
*  you can see this issue of your conscious mind becoming a spectator very well if you compare
*  tennis to table tennis right. If you watch a tennis game you could imagine that the players
*  are highly conscious as they play. You cannot imagine that if you've ever played ping pong
*  decently. A volley in ping pong is so fast that your conscious mind if it had if your reactions
*  had to go through your conscious mind you wouldn't be able to play. So you can detect that your
*  conscious mind while very much present isn't there and you can also detect where consciousness does
*  usefully intrude. If you go up against an opponent in table tennis that knows a trick that you
*  know how to respond to you will suddenly detect that something about your game is not effective
*  and you will start thinking about what might be how do you position yourself so that move that
*  puts the ball just in that corner of the table or something like that doesn't catch you off guard.
*  And this I believe is we highly conscious folks those of us who try to think through things very
*  deliberately and carefully mistake consciousness for like the highest kind of thinking and I really
*  think that this is an error. Consciousness is an intermediate level of thinking. What it does is
*  it allows you it's basically like uncompiled code and it doesn't run very fast it is capable of being
*  adapted to new circumstances but once the code is roughed in right it gets driven into the unconscious
*  layer and you become highly effective at whatever it is and from that point your conscious mind
*  basically remains there to detect things that aren't anticipated by the code you've already
*  written. And so I don't exactly know how one would establish this how one would demonstrate it but it
*  must be the case that the human mind contains sandboxes in which things are tested right maybe
*  you can build a piece of code and run it in parallel next to your active code so you can see
*  how it would have done comparatively but there's got to be some way of writing new code and then
*  swapping it in and frankly I think this has a lot to do with things like sleep cycles very often
*  when I get good at something I often don't get better at it while I'm doing it I get better at
*  it when I'm not doing it especially if there's time to sleep and think on it. So there's some sort of
*  you know new program swapping in for old program phenomenon which you know will be a lot easier
*  to see in machines it's going to be hard with the the wetware. I like I mean it is true because
*  somebody that played I played tennis for many years I do still think the highest form of excellence
*  in tennis is when the conscious mind is a spectator so it's the compiled code is the
*  highest form of being human and then consciousness is just some like specific compiler
*  you have to have like Borland C++ compiler you could just have different kind of compilers
*  ultimately the the thing that by which we measure the the power of life the intelligence of life
*  is the compiled code and you can probably do that compilation all kinds of ways. Yep yeah I'm not
*  saying that tennis is played consciously and table tennis isn't I'm saying that because tennis
*  is slowed down by the just the space on the court you could you could imagine that it was your
*  conscious mind playing but when you shrink the court down it becomes obvious it becomes obvious
*  that your conscious mind is just present rather than knowing where to put the paddle and weirdly
*  for me I would say this probably isn't true in a podcast situation but if I have to give a presentation
*  especially if I have not overly prepared I often find the same phenomenon when I'm giving the
*  presentation my conscious mind is there watching some other part of me present which is a little
*  jarring I have to say. Well that means you've you've gotten good at it not let the conscious
*  mind get in the way of the flow of words. Yeah that's that's the sensation to be sure and that's
*  the highest form of podcasting too I mean that's why I have that's what it looks like when a
*  podcast is really in the pocket like like Joe Rogan just having fun and just losing themselves
*  and that's that's something I aspire to as well just losing yourself in the conversation somebody
*  that has a lot of anxiety with people like I'm such an introvert I'm scared I was scared before
*  you showed up I'm scared right now there's just anxiety there's just it's a giant mess
*  it's hard to lose yourself it's hard to just get out of the way of your own mind. Yeah actually
*  trust is a big component of that your your conscious mind retains control if you are very
*  uncertain but when you do when you do get into that zone when you're speaking I realize it's
*  different for you with English as a second language although maybe you present in Russian and
*  and you know and it happens but do you ever hear yourself say something and you think oh that's
*  really good right like like you didn't come up with it some other part of you that you don't
*  exactly know came up with it I don't think I've ever heard myself in that way because I have a
*  much louder voice that's constantly yelling in my head at why the hell did you say that
*  there's a very self-critical voice that's much louder so I'm very maybe I need to deal with that
*  voice but it's been like with what is it called like a megaphone just screaming so I can't hear
*  no it says good job you said that thing really nicely so I'm kind of focused right now on the
*  megaphone person in the audience versus the the positive but that's definitely something to think
*  about it's been productive but you know the the place where I find gratitude and beauty and
*  appreciation of life is in the quiet moments when I don't talk when I listen to the world around me
*  when I listen to others when I talk I'm extremely self-critical in my mind when I when I produce
*  anything out into the world that's that originated with me like any kind of creation extremely
*  self-critical it's good for productivity for like always striving to improve and so on it might be
*  bad for for like just appreciating the things you've created I'm a little bit with Marvin
*  Minsky on this where he says the the key to to a productive life is to hate everything you've
*  ever done in the past I didn't know he said that I must say I resonate with it a bit
*  and you know I unfortunately my life currently has me putting a lot of stuff into the world
*  and I effectively watch almost none of it I can't stand it
*  yeah what what do you make of that I don't know I just recently I just yesterday read
*  metamorphosis by Kauff we read metamorphosis by Kafka where he turns into a giant bug
*  because of the stress that the world puts on him his parents put on him to succeed and you know
*  I think that's you have to find the balance because if you if you allow the self-critical
*  voice to become too heavy the burden of the world the pressure that the world puts on you to be the
*  best version of yourself and so on to strive then you become a bug and that's a big problem
*  and then and then and then the world turns against you because you're a bug you become some kind of
*  caricature of yourself I don't know become the worst version of yourself and then thereby
*  end up destroying yourself and then the world moves on that's the story that's a lovely story
*  I do think this is one of these places and frankly you could
*  map this onto all of modern human experience but this is one of these places where our ancestral
*  programming does not serve our modern selves yeah so I used to talk to students about the question of
*  dwelling on things you know dwelling on things is famously understood to be bad and it can't
*  possibly be bad it wouldn't exist a tendency toward it wouldn't exist if it was bad so what is bad is
*  dwelling on things past the point of utility and you know that's obviously easier to say than to
*  operationalize but if you realize that your dwelling is the key in fact to upgrading your program for
*  future well-being and that there's a point you know presumably from diminishing returns if not
*  counter productivity there is a point at which you should stop because that is what is in your
*  best interest then knowing that you're looking for that point is useful right this is the point at
*  which it is no longer useful for me to dwell on this error I have made right that is that's what
*  you're looking for and it also gives you license right if some part of you feels like it you know
*  is punishing you rather than searching then that also has a point at which it's no longer valuable
*  and there's some liberty in realizing yep even the part of me that was punishing me knows it's time
*  to stop so if we map that onto compiled code discussion as a computer science person I find
*  that very compelling you know there's a when you compile code you get warnings sometimes and
*  um usually if you're a good software engineer you're going to make sure there's no you know you treat
*  warnings as errors so you make sure that the compilation produces no warnings but at a certain
*  point when you have a large enough system you just let the warnings go it's fine like I don't know
*  where that warning came from but you know it's just uh ultimately you need to compile the code and
*  run with it and uh hope nothing terrible happens well I think what you will find and believe me I
*  think what you're what you're talking about with respect to robots unlearning is going to end up
*  having to go to a deep developmental state and a helplessness that evolves into hyper competence
*  and all of that but um I live I noticed that I live by something that I for lack of a better
*  descriptor call the theory of close calls and the theory of close calls says that people
*  typically miscategorize the events in their life where something almost went wrong
*  and you know for example if you I have a friend who um I was walking down the street with my
*  college friends and one of my friends stepped into the street thinking it was clear and was
*  nearly hit by a car going 45 miles an hour would have been an absolute disaster might have killed
*  her certainly would have permanently injured her but she didn't you know car didn't touch her right
*  now you could walk away from that and think nothing of it because well what is there to think nothing
*  happened or you could think well what is the difference between what did happen and my death
*  the difference is luck I never want that to be true right I never want the difference between
*  what did happen and my death to be luck therefore I should count this as very close to death
*  and I should prioritize coding so it doesn't happen again at a very high level so anyway my
*  my basic point is the accidents and disasters and misfortune describe a distribution that tells you
*  what's really likely to get you in the end and so personally you can use them to figure out
*  where the dangers are so that you can afford to take great risks because you have a really good
*  sense of how they're going to go wrong but I would also point out civilization has this problem
*  civilization is now producing these events that are major disasters but they're not existential
*  scale yet right they're very serious errors that we can see and I would argue that the pattern is
*  you discover that we are involved in some industrial process at the point it has gone wrong
*  right so I'm now always asking the question okay in light of the Fukushima triple meltdown
*  the financial collapse of 2008 the deep water horizon blowout COVID-19 and its probable origins
*  in the Wuhan lab what processes do I not know the name of yet that I will discover at the point that
*  some gigantic accident has happened and can we talk about the wisdom or lack thereof of engaging
*  in that process before the accident right that's what a wise civilization would be doing and yet
*  we don't I just want to mention something that happened a couple of days ago I don't know if you
*  know who JB Straubel is he's the co-founder of Tesla CTO of Tesla for many many years his wife
*  just died she was riding a bicycle and in the same in that same thin line between death and life
*  that many of us have been in where you walk into the intersection and there's this close call
*  every once in a while it you get the the short straw I wonder how much of our own individual
*  lives and the entirety of human civilization rests on this little roll of the dice well this
*  is sort of my point about the close calls is that there's a there's a level at which we can't
*  control it right the gigantic asteroid that comes from deep space that you don't have time to do
*  anything about there's not a lot we can do to hedge that out or at least not short term
*  but there are lots of other things you know obviously the financial collapse of 2008 didn't
*  break down the entire world economy it threatened to but a herculean effort managed to pull us back
*  from the brink the triple meltdown at Fukushima was awful but every one of the seven fuel pools
*  held there wasn't a major fire that made it impossible to manage the disaster going forward
*  we got lucky you know we could say the same thing about the the blowout at the deep water
*  horizon where a hole in the ocean floor large enough that we couldn't have plugged it could
*  have opened up all of these things could have been much much worse right and I think we can
*  say the same thing about COVID as terrible as it is and I you know we cannot say for sure
*  that it came from the Wuhan lab but there's a strong likelihood that it did
*  and it also could be much much worse so in each of these cases something is telling us
*  we have a process that is unfolding that keeps creating risks where it is luck that is the
*  difference between us and some scale of disaster that is unimaginable and that wisdom you know you
*  can be highly intelligent and cause these disasters to be wise is to stop causing them
*  and that would require a process of restraint a process that I don't see a lot of evidence of yet
*  so I think we have to generate it and somehow we you know at the moment we don't have a political
*  structure that would be capable of taking a protective algorithm and actually deploying
*  right because it would have important economic consequences and so it would almost certainly be
*  shot down but we can obviously also say you know we paid a huge price for all of the disasters that
*  I've mentioned and we have to factor that into the equation something can be very productive
*  short term and very destructive long term also the question is how many disasters we avoided
*  because of the ingenuity of humans or just the integrity and character of humans
*  that's sort of an open question we may be more
*  intelligent than lucky that's the hope because the optimistic message here that you're getting at is
*  maybe the process that we should be that maybe we can overcome luck with ingenuity meaning
*  I guess you're suggesting the processes we should be listing all the ways a human civilization can
*  destroy itself assigning likelihood to it and thinking through how can we avoid that
*  and being very honest with the data out there about the close calls and using those close calls
*  to then create sort of mechanism by which we minimize the probability of those close calls
*  and just being honest and transparent with the data that's out there well I think we need to do
*  a couple things for it to work so I've been an advocate for the idea that sustainability is
*  actually it's difficult to operationalize but it is an objective that we have to meet if we're to
*  be around long term and I realized that we also need to have reversibility of all of our processes
*  because processes very frequently when they start do not appear dangerous and then they when they
*  scale they become very dangerous so for example if you imagine the first internal combustion engine
*  in a vehicle driving down the street and you imagine somebody running after them saying hey if
*  you do enough of that you're going to alter the atmosphere and it's going to change the temperature
*  of the planet it's preposterous right why would you stop the person who's invented this marvelous new
*  contraption but of course eventually you do get to the place where you're doing enough of this
*  that you do start changing the temperature of the planet so if we built the capacity if we basically
*  said look you can't involve yourself in any process that you couldn't reverse if you had to
*  then progress would be slowed but our safety would go up dramatically and I think I think in some
*  sense if we are to be around long term we have to begin thinking that way we're just involved in
*  too many very dangerous processes so let's talk about one of the things that if not threatened
*  human civilization certainly hurt it at a deep level which is COVID-19 what percent probability
*  would you currently place on the hypothesis that COVID-19 leaked from the Wuhan Institute of
*  Virology so I maintain a flow chart of all the possible explanations and it doesn't break down
*  exactly that way the likelihood that it emerged from a lab is very very high if it emerged from
*  a lab the likelihood that the lab was the Wuhan Institute is very very high the there are multiple
*  different kinds of evidence that point to the lab and there are is literally no evidence that
*  points to nature either the evidence points nowhere or it points to the lab and the lab
*  could mean any lab but geographically obviously the labs in Wuhan are the most likely and the
*  lab that was most directly involved with research on viruses that look like COVID that look like
*  SARS-CoV-2 is obviously the place that one would start but I would say the likelihood that this
*  virus came from a lab is well above 95 percent we can talk about the question of could a virus
*  have been brought into the lab and escaped from there without being modified that's also possible
*  but it doesn't explain any of the anomalies in the genome of SARS-CoV-2 could it have been
*  delivered from another lab could Wuhan be a distraction in order that we would connect
*  the dots in the wrong way that's conceivable I currently have that below one percent on my
*  flow chart but I think very dark thought that somebody would would do that almost as a
*  a political attack on China well it depends I don't even think that's one possibility
*  sometimes when Eric and I talk about these issues we will generate a scenario just to prove that
*  something could could live in that space right it's a placeholder for whatever may actually
*  have happened and so it doesn't have to have been an attack on China that's certainly one
*  possibility but I would point out if you can predict the future in some unusual way better
*  than others you can print money right that's what markets that allow you to bet for or against
*  uh virtually any sector allow you to do so you can imagine a simply amoral person or entity
*  generating a pandemic attempting to cover their tracks because it would allow them to bet against
*  things like you know cruise ships air travel whatever it is and bet in favor of I don't know
*  uh sanitizing gel and whatever else you would do so am I saying that I think somebody did that no
*  I really don't think it happened we've seen zero evidence that this was intentionally released
*  however were it to have been intentionally released by somebody who did not know did not want it
*  known where it had come from releasing it into Wuhan would be one way to cover their tracks so
*  we have to leave the possibility formally open but acknowledge there's no evidence so
*  the probability therefore is low I tend to believe maybe this is the optimistic nature that I have
*  that people who are competent enough to do the kind of thing we just described
*  are not going to do that because it requires a certain kind of I don't want to use the word
*  evil but whatever word you want to use to describe the kind of uh disregard for human life required
*  to do that you're just that's like that's just not going to be coupled with competence I feel
*  like there's a trade-off chart where competence on one axis and evils on the other and the more evil
*  you become the the crapper you are at doing great engineering scientific work required to deliver
*  weapons of different kinds whether it's bioweapons or nuclear weapons all those kinds of things
*  that seems to be the lessons I take from history but that doesn't necessarily mean that's what's
*  going to be happening in the future but to stick on the lab leak idea because the flow chart is
*  probably huge here because there's a lot of fascinating possibilities one question I want
*  to ask is what would evidence for natural origins look like so one piece of evidence for natural
*  origins is that it's happened in the past that that viruses have jumped oh they do jump they
*  so like that's one like that's possible to have happened you know so that that's a sort of like a
*  historical evidence like okay well it's possible that it have it's possible it's not it's not
*  evidence of the kind you think it is it's a justification for a presumption right right so
*  the presumption upon discovering a new virus circulating is certainly that it came from nature
*  right the problem is the presumption evaporates in the face of evidence or at least it logically
*  should and it didn't in this case it was maintained by people who privately in their emails acknowledged
*  that they had grave doubts about the natural origin of of this virus is there some other piece
*  of evidence that we could look for and see that would say this increases the probability that it's
*  natural origins yeah in fact there is evidence you know I always worry that somebody is going to
*  make up some evidence in order to reverse the flow well let's say I am there's a lot of incentive
*  for that actually there's a huge amount of incentive on the other hand why didn't the
*  powers that be the powers that lied to us about weapons of mass destruction in Iraq why didn't
*  they ever fake weapons of mass destruction in Iraq whatever force it is I hope that force is here too
*  and so whatever evidence we find is real it's the competence thing I'm talking about but okay go
*  ahead sorry well we can get back to that but I would say yeah that the the giant piece of evidence
*  that will shift the probabilities in the other direction is the discovery of either a human
*  population in which the virus circulated prior to showing up in Wuhan that would explain where the
*  virus learned all of the tricks that it knew instantly upon spreading from Wuhan so that would
*  do it or an animal population in which an ancestor epidemic can be found in which the virus learned
*  this before jumping to humans but I point out in that second case you would certainly expect to see
*  a great deal of evolution in the early epidemic which we don't see so there almost has to be a
*  human population somewhere else that had the virus circulating or an ancestor of the virus that we
*  first saw in Wuhan circulating and it has to have gotten very sophisticated in that prior epidemic
*  before hitting Wuhan in order to explain the total lack of evolution and extremely effective virus
*  that emerged at the end of 2019 so you don't believe in the magic of evolution to spring up
*  with all the tricks already there like everybody who doesn't have the tricks they die quickly and
*  then you just have this beautiful virus that comes in with a spike protein and the and the through
*  mutation and selection just like the ones that succeed and succeed big are the ones that are going
*  to just spring into life with the tricks well no that's that's called a hopeful monster and
*  hopeful monsters don't work it's to the job of becoming a new pandemic virus is too difficult
*  it involves two very difficult steps and they both have to work one is the ability to infect a person
*  and spread in their tissues sufficient to make an infection and the other is to jump between
*  individuals at a sufficient rate that it doesn't go extinct for one reason or another those are
*  both very difficult jobs they require as you describe selection and the point is selection
*  would leave a mark we would see evidence that it was in animals or humans both right and you see
*  this evolutionary trace of the virus gathering the tricks up yeah you would see the virus you
*  would see the clumsy virus get better and better and yes i am a full believer in the power of that
*  process in fact i believe it what i know from studying the process is that it is much more
*  powerful than most people imagine that what we teach in the evolution 101 textbook is too clumsy
*  a process to do what we see it doing and that actually people should increase their expectation
*  of the rapidity with which that process can produce just jaw-dropping adaptations that said
*  we just don't see evidence that it happened here which doesn't mean it doesn't exist but it means
*  in spite of immense pressure to find it somewhere there's been no hint which probably means it took
*  place inside of a laboratory so inside the laboratory gain of functional research on viruses
*  and i believe most of that kind of research is doing this exact thing that you're referring to
*  which is accelerated evolution and just watching evolution do its thing and a bunch of viruses
*  and seeing what kind of tricks get developed the other method is engineering viruses so
*  manually adding on the tricks
*  what which do you think we should be thinking about here so mind you i learned what i know
*  in the aftermath of this pandemic emerging i started studying the question and i would say
*  based on the content of the genome and other evidence in publications from the various labs
*  that were involved in in generating this technology a couple of things seem likely
*  this sars-cov-2 does not appear to be entirely the result of either a splicing process
*  or serial packaging and it appears to have both things in its past or it's at least highly likely
*  that it does so for example the fur and cleavage site looks very much like it was added in to the
*  virus and it was known that that would increase its infectivity in humans and increase its tropism
*  the virus appears to be excellent at spreading in humans and minks and ferrets now minks and ferrets
*  are very closely related to each other and ferrets are very likely to have been used in a serial
*  passage experiment the reason being that they have an ace 2 receptor that looks very much like the
*  human ace 2 receptor and so were you going to passage the virus or its ancestor through an
*  animal in order to increase its infectivity in humans which would have been necessary
*  ferrets would have been very likely it is also quite likely that humanized mice were utilized
*  and it is possible that human airway tissue was utilized i think it is vital that we find out
*  what the protocols were if this came from the wuhan institute we need to know it and we need
*  to know what the protocols were exactly because they will actually give us some tools that would
*  be useful in fighting SARS-CoV-2 and hopefully driving it to extinction which ought to be our
*  priority it is a priority that does not it is not apparent from our behavior but it really is
*  it should be our objective if we understood where our interests lie we would be much more
*  focused on it but those protocols would tell us a great deal if it wasn't the wuhan institute we
*  need to know that if it was nature we need to know that and if it was some other laboratory we
*  need to figure out who what and where so that we can determine what is what we can determine about
*  about what was done you're opening up my mind about why we should investigate why we should
*  know the truth of the origins of this virus so for me personally let me just tell the story of my own
*  kind of journey when i first started looking into the lab leak hypothesis
*  what became terrifying to me and important to understand and obvious is the sort of like sam
*  harris way of thinking which is it's obvious that a lab leak of a deadly virus will eventually happen
*  my mind was it doesn't even matter if it happened in this case it's obvious it's going to happen in
*  the future so why the hell are we not freaking out about this and covid-19 is not even that deadly
*  relative to the possible future viruses it's this the way i disagree with sam on this but he thinks
*  about this way about a gi as well about artificial intelligence it's a different discussion i think
*  but with viruses it seems like something that could happen on the scale of years maybe a few
*  decades a gi is a little bit farther out for me but it seemed the terrifying thing seemed obvious
*  that this will happen very soon for a much deadlier virus as we get better and better at both
*  engineering viruses and doing this kind of evolutionary driven research gain of function
*  research okay but then you started speaking out about this as well but also started to say no no
*  no we should hurry up and figure out the origins now because it will help us figure out how to
*  actually respond to this particular virus how to treat this particular virus what is in terms of
*  vaccines in terms of antiviral drugs in terms of just and although the the the number of responses
*  we should have okay i still am much more freaking out about the future maybe you can
*  break that apart a little bit which are you most um focused on now which are you most freaking out
*  about now in terms of the importance of figuring out the origins of this virus i am most freaking
*  out about both of them because they're both really important and you know we can put bounds on this
*  let me say first that this is a perfect test case for the theory of close calls because as much as
*  covet is a disaster it is also a close call from which we can learn much you are absolutely right
*  if we keep playing this game in the lab if we are not if we are especially if we do it under pressure
*  and when we are told that a virus is going to leap from nature any day and that the more we
*  know the better we'll be able to fight it we're going to create the disaster all the sooner so
*  yes that should be an absolute focus the fact that there were people saying that this was dangerous
*  back in 2015 ought to tell us something the fact that the system bypassed a ban and offshoreed the
*  work to china ought to tell us this is not a chinese failure this is a failure of something
*  larger and harder to see but i also think that there's a there's a clock ticking with respect
*  to sarz covey 2 and covet the disease that it creates and that has to do with whether or not
*  we are stuck with it permanently so if you think about the cost to humanity of being stuck with
*  influenza it's an immense cost year after year and we just stop thinking about it because it's there
*  some years you get the flu most years you don't maybe you get the vaccine to prevent it maybe
*  the vaccine isn't particularly well targeted but imagine just simply doubling that cost
*  imagine we get stuck with sarz covey 2 and its descendants going forward and that it just settles
*  in and becomes a fact of modern human life that would be a disaster right the number of people
*  we will ultimately lose is incalculable the amount of suffering that will be caused is
*  incalculable the loss of well-being and wealth incalculable so that ought to be a very high
*  priority driving this extinct before it becomes permanent and the ability to drive extinct
*  goes down the longer we delay effective responses to the extent that we let it have this very large
*  canvas large numbers of people who have the disease in which mutation and selection can result in
*  adaptation that we will not be able to counter the greater its ability to figure out features
*  of our immune system and use them to its advantage so i'm feeling the pressure of driving an extinct
*  i believe we could have driven it extinct six months ago and we didn't do it because of very
*  mundane concerns among a small number of people and i'm not alleging that they were brazen about
*  um or that they were callous about deaths that would be caused i have the sense that they were
*  working from a kind of autopilot in which you you know let's say you're in some kind of a corporation
*  a pharmaceutical corporation you have a portfolio of therapies that in the context of a pandemic
*  might be very lucrative those therapies have competitors you of course want to position your
*  product so that it succeeds and the competitors don't and lo and behold at some point through
*  means that i think those of us on the outside can't really uh into it you end up saying things about
*  competing therapies that work better and much more safely than the ones you're selling that
*  aren't true and do cause people to die in large numbers um but it you know it's some kind of
*  autopilot at least part of it is so the there's a complicated coupling of the autopilot of uh
*  institutions companies governments and then there's also the geopolitical game
*  theory thing going on where you want to keep secrets it's the chernobyl thing where if you
*  messed up there's a big incentive i think to hide the fact that you messed up so how do we fix this
*  and what's more important to fix the autopilot which is the response that we often criticize
*  about our institutions especially the leaders in those institutions anthony Fauci and so on
*  as some of the members of the scientific community and the second part is the
*  the game with china of hiding the information in terms of on the fight between nations
*  well in our live streams on dark horse heather and i have been talking from the beginning about
*  the fact that although yes what happens began in china it very much looks like a failure of the
*  international scientific community that's frightening but it's also hopeful in the sense
*  that actually if we did the right thing now we're not navigating a puzzle about chinese
*  responsibility we're navigating a question of collective responsibility for something that has
*  been terribly costly to all of us so that's not a very happy process but as you point out what's
*  at stake is in large measure at the very least the strong possibility this will happen again
*  and that at some point it will be far worse so you know just as a person that does not learn
*  the lessons of their own errors doesn't get smarter and they remain in danger we collectively
*  humanity has to say well there sure is a lot of evidence that suggests that this is a self-inflicted
*  wound when you have done something that has caused a massive self-inflicted wound
*  self-inflicted wound it makes sense to dwell on it exactly to the point that you have learned
*  the lesson that makes it very very unlikely that something similar will happen again i think this
*  is a good place to kind of ask you to do almost like a thought experiment or um to steel man
*  the argument against the lab leak hypothesis so if you were to argue uh you know you said 95
*  percent chance that the virus leaked from a lab there's a bunch of ways i think you can argue
*  that even talking about it is uh bad for the world so i if i just put something on the table
*  is to say that um for one it would be racism versus chinese people that talking about that it
*  leaked from a lab there's a kind of immediate kind of blame and it can spiral down into this idea
*  that's somehow the people are responsible for the virus and this kind of thing is it possible for
*  you to come up with other steel man arguments against talking or against the possibility of
*  the lab leak hypothesis well so i think steel manning is a tool that is extremely valuable
*  but it's also possible to abuse it i think that you can only steel man a good faith argument
*  and the problem is we now know that we have not been engaged in opponents who were wielding good
*  faith arguments because privately their emails reflect their own doubts and what they were doing
*  publicly was actually a punishment a public punishment for those of us who spoke up
*  with i think the purpose of either backing us down or more likely warning others not to engage in the
*  same kind of behavior and obviously for people like you and me who regard science as our likely
*  best hope for navigating difficult waters shutting down people who are using those tools
*  honorably is itself dishonorable so i don't really i don't feel that it is i don't feel that there's
*  anything to steel man and i also think that you know immediately at the point that the world
*  suddenly with no new evidence on the table switched gears with respect to the lab leak
*  you know at the point that nicholas wade had published his article and suddenly the world was
*  going to admit that this was at least a possibility if not a likelihood we got to see something of the
*  rationalization process that had taken place inside the institutional world and it very
*  definitely involved the claim that what was being avoided was the targeting of chinese scientists
*  and my point would be i don't want to see the targeting of anyone i don't want to see racism
*  of any kind on the other hand once you create license to lie in order to protect individuals
*  when the world has a stake in knowing what happened then it is inevitable that that process that
*  license to lie will be used by the thing that captures institutions for its own purposes so
*  my sense is it may be very unfortunate if the story of what happened here can be used against
*  chinese people that would be very unfortunate and as i think i mentioned heather and i have taken
*  great pains to point out that this doesn't look like a chinese failure it looks like a failure of
*  the international scientific community so i think it is important to broadcast that message along
*  with the analysis of the evidence but no matter what happened we have a right to know
*  and i frankly do not take the institutional layer at its word that its motivations are honorable and
*  that it was protecting you know good-hearted scientists at the expense of the world that
*  explanation does not add up well this is a very interesting question about whether it's ever okay
*  to lie at the institutional layer to protect the populace i think both you and i are probably on
*  the same have the same sense that it's a slippery slope even if it's an effective mechanism in the
*  short term in the long term it's going to be destructive this happened with masks this happened
*  with other things if you look at just history pandemics there is an idea that panic is destructive
*  amongst the populace so you want to construct a narrative whether it's a lie or not to minimize
*  panic but you're suggesting that almost in all cases and i think that was the lesson from
*  the the pandemic in the early 20th century that lying creates distrust and distrust
*  in the institutions is ultimately destructive that's your sense that lying is not okay well
*  okay you know there are obviously places where complete transparency is not a good idea right
*  to the extent that you broadcast a technology that allows one individual to hold the world hostage
*  the world hostage right obviously you've got a something to be navigated but in general
*  i don't believe that the scientific system should be lying to us in the case of this particular lie
*  the idea that the well-being of chinese scientists outweighs the well-being of the world
*  is preposterous yeah right as you as you point out one thing that rests on this question is
*  whether we continue to do this kind of research going forward and the scientists in question all
*  of them american chinese all of them were pushing the idea that the risk of a zoonotic spillover
*  event causing a major and highly destructive pandemic was so great that we had to risk this
*  now if they themselves have caused it and if they are wrong as i believe they are about the
*  likelihood of a major world pandemic spilling out of nature in the way that they wrote into
*  their grant applications then the danger is you know the call is coming from inside the house and
*  we have to look at that and yes whatever we have to do to protect scientists from
*  retribution we should do but we cannot protecting them by lying to the world and even worse by
*  by demonizing people like me like josh rogan like uri dagan the entire drastic group on twitter by
*  demonizing us for simply following the evidence is to set a terrible precedent right you're
*  demonizing people for using the scientific method to evaluate evidence that is available to us in
*  the world what a terrible crime it is to teach that lesson right thou shalt not use scientific
*  tools no i'm sorry whatever your license to lie is it doesn't extend to that yeah i've seen the
*  the attacks on you the pressure on you has a very important effect on
*  thousands of world-class biologists actually so at mit colleagues of mine people i know
*  there's a slight pressure to not be allowed to uh one speak publicly and to actually think
*  like to even think about these ideas it sounds kind of ridiculous but just to
*  in the in the privacy of your own home to to read things to to think it's many people many world-class
*  biologists that i know will just avoid looking at the data there's not even that many people
*  that are publicly opposed and gain of function research they're they're also like it's not worth
*  it it's not worth the battle and there's many people that kind of argue that those battles
*  should be fought in private in uh you know with colleagues in the um in the privacy of the
*  scientific community that the public is somehow not maybe intelligent enough to be able to deal
*  with the the complexities of this kind of discussion i don't know but the final result is
*  combined with the bullying of you and uh all the different pressures in the academic institutions
*  is that it's just people are self-censoring and silencing themselves and silencing the most
*  important thing which is the power of their brains like these people are brilliant and the
*  fact that they're not utilizing their brain to come up with solutions uh outside of the conformist
*  line of thinking is tragic well it is i also think that it we have to look at it and understand it
*  for what it is for one thing it's kind of a cryptic totalitarianism somehow people's sense of what
*  they're allowed to think about talk about discuss is causing them to self-censor and i can tell you
*  it's causing many of them to rationalize which is even worse they're blinding themselves to what they
*  can see um but it is also the case i believe that what you're describing about what people said and
*  a great many people understood that the lab leak hypothesis could not be taken off the table but
*  they didn't say so publicly and i think that their discussions with each other about why they did not
*  say what they understood that's what capture sounds like on the inside i don't know exactly
*  what force captured the institutions i don't think uh anybody knows for sure out here in public
*  i don't even know that it wasn't just simply a process but you have these institutions they are
*  behaving towards a kind of somatic obligation they have lost sight of what they were built to accomplish
*  and on the inside the way they avoid going back to their original mission is to say things to
*  themselves like the public can't have this discussion it can't be trusted with it yes we need to be able
*  to talk about this but it has to be private whatever it is they say to themselves that is
*  what capture sounds like on the inside it's a institutional rationalization mechanism and
*  it's very very deadly and at the point you go from lab leak to repurposed drugs you can see that it's
*  very deadly in a very direct way yeah i see this in my field of with um things like autonomous
*  weapon systems people in ai do not talk about the use of ai in weapon systems they they kind of avoid
*  the idea that ai is used in the military it's kind of funny there is there's this like kind of
*  discomfort and they're like they all hurry like um you know like something scary happens and a
*  bunch of sheep kind of like run away that's what it looks like and i don't even know what to do
*  about it because and then i feel this natural pull every time i bring up autonomous weapon systems
*  to go along with the sheep there's a natural kind of pull towards that direction because it's like
*  what can i do as one person now there's currently nothing destructive happening with autonomous
*  weapon systems so we're like in the early days of this race that in 10 20 years might become a real
*  problem now where the discussion we're having now we're now facing the result of that in the space
*  of viruses uh like for many years avoiding the conversations here i don't know what to do that
*  in the early days um but i think we have to i guess create institutions where people can stand out
*  people can stand out and like basically be individual thinkers and break out into all kinds
*  of spaces of ideas that allow us to think freely freedom of thought and maybe that requires the
*  decentralization of institutions well years ago i came up with a concept called cultivated insecurity
*  and the idea is let's just take the example of the average joe right the average joe has a job
*  somewhere and their mortgage their medical insurance their retirement their connection
*  with the economy is to one degree or another dependent on their relationship with the employer
*  that means that there is a strong incentive especially in any industry where it's not easy
*  to move from one employer to the next there's a strong incentive to stay in your employer's good
*  graces right so it creates a very top-down dynamic not only in terms of who gets to tell
*  uh other people what to do but it really comes down to who gets to tell other people how to think
*  people how to think so that's extremely dangerous the way out of it is to cultivate security to the
*  extent that somebody is in a position to go against the grain and have it not be a catastrophe for
*  their family and their ability to earn you will see that behavior a lot more so i would argue that
*  some of what you're talking about is just a simple predictable consequence of the concentration of
*  the uh the sources of well-being and that this is a solvable problem you got a chance to talk
*  with joe rogan yesterday yes i did and i just saw the episode was released and uh ivermectin is
*  trending on twitter joe told me it was an incredible conversation i look forward to
*  listening today many people have probably by the time this is released i've already listened to it
*  but i think it would be interesting to discuss
*  uh a post-mortem how do you feel how the conversation went and maybe broadly
*  how do you see the story as it's unfolding of ivermectin from the origins
*  from before covid-19 through 2020 to today i very much enjoyed talking to joe and i'm uh
*  uh undescribably grateful that he would take the risk of such a discussion that he would
*  as he described it to an emergency podcast on the subject which i i think that was not an
*  exaggeration this needed to happen for various reasons that he uh you know he took us down the
*  road of talking about the censorship campaign against ivermectin which i find utterly shocking
*  and talking about the drug itself and i should say we talked we had pierre corey available uh he
*  he came on the podcast as well he is of course the face of the fl triple c the frontline covid-19
*  critical care alliance these are doctors who have innovated ways of treating covid patients and they
*  happened on ivermectin and have been using it and i hesitate to use the word advocating for it
*  because that's not really the role of doctors or scientists but they are advocating for it in the
*  sense that there is this uh pressure not to talk about its effectiveness for reasons that we can
*  go into so maybe step back and say what is ivermectin and how much studies have been done
*  to show its effectiveness so ivermectin is an interesting drug it was discovered in the 70s
*  by a japanese scientist named satoshi omura and he found it in soil near a japanese golf course
*  so i would just point out in passing that if we were to stop self-silencing over the possibility
*  that asians will be demonized over the possible lab leak in wuhan and to recognize that actually
*  the natural course of the story has a likely lab leak in china it has a unlikely hero in japan
*  the story is naturally not a simple one but in any case omura discovered this molecule he
*  sent it to a friend who was at merck a scientist named campbell they won a noble prize for the
*  discovery of the ivermectin molecule in 2015 its initial use was in treating parasitic infections
*  it's very effective in treating uh the um the worm that causes river blindness uh the pathogen that
*  causes elephantitis scabies it's a very effective anti-parasite drug it's extremely safe it's on
*  the who's list of essential medications it's safe for children it has been administered something
*  like four billion times in the last four decades it has been given away in the millions of doses
*  by merck in africa people have been on it for long periods of time and in fact one of the
*  reasons that africa may have had less severe impacts from covet 19 is that ivermectin is
*  widely used there to prevent parasites and the drug appears to have a long-lasting impact so
*  it's an interesting molecule it was discovered some time ago apparently that it has antiviral
*  properties and so it was tested in early in the covet 19 pandemic to see if it might work
*  to treat humans with covet it turned out to have very promising evidence that it did treat humans
*  it was tested in tissues it was tested at a very high dosage which confuses people they think that
*  those of us who believe that ivermectin might be useful in confronting this disease are advocating
*  those high doses which is not the case but in any case there have been quite a number of studies
*  a wonderful meta analysis was finally released we had seen it in pre-print version but it was
*  finally peer reviewed and published this last week it reveals that the drug as clinicians have
*  been telling us those who have been using it it's highly effective at treating people with the
*  disease especially if you get to them early and it showed an 86 effectiveness as a prophylactic
*  to prevent people from contracting covet and that number 86 is high enough to drive sars-cov-2 to
*  extinction if we wished to deploy it first of all the the meta analysis is this the
*  ivermectin for covet 19 real-time meta analysis of 60 studies or there's a bunch of meta analysis
*  because i was really impressed by the real-time meta analysis that keeps getting updated i don't
*  know if it's the same kind of the one at ivmmeta.com well i saw it it's c19evermeta.com no this is not
*  that meta analysis so that is as you say a living meta analysis where you can watch as evidence which
*  is super cool by the way it's really cool and they've got some really nice graphics that allow
*  you to understand well what is the evidence you know it's concentrated around this level of
*  effectiveness etc so anyway it's great site well worth paying attention to no this is a meta analysis
*  i don't know any of the authors but one second author is tess lorry of the bird group bird being
*  a a group of analysts and doctors in britain that is playing a role similar to the fl triple c here
*  in the u.s. so anyway this is a meta analysis that that that tess lorry and others did of all of the
*  available evidence and it's quite compelling people if people can look for it on my twitter
*  i will i will put it up and people can find it there so what about dose here that in terms of
*  safety what do we understand about the the kind of dose required to to have that level of effectiveness
*  and what do we understand about the safety of that kind of dose so let me just say i'm not a
*  medical doctor i'm a biologist i'm on ivermectin in lieu of vaccination in terms of dosage there
*  is one reason for concern which is that the most effective dose for prophylaxis involves something
*  like weekly administration and that that is because that is not a historical pattern of use
*  for the drug it is possible that there is some long-term implication of being on it for
*  being on it weekly for a long period of time there's not a strong indication of that the
*  safety signal that we have over people using the drug over many years and using it in high doses
*  in fact dr corey told me yesterday that there are cases in which people have made calculation
*  errors and taken a massive overdose of the drug and had no ill effect so anyway there's lots of
*  reasons to think the drug is comparatively safe but no drug is perfectly safe and i do worry about
*  the long-term implications of taking it i also think it's very likely because the drug is
*  administered in a dose something like let's say 15 milligrams for somebody my size once a week after
*  you've gone through the initial the initial double dose that you take 48 hours apart it is apparent
*  that if the amount of drug in your system is sufficient to be protective at the end of the
*  week then it was probably far too high at the beginning of the week so there's a question
*  about whether or not you could flatten out the intake so that the amount of ivermectin goes down
*  but the protection remains i have little doubt that that would be discovered if we looked for it
*  but that said it does seem to be quite safe highly effective at preventing covid the 86
*  number is plenty high enough for us to drive sars cov2 to extinction in light of its are not
*  number of slightly more than two and so why we are not using it as a bit of a a mystery so even
*  if everything you said now turns out to be not correct it is nevertheless obvious that it's
*  sufficiently promising it always has been in order to merit rigorous scientific exploration
*  investigation doing a lot of studies and certainly not censoring the science or the discussion of it
*  so before we talk about the various vaccines for a cove at 19 i'd like to talk to you about
*  censorship given everything you're saying why did youtube and other places
*  censor discussion of ivermectin well there's a question about why they say they did it
*  and there's a question about why they actually did it now it is worth mentioning that youtube
*  is part of a consortium it is partnered with twitter facebook reuters ap financial times
*  washington post some other notable organizations and that this group has appointed itself
*  the arbiter of truth in effect they have decided to control discussion ostensibly
*  to prevent the distribution of misinformation now how have they chosen to do that in this case
*  they have chosen to simply utilize the recommendations of the who and the cdc
*  and apply them as if they are synonymous with scientific truth problem even at their best
*  the who and cdc are not scientific entities they are entities that are about public health
*  and public health has this whether it's right or not and i believe i disagree with it but
*  it has this self-assigned right to lie that comes from the fact that there is game theory that
*  works against for example a successful vaccination campaign that if everybody else takes a vaccine
*  and therefore the herd becomes immune through vaccination and you decide not to take a vaccine
*  then you benefit from the immunity of the herd without having taken the risk so people who do
*  best are the people who opt out that's a hazard and the who and cdc as public health entities
*  effectively oversimplify stories in order that that game theory does not cause a predictable
*  tragedy of the commons with that said once that right to lie exists then it finds out it turns
*  out to serve the interests of for example pharmaceutical companies which have emergency
*  use authorizations that require that there not be a safe and effective treatment and have immunity
*  from liability for harms caused by their product so that's a recipe for disaster right you you don't
*  need to be a sophisticated thinker about complex systems to see the hazard of immunizing
*  a company from the harm of its own product at the same time that that product can only
*  exist in the market if some other product that works better somehow fails to be noticed
*  so somehow youtube is doing the bidding of merc and others whether it knows that that's what it's
*  doing i have no idea i think this may be another case of an autopilot that thinks it's doing the
*  right thing because it's parroting the corrupt wisdom of the who and the cdc but the who and
*  the cdc have been wrong again and again in this pandemic and the irony here is that with youtube
*  coming after me well my channel has been right where the who and cdc have been wrong consistently
*  over the whole pandemic so how is it that youtube is censoring us because the who and cdc disagree
*  with us when in fact in past disagreements we've been right and they've been wrong there's so much
*  to talk about here so i've heard this many times actually on the inside of youtube and with
*  colleagues that i've talked about talked with is they kind of in a very casual way say their
*  job is simply to slow or prevent the spread of misinformation
*  and they say like that's an easy thing to do like to know what is true or not is an easy thing to do
*  and so from the youtube perspective i think they basically outsource of of the the task of knowing
*  what is true or not to public institutions that on a basic google search claim to be the arbiters
*  of truth so if you were youtube who are exceptionally profitable and exceptionally powerful
*  in terms of controlling what people get to see or not what would you do would you take a stand
*  a public stand against the who cdc or would you instead say you know what let's open the dam
*  and let any video on anything fly what do you what do you do here if you say you were put
*  if brett weinstein was put in charge of youtube for a month in this most critical of times where
*  youtube actually has incredible amounts of power to educate the populace to give power of knowledge
*  to the populace such that they can reform institutions what would you do how would you run youtube
*  well unfortunately or fortunately this is actually quite simple the founders the american founders
*  settled on a counter-intuitive formulation that people should be free to say anything they should
*  be free from the government blocking them from doing so they did not imagine that in formulating
*  that right that most of what was said would be of high quality nor did they imagine it would be free
*  of harmful things what they correctly reasoned was that the benefit of leaving everything so it
*  can be said exceeds the cost which everyone understands to be substantial what i would say
*  is they could not have anticipated the impact the centrality of platforms like youtube facebook
*  twitter etc if they had they would not have limited the first amendment as they did they clearly
*  understood that the power of the federal government was so great that it needed to be limited by
*  granting explicitly the right of citizens to say anything in fact youtube twitter facebook may be
*  more powerful in this moment than the federal government of their worst nightmares could have
*  been the power that these entities have to control thought and to shift civilization is so great that
*  we need to have those same protections it doesn't mean that harmful things won't be said but it
*  means that nothing has changed about the cost benefit analysis of building the right to censor
*  so if i were running youtube the limit of what should be allowed is the limit of the law
*  right if what you are doing is legal then it should not be youtube's place to limit what gets said or
*  who gets to hear it that is between speakers and audience will harm come from that of course it will
*  but will net harm come from it no i don't believe it will i believe that allowing everything to be
*  said does allow a process in which better ideas do come to the fore and win out so you believe
*  that in the end when there's complete freedom to share ideas that truth will win out so what i've
*  noticed just as a brief side comment that certain things become viral irregardless of their truth
*  i've noticed that things that are dramatic and or funny like things that become memes
*  are not don't have to be grounded in truth and so that what worries me there is that we basically
*  maximize for drama versus maximize for truth in a system where everything is free and that's
*  worrying in the time of emergency well yes it's all worrying in time of emergency to be sure
*  but i want you to notice that what you've happened on is actually an analog for a much
*  deeper and older problem human beings are the we are not a blank slate but we are the blanket
*  slate that nature has ever devised and there's a reason for that right it's where our flexibility
*  comes from we have effectively we are robots in which the a large fraction of the cognitive
*  capacity has been or of the behavioral capacity has been offloaded to the software layer which
*  gets written and rewritten over evolutionary time that means effectively that much of what we are
*  in fact the important part of what we are is housed in the in the cultural layer and the
*  conscious layer and not in the hardware hard coding layer that layer is prone to make errors
*  right and anybody who's watched a child grow up knows that children make absurd errors all the
*  time right that's part of the process as we were discussing earlier it is also true that as you
*  look across a field of people discussing things a lot of what is said is pure nonsense it's garbage
*  but the tendency of garbage to emerge and even to spread in the short term does not say that over
*  the long term what sticks is not the valuable ideas so there is a high tendency for novelty
*  to be created in the cultural space but there's also a high tendency for it to go extinct and you
*  have to keep that in mind it's not like the genome right everything is happening at a much higher rate
*  things are being created they're being destroyed and i can't say that you know i mean obviously
*  we've seen totalitarianism arise many times and it's very destructive each time it does so it's
*  not like hey freedom to come up with any idea you want hasn't produced a whole lot of carnage but
*  the question is over time does it produce more open fairer more decent societies and i believe
*  that it does i can't prove it but that does seem to be the pattern i i believe so as well the thing
*  is in the short term freedom of speech absolute freedom of speech can be quite destructive
*  but you nevertheless have to hold on to that because in the long term i think you and i i
*  guess are optimistic in the sense that good ideas will win out i don't know how strongly i believe
*  that it will work but i will say i haven't heard a better idea yeah i would also point out that
*  there's something very significant in this question of the hubris involved in imagining
*  that you're going to improve the discussion by censoring which is the majority of concepts at
*  the fringe are nonsense that's automatic but the heterodoxy at the fringe which is indistinguishable
*  at the beginning from the nonsense ideas is the key to progress so if you decide hey the fringe is
*  99 garbage let's just get rid of it right hey that's a strong win we're getting rid of 99
*  garbage for one percent something or other and the point is yeah but that one percent something
*  rather is the key you're throwing out the key and so that's what youtube is doing frankly i think
*  at the point that it started censoring my channel you know in the immediate aftermath of this major
*  reversal of lab for lab leak it should have looked at itself and said well what the hell are we doing
*  who are we censoring we're censoring somebody who was just right right in a conflict with the very
*  same people on whose behalf we are now censoring right that should have caused them to wake up
*  so you said one approach if you're on youtube is this basically let all videos go that do not
*  violate the law well i should fix that okay i believe that that is the basic principle eric
*  makes an excellent point about the distinction between ideas and personal attacks doxing these
*  other things so i agree there's no value in allowing people to destroy each other's lives
*  even if there's a technical legal defense for it now how you draw that line i don't know
*  but you know what i'm talking about is yes people should be free to traffic in bad ideas and they
*  should be free to expose that the ideas are bad and hopefully that process results in better ideas
*  winning out yeah there's an interesting line between you know like ideas like the earth is flat
*  which i believe you should not censor and then like you start to encroach on like personal attacks
*  so not not you know doxing yes but like not even getting to that like there's a certain point
*  where it's like that's no longer ideas that's more that's somehow not productive even if it's
*  it feels like believing the earth is flat it's somehow productive because maybe there's a tiny
*  percent chance it is you know like it just feels like personal attacks it doesn't well you know
*  it's i'm torn on this because there's assholes in this world there's fraudulent people in this
*  world so sometimes personal attacks are useful to reveal that but there's a line you can cross
*  like there's a comedy where people make fun of others i think that's amazing that's very
*  powerful that's very useful even if it's painful but then there's like once it gets to be
*  yeah there's a certain line it's a gray area where you cross where it's no longer
*  in any possible world productive and that's a really weird gray area for youtube to operate in
*  and it feels like should be a crowd source thing where people vote on it but then again do you
*  trust the majority to vote on what is crossing the line and not i mean this is where this is really
*  interesting on this particular like the scientific aspect of this do you think youtube should take
*  more of a stance not censoring but to actually have scientists within youtube having these kinds
*  of discussions and then be able to almost speak out in a transparent way this is what we're going
*  to let this video stand but here's all these other opinions almost like take a more active role in
*  its recommendation system in trying to present a full picture to you right now they're not and
*  the recommender systems are not human fine-tuned they're all based on how you click and there's
*  this clustering algorithms they're not taking an active role on giving you the full spectrum of
*  ideas in the space of science they just censor or not well at the moment it's going to be pretty
*  hard to compel me that these people should be trusted with any sort of curation or comment on
*  matters of evidence because they have demonstrated that they are incapable of doing it well
*  you could make such an argument and i guess i'm open to the idea of institutions that would look
*  something like youtube that would be capable of offering something valuable i mean and you know
*  even just the fact of them literally curating things and putting some videos next to others
*  you know implies something so yeah there's a question to be answered but at the moment no
*  at the moment what it is doing is quite literally putting not only individual humans in tremendous
*  jeopardy by censoring discussion of useful tools and making tools that are more hazardous than has
*  been acknowledged seem safe right but it is also placing humanity in danger of a permanent
*  relationship with this pathogen i cannot emphasize enough how expensive that is it's effectively
*  incalculable if the relationship becomes permanent the number of people who will ultimately
*  suffer and die from it is indefinitely large yeah there's a currently the algorithm is very
*  rabbit hole driven meaning if you if you click on the flat earth videos it'll that's all you're
*  going to be presented with and you're not going to be nicely presented with arguments against the
*  flat earth and the flip side of that if you watch like quantum mechanics videos or no
*  general relativity videos it's very rare you're going to get in a recommendation have you considered
*  the earth is flat and i think you should have both same with vaccine videos that present the
*  power and the incredible like biology genetics virology about the vaccine you're rarely going
*  to get videos from well-respected scientific minds presenting possible dangers of vaccine
*  and the vice versa is true as well which is if you're looking at the dangers of the vaccine on
*  youtube you're not going to get the highest quality of videos recommended to you and i'm
*  not talking about like manually inserted cdc videos that are like the most untrustworthy things you
*  can possibly watch about how everybody should take the vaccine it's the safest thing ever
*  no it's about incredible again mit colleagues of mine incredible biologists virologists that
*  i'll talk about the the details of how the mrna vaccines work and all those kinds of things
*  i think maybe this is me with the ai hat on is i think the algorithm can fix a lot of this
*  and youtube should build better algorithms and trust that to and a couple of complete freedom
*  of speech to expand the what people are able to think about present always varied views not
*  balanced in some artificial way hard-coded way but balanced in a way that's crowdsourced i think
*  that's an algorithm problem that can be solved because then you can delegate it to the algorithm
*  as opposed to this hard code censorship of basically creating artificial boundaries on
*  what can and can't be discussed instead creating a full spectrum of exploration that can be done
*  and trusting the intelligence of people to do the exploration well there's there's a lot there i
*  would say we have to keep in mind that we're talking about a publicly held company with
*  shareholders and obligations to them and that that may make it impossible and i remember
*  many years ago back in the early days of google i remember a sense of terror at the loss of
*  general search right it used to be that the that google if you searched came up with the same
*  thing for everyone and then it got personalized and for a while it was possible to turn off the
*  personalization which was still not great because if everybody else is looking at a personalized
*  search and you can tune into one that isn't personalized what are you know that doesn't
*  tell you why the world is sounding the way it is but nonetheless it was at least an option and then
*  that vanished and the problem is i think this is literally deranging us that in effect i mean what
*  you're describing is unthinkable it is unthinkable that in the face of a campaign to vaccine vaccinate
*  people in order to reach herd immunity that youtube would give you videos on hazards of
*  vaccines when this is you know how hazardous the vaccines are is an unsettled question why is it
*  unthinkable that doesn't make any sense from a company perspective if intelligent people
*  in large amounts are open-minded and are thinking through the hazards and the benefits of a vaccine
*  a company should should find the best videos to present what people are thinking about well let's
*  come up with a hypothetical okay let's come up with a a very deadly disease for which there's
*  a vaccine that is very safe though not perfectly safe and we are then faced with youtube trying
*  to figure out what to do for somebody searching on vaccine safety suppose it is necessary in
*  order to drive the pathogen to extinction something like smallpox that people get on board with the
*  vaccine but there's a tiny fringe of people who thinks that the vaccine is a mind control agent
*  all right so should youtube direct people to the only claims against this vaccine which is that
*  it's a mind control agent when in fact the vaccine is very safe whatever that means if that were the
*  actual configuration of the puzzle then youtube would be doing active harm pointing you to
*  to this other video potentially now yes i would love to live in a world where people
*  are up to the challenge of sorting that out but the my basic point would be if it's an evidentiary
*  question and there is essentially no evidence that the vaccine is a mind control agent and there's
*  plenty of evidence that the vaccine is safe then well you look for this video we're going to give
*  you this one puts it on a par right so for the mind that's tracking how much thought is there
*  behind it's safe versus how much thought is there behind it's a mind control agent will result in
*  artificially elevating this now in the current case what we've seen is not this at all we have
*  seen evidence obscured in order to create a false story about safety and we saw the inverse with
*  ivermectin we saw a campaign to portray the drug as more dangerous and less effective than the
*  evidence clearly suggested it was so we're not talking about a comparable thing but i guess my
*  point is the algorithmic solution that you point to creates a problem of its own which is that it
*  means that the way to get exposure is to generate something fringy if you're the only thing on some
*  fringe then suddenly youtube would be recommending those things and that's that's obviously a gameable
*  system at best yeah but the solution to that i know you're you're creating a thought experiment
*  maybe playing a little bit of a devil's advocate i think the solution to that is not to limit the
*  algorithm in the case of the super deadly virus it's for the scientist to step up and become
*  better communicators more charismatic is fight the battle of ideas sort of create better videos you
*  know like if the virus is truly deadly you have a lot more ammunition a lot more data a lot more
*  material to work with in terms of communicating with the public it's so be better at communicating
*  and stop being uh you have to start trusting the intelligence of people and also being transparent
*  and playing the game of the internet which is like what is the internet hungry for i believe
*  authenticity stop looking like you're full of shit it's the scientific community if there's any
*  flaw that i currently see especially the people that are in public office that like anthony
*  falchi they look like they're full of shit and i know they're brilliant why don't they look more
*  authentic so they're losing that game and i think a lot of people observing this entire system now
*  younger scientists are seeing this and saying okay if i want to continue being a scientist in the
*  public eye and i want to be effective at my job i'm going to have to be a lot more authentic
*  so they're learning the lesson this evolutionary system is working uh so there's just a younger
*  generation of minds coming up that i think will do a much better job in this battle of ideas that
*  when the much more dangerous virus comes along they'll be able to be better communicators at
*  least that's the hope the the using the algorithm to control that is uh i feel like it's a big
*  problem so you're going to have the same problem with a deadly virus as with the current virus
*  if you let youtube draw hard lines by the pr and the marketing people versus the broad community
*  of scientists well in some sense you're you're uh suggesting something that's close kin to what
*  i was saying about you know freedom of expression ultimately provides an advantage to to better
*  ideas so i'm in agreement broadly speaking um but i would also say there's probably some sort of
*  you know let's imagine the world that you propose where youtube shows you the alternative point of
*  view that has the problem that i suggest but one thing you could do is you could give us the
*  tools to understand what we're looking at right you could give us so first of all there's something
*  i think myopic solipsistic narcissistic about a an algorithm that serves shareholders by showing you
*  what you want to see rather than what you need to know right that's the distinction is flattering
*  you you know playing to your blind spot is something that algorithm will figure out but it's
*  not healthy for us all to have google playing to our blind spot it's very very dangerous so
*  what i really want is analytics that allow me or maybe options and analytics the options should
*  allow me to see what alternative perspectives are being explored right so here's the thing i'm
*  searching and it leads me down this road right let's let's say it's ivermectin okay i find all
*  of this evidence that ivermectin works i find all of these discussions and people talk about
*  various protocols and this and that and then i could say all right what is the other side and
*  i could see who is searching not as individuals but what demographics are searching alternatives
*  and maybe you could even combine it with something reddit like where effectively let's say that there
*  was a position that uh i don't know that that a vaccine is a mind control device and you could
*  have a steel man this argument competition effectively and the better answers that steel
*  man and as well as possible would rise to the top and so you could read the top three or four
*  explanations about why this really credibly is a mind control product and you can say well
*  that doesn't really add up i can check these three things myself and they can't possibly be right
*  right and you could dismiss it and then as an argument that was credible let's say
*  plate tectonics before that was an accepted concept you'd say wait a minute there is evidence
*  for plate tectonics as crazy as it sounds that the continents are floating around on liquid
*  actually that's not so implausible you know we've got these subduction zones we've got a geology
*  that is compatible we've got puzzle piece continents that seem to fit together wow that's a surprising
*  amount of evidence for that position so i'm going to file some bayesian probability with it that's
*  updated for the fact that actually the steel man argument is better than i was expecting right so
*  i could imagine something like that where a i would love the search to be indifferent to who's
*  searching right the the solipsistic thing is too dangerous so the search could be general so we
*  would all get a sense for what everybody else was seeing too and then some layer that didn't have
*  anything to do with what youtube points you to or not but allowed you to see you know the general
*  pattern of adherence to searching for information and again a layer in which those things could be
*  defended so you could hear what a good argument sounded right like rather than just hear a
*  caricatured argument yeah and also reward people creators that have demonstrated like a track
*  record of open-mindedness and correctness correctness as much as it could be measured
*  over long term and sort of uh i mean a lot of this maps to incentivizing good long-term behavior
*  not immediate kind of dopamine rush uh kind of uh signals i think ultimately the algorithm
*  um on the individual level should optimize for personal growth
*  long-term happiness just growth intellectually growth in terms of lifestyle personally and so on
*  as opposed to immediate uh i think that's going to build a better society not even just like truth
*  because i think truth is a complicated thing it's more just you growing as a person uh exploring
*  the space of ideas changing your mind often increasing the level to which your open mind
*  and the knowledge base you're operating from uh the willingness to um empathize with others all
*  those kinds of things the algorithm should optimize for that creating a better human at the individual
*  level that you're alt i think that's a great business model because the person that's using
*  this tool will then be happier with themselves for having used it and it'll be a lifelong
*  quote-unquote customer i think it's a great business model to make a happy open-minded
*  knowledgeable better human being it's a terrible business model under the current system what you
*  want is to build the system in which it is a great business model why is a terrible model
*  because it will be decimated by those who play to the short term i don't think so why i mean i think
*  we're living it we're living it well no because if if you have the alternative that presents itself
*  it it points out the emperor emperor has no clothes i mean it points out that youtube is
*  operating in this way twitter is operating in this way so facebook is operating in this way how long
*  term would you like the wisdom to to prove that well even a week is better what's currently
*  right but the problem is you know if a week loses out to an hour right and i don't think it loses
*  out it loses out in the short term that's my point at least you're a great communicator and you
*  basically say look here's the metrics and a lot of it is like how people actually feel like this
*  this is what people experience with social media they look back at the previous month and say
*  i felt shitty and a lot of days because of social media right like they if you look back at the
*  previous few weeks and say wow i'm a better person because of that month happened that's
*  they immediately choose the product that's going to lead to that that's what love for products looks
*  like if you if you love like a lot of people love their tesla car like that's or iphone or like
*  beautiful design that's what love looks like you look back i'm a better person for having used this
*  thing well you gotta ask yourself the question though if this is such a great business model
*  why isn't it evolving why don't we see it honestly it's competence it's like people are just it's not
*  it's not easy to build new it's not easy to build products tools systems on new ideas it's kind of
*  a new idea we've gone through this everything we're seeing now comes from the ideas of the
*  initial birth of the internet there just needs to be new sets of tools that are incentivizing
*  long-term personal growth and happiness that's it right but but what we have is a market that
*  doesn't favor this right i mean for one thing you know we had an alternative to facebook right that
*  looked you know you owned your own data it wasn't exploitative and facebook bought a huge interest
*  in it and it died i mean who do you know who's on diaspora the execution there was not good right
*  but it could have gotten better right i don't think that the argument that why hasn't somebody
*  done it a good argument for it's not going to completely destroy all of twitter and facebook
*  when somebody does it or twitter will catch up and pivot to to the algorithm this is not what
*  this is not what i'm saying there's obviously great ideas that remain unexplored because nobody
*  has gotten to the foothill that would allow you to explore them that's true but you know an internet
*  that was non-predatory is an obvious idea and many of us know that we want it and many of us have seen
*  prototypes of it and we don't move because there's no audience there so the network effects cause you
*  to stay with the predatory internet but let me just i wasn't kidding about build the system in
*  which your idea is a great business plan so in our upcoming book heather and i in our last chapter
*  explore something called the fourth frontier and fourth frontier has to do with sort of a 2.0
*  version of civilization which we freely admit we can't tell you very much about it's something
*  that would have to be we would have to prototype our way there we would have to effectively
*  navigate our way there but the result would be very much like what you're describing it would
*  be something that effectively liberates humans meaningfully and most importantly it has to feel
*  like growth without depending on growth in other words human beings are creatures that like every
*  other creature is effectively looking for growth right we are looking for underexploited or
*  opportunities and when we find them our ancestors for example if they happen into a new
*  valley that was unexplored by people their population would grow until it hit carrying
*  capacity so there would be this great feeling of there's abundance until you hit carrying capacity
*  which is inevitable and then zero sum dynamics would set in so in order for human beings to
*  flourish long term the way to get there is to satisfy the desire for growth without hooking
*  it to actual growth which only moves and fits and starts and this is actually i believe the key
*  to avoiding these you know spasms of human tragedy when in the absence of growth people do
*  something that causes their population to experience growth which is they go and
*  make war on or commit genocide against some other population which is something we obviously have to
*  stop by the way this is a hunter gatherers guide to the 21st century co-authored
*  that's right your wife heather being released this september i believe you said you're going to do
*  a little bit of a preview videos on each chapter leading up to the release so i'm looking forward
*  to the last chapter the as well as all the the previous one i have a few questions on that
*  so you you have um you generally have faith to clarify that technology could be the thing
*  that empowers this kind of future well if you just let technology evolve it's going to be our
*  undoing right one of the things that i um fault my libertarian friends for is this faith that the
*  market is going to find solutions without destroying us and my sense is i'm a very strong
*  believer in markets all right i believe in their power even above some market fundamentalists but
*  what i don't believe is that they should be allowed to plot our course right markets are very good at
*  figuring out how to do things they are not good at all about figuring out what we should do
*  right what we should want we have to tell markets what we want and then they can tell us how to do
*  it best and if we adopted that kind of pro market but in a context where it's not steering where
*  human well-being is actually the driver we can do remarkable things and the technology that emerges
*  would naturally be enhancing of human well-being perfectly so no but overwhelmingly so but at the
*  moment markets are finding our every defective character and exploiting them and making huge
*  profits and making us worse to each other in the process before we leave covet 19 let me
*  ask you about a very difficult topic which is the vaccines so i took the phizer vaccine the two shots
*  you did not you have been taking ivermectin yeah so one of the arguments against the discussion of
*  ivermectin is that it prevents people from being fully willing to get the vaccine
*  how would you compare ivermectin and the vaccine for covet 19 all right that's a good question
*  i would say first of all there are some hazards with the vaccine that people need to be aware of
*  there are some things that we cannot rule out and for which there is some evidence the two that i
*  think people should be tracking is the possibility some would say a likelihood that a vaccine of this
*  nature that is to say very narrowly focused on a single antigen is a an evolutionary pressure
*  that will drive the emergence of variants that will escape the protection that comes from the
*  vaccine so this is a hazard it is a particular hazard in light of the fact that these vaccines
*  have a substantial number of breakthrough cases so one danger is that a person who has been vaccinated
*  will shed viruses that are specifically less visible or invisible to the immunity created by
*  the vaccines so we may be creating the next pandemic by applying the pressure of vaccines
*  at a point that it doesn't make sense to the other danger has to do with something called
*  antibody dependent enhancement which is something that we see in certain diseases like dengue fever
*  you may know that dengue one gets a case and then their second case is much more devastating so
*  breakbone fever is when you get your second case of dengue and dengue effectively utilizes the
*  immune response that is produced by prior exposure to attack the body in ways that it is incapable
*  of doing before exposure so this is apparently this pattern has apparently blocked past efforts
*  to make vaccines against your own viruses whether it will happen here or not it is still too early
*  to say but before we even get to the question of harm done to individuals by these vaccines we have
*  to ask about what the overall impact is going to be and it's not clear in the way people think it
*  is that if we vaccinate enough people the pandemic will end it could be that we vaccinate people and
*  make the pandemic worse and while nobody can say for sure that that's where we're headed it is at
*  least something to be aware of so don't vaccines usually create that kind of evolutionary pressure
*  to create more deadlier different strains of the virus isn't so is there something particular
*  with these mRNA vaccines that's uniquely dangerous in this regard well it's not even just the mRNA
*  vaccines the mRNA vaccines and the adeno vector DNA vaccine all share the same vulnerability which
*  is they are very narrowly focused on one subunit of the spike protein so that is a very concentrated
*  evolutionary signal we are also deploying it in mid-pandemic and it takes time for immunity to
*  develop so part of the problem here if you if you inoculated a population before encounter with a
*  pathogen then there might be substantially enough immunity to prevent this phenomenon from happening
*  but in this case we are inoculating people as they are encountering those who are sick with the
*  disease and what that means is the disease is now faced with a lot of opportunities to effectively
*  evolutionarily practice escape strategies so one thing is the timing the other thing is the narrow
*  focus now in a traditional vaccine you would typically not have one antigen right you would
*  have basically a virus full of antigens and the immune system would therefore produce a broader
*  response so that is the case for people who have had covid right they have an immunity that is
*  broader because it wasn't so focused on one part of the spike protein so anyway there is something
*  unique here so these platforms create that special hazard they also have components that we haven't
*  used before in people so for example the lipid nanoparticles that coat the RNAs are distributing
*  themselves around the body in a way that will have unknown consequences so anyway there's there's
*  reason reason for concern is it possible for you to steel man the argument that everybody should
*  get vaccinated of course the argument that everybody should get vaccinated is that nothing
*  is perfectly safe phase three trials showed good safety for the vaccines now that may or may not
*  be actually true but what we saw suggested high degree of efficacy and a high degree of safety
*  for the vaccines that inoculating people quickly and therefore dropping the landscape of available
*  victims for the pathogen to a very low number so that herd immunity drives it to extinction
*  requires us all to take our share of the risk and that that because driving it to extinction
*  should be our highest priority that really people shouldn't think too much about the various nuances
*  because overwhelmingly fewer people will die if the population is vaccinated from the vaccine
*  then we'll die from covet if they're not vaccinated and with the vaccine as it currently is being
*  deployed that is a quite a likely scenario that uh everything you know the virus will fade away
*  in the following sense that the probability that a more dangerous strain will be created
*  is non-zero but it's not 50 it's something smaller and so the most like well i don't know maybe you
*  disagree with that but the the scenario we're most likely to see now that the vaccine is here
*  is that the via the effects of the virus will fade away first of all i don't believe that the
*  probability of creating a worse pandemic is low enough to discount i think the probability is
*  fairly high and frankly we are seeing a wave of variants that um we will have to do a careful
*  analysis to figure out what exactly that has to do with campaigns of vaccination where they have
*  been where they haven't been where the variants emerged from but i believe that what we are seeing
*  is a disturbing pattern that reflects that uh those who were advising caution may well have
*  been right the data here by the way and the small tangent is terrible terrible right and why is it
*  terrible is another question right this is where i started getting angry yes it's like there's an
*  obvious opportunity for exceptionally good data for exceptionally rigorous like even the self
*  like the website for self-reporting side effects for not side effects but negative adverse events
*  adverse events sorry for the vaccine like there's many things i could say from both the study
*  perspective but mostly let me just put on my hat of like html and like web design like it's like the
*  worst website it makes it so unpleasant to report it makes it so unclear what you're reporting if
*  somebody actually has serious effects like if you have very mild effects what are the incentives for
*  you to even use that crappy website with many pages and forms that don't make any sense if you
*  have adverse effects what are the incentives for you to use that website what is the trust
*  that you have that this information will be used well all those kinds of things and the data about
*  who's getting vaccinated anonymized data about who's getting vaccinated where when with that
*  with what vaccine coupled with the adverse effects all of that we should be collecting
*  instead we're completely not and we're doing it in a crappy way and using that crappy data to make
*  conclusions that you then twist you're basically collecting in a way that can
*  arrive at whatever conclusions you want and the data is being collected by
*  the institutions by governments and so therefore it's obviously they're going to try to construct
*  any kind of narratives they want based on this crappy data reminds me of much of psychology the
*  field that i love but is flawed in many fundamental ways so rant over but coupled with the dangers that
*  you're speaking to we don't have even the data to um to understand the dangers yeah uh i'm going
*  to pick up on your rant and say we estimates of the degree of under reporting in veres are
*  that it is 10 of the real to 100 and that's the system for reporting yeah the various system is
*  the is the system for reporting adverse events so in the u.s we have above 5 000
*  unexpected deaths that seem in time to be associated with vaccination that is an undercount
*  almost certainly and by a large factor we don't know how large i've seen estimates 25 000 dead
*  in the u.s alone now you can make the argument that okay that's a large number but the necessity of
*  immunizing the population to drive sars-cov-2 to extinction is such that it's an acceptable number
*  but i would point out that that actually does not make any sense and the reason it doesn't make any
*  sense is actually there's several reasons one if that was really your point that yes many many
*  people are going to die but many more will die if we don't do this um were that your approach
*  you would not be inoculating people who had had a covet 19 which is a large population there's
*  no reason to expose those people to danger their risk of adverse events in the case that they
*  have them is greater so there's no reason that we would be allowing those people to face a risk
*  of death if this was really about an acceptable number of deaths arising out of this uh the set
*  of vaccines i would also point out there's something incredibly bizarre and i would
*  i struggle to find language that is strong enough for the horror of vaccinating children in this
*  case because children suffer a greater risk of long-term effects because they are going to live
*  longer and because this is earlier in their development therefore it impacts systems that
*  are still forming they tolerate covet well and so the benefit to them is very small and so the only
*  argument for doing this is that they may cryptically be carrying more covet than we think
*  and therefore they may be integral to the way the virus spreads to the population but if that's the
*  reason that we are inoculating children and there has been some revision in the last day or two about
*  the recommendation on this because of the adverse events that have shown up in children but to the
*  extent that we were vaccinating children we were doing it to protect old infirm people who are the
*  most likely to succumb to covet 19 what society puts children in danger robs children of life
*  to save old infirm people that's upside down so there's something about the way we are going about
*  vaccinating who we are vaccinating what dangers we are pretending don't exist that suggests that to
*  some set of people vaccinating people is a good in and of itself that that is the objective of the
*  exercise not herd immunity and the last thing i'm sorry i don't want to prevent you from jumping in
*  here but the second reason in addition to the fact that we're exposing people to danger that we
*  should not be exposing them to by the way as a tiny tangent another huge part of this soup that
*  should have been part of it that's an incredible solution is large-scale testing but that that
*  might be another couple hour but conversation but there's these solutions that are obvious that
*  were available from the very beginning so you could argue that i've erected is not that obvious
*  but maybe the whole point is you have aggressive very fast research that leads to meta-analysis
*  and then large-scale production and deployment okay at least that possibility should be
*  seriously considered coupled with a serious consideration of large-scale deployment of
*  testing at home testing that could have accelerated the the speed at which we reached that
*  herd immunity but i don't even want to well let me just say i am also completely shocked that we
*  did not get on high quality testing early and that we are still suffering from this even now
*  because just the simple ability to track where the virus moves between people would tell us a
*  lot about its mode of transmission which would allow us to protect ourselves better instead that
*  information was hard won and for no good reason so i i also find this mysterious you've spoken with
*  eric weinstein your brother on his podcast the portal about the ideas that eventually led to the
*  paper you published titled the reserved capacity hypothesis i think first
*  can you explain this paper and the ideas that led up to it sure easier to explain the conclusion
*  of the paper there's a question about why a creature that can replace its cells with new cells
*  grows feeble and inefficient with age we call that process which is otherwise called aging we
*  call it senescence and senescence in this paper it is hypothesized is the unavoidable downside
*  of a cancer prevention feature of our bodies that each cell has a limit on the number of times it
*  can divide there are a few cells in the body that are exceptional but most of our cells can only
*  divide a limited number of times that's called the hayflick limit and the hayflick limit reduces the
*  ability of the organism to replace tissues it therefore results in a failure over time of
*  maintenance and repair and that explains why we we become decrepit as we grow old the question
*  was why would that be especially in light of the fact that the mechanism that seems to limit the
*  ability of cells to reproduce is something called a telomere telomere is a it's a not a gene but it's
*  a dna sequence at the ends of our chromosomes that is just simply repetitive and the number of repeats
*  functions like a counter so there's a number of repeats that you have after development is
*  finished and then each time the cell divides a little bit of telomere is lost and at the point
*  that the telomere becomes critically short the cell stops dividing even though it still has the
*  capacity to do so stops dividing and it starts transcribing different genes than it did when it
*  had more telomere so what my work did was it looked at the fact that the telomere shortening was being
*  studied by two different groups it was being studied by people who were interested in counteracting
*  the aging process and it was being studied in exactly the opposite fashion by people who were
*  interested in tumorigenesis and cancer the thought being because it was true that when
*  one looked into tumors they always had telomerase active that's the enzyme that lengthens our telomeres
*  so those folks were interested in bringing about a halt to the lengthening of telomeres in order to
*  counteract cancer and the folks who were studying the senescence process were interested in lengthening
*  telomeres in order to generate greater repair capacity and my point was evolutionarily speaking
*  this looks like a pleiotropic effect that the genes which create the tendency of the cells to
*  be limited in their capacity to replace themselves are providing a benefit in youth which is that we
*  are largely free of tumors and cancer at the inevitable late life cost that we grow feeble
*  and inefficient and eventually die and that matches a very old hypothesis in evolutionary theory by
*  somebody i was fortunate enough to know george williams one of the great 20th century evolutionists
*  who argued that senescence would have to be caused by pleiotropic genes that cause early life benefits
*  at unavoidable late life costs and although this isn't the exact nature of the system he predicted
*  it matches what he was expecting in many regards to a shocking degree that said the the the focus
*  of the paper is about the well let me just read the abstract we observed that captive rodent
*  breeding protocol is designed this is the end of the abstract we observed that captive rodent
*  breeding protocol is designed to increase reproductive output simultaneously exerts strong
*  selection against reproductive senescence and virtually eliminates selection that would otherwise
*  favor tumor suppression this appears to have greatly elongated the telomeres of laboratory mice
*  with their telomeric failsafe effectively disabled these animals are unreliable models of normal
*  senescence and tumor formation so basically using these mice is not going to lead to the right kinds
*  of conclusions safety tests employing these animals likely overestimate cancer risks and
*  underestimate tissue damage and consequent accelerated senescence so i think especially
*  with your discussion with eric the conclusion of this paper has to do with the fact that
*  like we shouldn't be using these mice to test the safety or to make conclusions about
*  cancer or senescence is that the basic takeaway like basically saying that the length of these
*  telomeres is an important variable to consider well let's put it this way i think there was a reason
*  that the world of scientists who was working on telomeres did not block did not spot the
*  pleiotropic relationship that was the key argument in my paper the reason they didn't spot it was
*  that there was a result that everybody knew which seemed inconsistent the result was that mice have
*  very long telomeres but they do not have very long lives now we can talk about what the actual meaning
*  of don't have very long lives is but in the end i was confronted with a hypothesis that would explain
*  a great many features of the way mammals and indeed vertebrates age but it was inconsistent
*  with one result and at first i thought maybe there's something wrong with the result maybe
*  this is one of these cases where the result was achieved once through some bad protocol and
*  everybody else was repeating it didn't turn out to be the case many laboratories had established
*  that mice had ultra long telomeres and so i began to wonder whether or not there was something
*  about the breeding protocols that generated these mice and what that would predict is that the mice
*  that have long telomeres would be laboratory mice and that wild mice would not and carol grider who
*  agreed to collaborate with me tested that hypothesis and showed that it was indeed true that
*  wild derived mice or at least mice that had been in captivity for a much shorter period of time did
*  not have ultra long telomeres now what this implied though as you read is that our reading protocols
*  generate lengthening of telomeres and the implication of that is that the animals that
*  have these very long telomeres will be hyper prone to create tumors they will be extremely
*  resistant to toxins because they have effectively an infinite capacity to replace any damage
*  tissue and so ironically if you give one of these ultra long telomere lab mice a toxin if the toxin
*  doesn't outright kill it it may actually increase its lifespan because it functions as a kind of
*  chemotherapy so the reason that chemotherapy works is that dividing cells are more vulnerable than
*  cells that are not dividing and so if this mouse has effectively had its cancer protection turned
*  off and it has cells dividing too rapidly and you give it a toxin you will slow down its tumors
*  faster than you harm its other tissues and so you'll get a paradoxical result that actually
*  some drug that's toxic seems to benefit the mouse now i don't think that that was understood before
*  i published my paper now i'm pretty sure it has to be and the problem is that this actually is a
*  system that serves pharmaceutical companies that have the difficult job of bringing compounds to
*  market many of which will be toxic maybe all of them will be toxic and these mice predispose our
*  system to declare these toxic compounds safe and in fact i believe we've seen the errors that result
*  from using these mice a number of times most famously with vioxx which turned out to do
*  conspicuous heart damage why do you think this paper on this idea has not gotten significant
*  traction well my collaborator carol grider said something to me that rings in my ears to this day
*  she initially after she showed that laboratory mice have anomalously long telomeres and that wild
*  mice don't have long telomeres i asked her where she was going to publish that result so that i
*  could cite it in my paper and she said that she was going to keep the result in house rather than
*  publish it and at the time i was a young graduate student i didn't really understand what she was
*  saying but in some sense the knowledge that a model organism is broken in a way that creates
*  the likelihood that certain results will be reliably generatable you can publish a paper
*  and make a big splash with such a thing or you can exploit the fact that you know how those models
*  will misbehave and other people don't so there's a question if somebody is motivated cynically
*  and what they want to do is appear to have deeper insight into biology because they predict things
*  better than others do knowing where the flaw is so that your predictions come out true is advantageous
*  at the same time i can't help but imagine that the pharmaceutical industry when it figured out
*  that the mice were predisposed to suggest that drugs were safe didn't leap to fix the problem
*  because in some sense it was the perfect cover for the difficult job of bringing drugs to market and
*  then discovering their actual toxicity profile right this made things look safer than they were
*  and i believe a lot of profits have likely been generated downstream
*  so to kind of play devil's advocate it's also possible that this particular the length of the
*  telomeres is not a strong variable for the conclusions for for the drug development and
*  for the conclusions that carol and others have been studying is that is that is it possible for
*  that to be the case that this like so one reason she and others could be ignoring this
*  is because it's not a strong variable well i don't believe so and in fact at the point that i went
*  to publish my paper carol published her result um she did so in a way that did not make a huge splash
*  did she like i apologize if i don't know how what was the emphasis of her publication of that paper
*  was it purely just kind of showing data or is there more because in your paper there's a kind
*  of more of a philosophical statement as well well my paper was motivated by interest in the
*  evolutionary dynamics around senescence i wasn't um you know pursuing grants or anything like that
*  i was just working on a puzzle i thought was interesting carol has of course gone on to win
*  a nobel prize for her co-discovery with elizabeth grider of telomerase the enzyme that lengthens
*  telomeres um but anyway she's a heavy hitter in the academic world i don't know exactly what her
*  purpose was i do know that she told me she wasn't planning to publish and i do know that i discovered
*  that she was in the process of publishing very late and when i asked her to send me the paper
*  to see whether or not she had put evidence in it that the hypothesis had come from me
*  she grudgingly sent it to me and my name was nowhere mentioned and she has she broke contact
*  at that point what it is that motivated her i don't know but i don't think it can possibly
*  be that this result is unimportant the fact is the reason i called her in the first place
*  and established contact that generated our collaboration was that she was a leading light
*  in the field of telomeric studies and because of that this question about whether the model
*  organisms are distorting the uh the understanding of the functioning of telomeres is it's central
*  do you feel like you you've been as a young graduate student do you think carol or do you
*  think the scientific community broadly screwed you over in some way you know i don't think of
*  it in those terms probably partly because it's not productive but you know i have a complex
*  relationship with this story right on the one hand i'm livid with carol greider for what she
*  did right she absolutely pretended that i didn't exist in the story and i don't think i was a
*  threat to her my interest was as an evolutionary biologist i had made an evolutionary contribution
*  she had tested a hypothesis and frankly i think it would have been better for her
*  if she had acknowledged what i had done i think it would have enhanced her work um and you know i was
*  let's put it this way when i watched her nobel lecture and i should say there's been a lot of
*  confusion about this nobel stuff i've never said that i should have gotten a nobel prize people
*  have misportrayed that um my in listening to her lecture i had one of the most bizarre emotional
*  experiences of my life because she presented the work that resulted from my hypothesis she presented
*  it as she had in her paper with no acknowledgement of where it had come from and she had in fact
*  portrayed the distortion of the telomeres as if it were a lucky fact because it allowed testing
*  hypotheses that would otherwise not be testable you have to understand as a young scientist
*  to watch work that you have done presented in what's surely the most important lecture of her
*  career right it's thrilling it was thrilling to see you know her uh her figures projected on the
*  screen there right to have been part of work that was important enough for that felt great
*  and of course to be erased from the story felt absolutely terrible um so anyway that's sort of
*  where i am with it my sense is um i what i'm really troubled by in the story is the fact
*  that as far as i know the flaw with the mice has not been addressed and actually eric did some
*  looking into this he tried to establish by calling the jack's lab and trying to ascertain
*  what had happened with the colonies whether any change in protocol had occurred and he couldn't
*  get anywhere there was seemingly no awareness that it was even an issue so i'm very troubled
*  by the fact that as a father for example i'm in no position to protect my family from the hazard
*  that i believe lurks in our medicine cabinets right i'm even though i'm aware of where the
*  hazard comes from it doesn't tell me anything useful about which of these drugs will turn out
*  to do damage if that is ultimately tested and that's a very frustrating position to be in
*  um on the other hand you know there's a part of me that's even still grateful to carol
*  for taking my call she didn't have to take my call and talk to some young graduate student who
*  had some evolutionary idea that wasn't you know in her wheelhouse specifically and yet she did
*  and you know for a while she was a good collaborator so well can i have to proceed
*  carefully here because it's a complicated topic um so she took the call
*  and you kind of you're kind of saying that she basically erased credit you know pretending you
*  didn't exist in some kind of in a certain sense let me phrase it this way i've um as a as a
*  research scientist at mit i've had and especially just part of a large set of collaborations i've
*  had a lot of students come to me and talk to me about ideas perhaps less interesting than what
*  we're discussing here in the space of ai that i've been thinking about anyway in general with
*  everything i'm doing with robotics people uh have told me a bunch of ideas that i'm already
*  thinking about the point is taking that idea see this is different because the idea has more power
*  in the space that we're talking about here and robotics is like your idea means shit until you
*  build it like so the engineering world is a little different but it there's a kind of sense that i
*  probably forgot a lot of brilliant ideas have been told to me do you think she pretended you
*  don't exist do you think she was so busy that she kind of forgot you know that she has like the
*  stream of brilliant people around her that there's a bunch of ideas that are swimming in the air
*  and you just kind of forget people that are a little bit on the periphery on the idea generation
*  like or is it some mix of both uh it's not a mix of both um i know that because we corresponded
*  she put a graduate student on this work he emailed me excitedly when the results came in um so there
*  was no ambiguity about what had happened what's more when i went to publish my work i actually
*  sent it to carol in order to get her feedback because i wanted to be a good collaborator to her
*  and she absolutely panned it made many critiques that were not valid but it was clear at that point
*  that she became an antagonist and none of this adds that she couldn't possibly have forgotten
*  the conversation um i believe i even sent her tissues at some point in in part not related to
*  this project but as a favor she was doing another project that involved telomeres and she needed
*  samples that i could get a hold of because of the museum of zoology that i was in
*  so this was not a one-off conversation i certainly know that those sorts of things can happen but
*  that's not what happened here this was a relationship that existed and then was suddenly
*  cut short at the point that she published her paper by surprise without saying where the hypothesis
*  had come from and began to be a opposing force to my work
*  is there there's a bunch of trajectories you could have taken through life
*  do you think about the trajectory of being um a researcher of then going to to war in the space
*  of ideas of publishing further papers along this line i mean that's often the dynamic of
*  the that fascinating space is you have a junior researcher with brilliant ideas and a senior
*  researcher that that starts out as a mentor that becomes a competitor i mean that that that happens
*  but then the way to um it's an almost an opportunity to shine is to publish a bunch
*  more papers in this place like to tear it apart to dig into like really uh make it a war of ideas
*  did you consider that possible trajectory i did a couple things to say about it one this work was
*  not central for me i took a year on the telomere project because something fascinating occurred
*  to me and i pursued it and the more i pursued it the clearer it was there was something there
*  but it wasn't the focus of my graduate work and i didn't want to become a telomere researcher what
*  i want to do is to be an evolutionary biologist who upgrades the toolkit of evolutionary concepts
*  so that we can see more clearly how organisms function and why and telomeres was a proof of
*  concept right that paper was a proof of concept that the toolkit in question works um as for the
*  need to pursue it further i think it's kind of absurd and you're not the first person to say
*  maybe that was the way to go about it but the basic point is look the work was good
*  the it turned out to be highly predictive frankly the model of senescence that i presented is now
*  widely accepted and i don't feel any misgivings at all about having spent a year on it said my piece
*  and moved on to other things which frankly i think are bigger i think there's a lot of good to be done
*  and it would be it would be a waste to get overly narrowly focused there's so many ways through
*  the space of science and the the most common ways to just publish a lot it's published a lot
*  of papers these incremental work and exploring the space kind of like ants looking for food
*  you're tossing out a bunch of different ideas some of them could be brilliant breakthrough ideas
*  nature some of their more confidence kind of publications all those kinds of things
*  did you consider that kind of path in science of course i considered it but i must say the
*  experience of having my first encounter with the process of peer review be this story which was
*  frankly a debacle from one end to the other with respect to the process of publishing
*  it did not it was not a very good sales pitch for trying to make a difference to publication
*  and i would point out part of what i ran into and i think frankly part of what explains
*  carol's behavior is that in some parts of science there is this dynamic where pi's parasitize their
*  underlings and if you're very very good you rise to the level where one day instead of being
*  parasitized you get to parasitize others now i find that scientifically despicable and it wasn't the
*  culture of the lab i grew up in at all my lab in fact the pi dick alexander who's now gone but who
*  was an incredible mind and a great human being he didn't want his graduate students working on the
*  same topics he was on not because it wouldn't have been useful and exciting but because in effect he
*  did not want any confusion about who had done what because he was a great mentor and the idea was
*  actually a great mentor is not stealing ideas and you and you don't want you don't want people
*  thinking that they are so anyway my point would be i wasn't up for being parasitized i don't like
*  the idea that if you are very good you get parasitized until it's your turn to parasitize
*  others that doesn't make sense to me a you know crossing over from evolution into cellular biology
*  may have exposed me to that that may have been par for the course but it doesn't make it acceptable
*  and i would also point out that my work falls in the realm of synthesis my work generally takes
*  evidence accumulated by others and places it together in order to generate hypotheses that
*  explain sets of phenomena that are otherwise intractable and i am not sure that that is best
*  done with narrow publications that are read by few and in fact i would point to the very conspicuous
*  example of richard dawkins who i must say i've learned a tremendous amount from and i greatly
*  admire dawkins has almost no publication record in the sense of peer-reviewed papers in journals
*  what he's done instead is done synthetic work and he's published it in books which are not
*  peer-reviewed in the same sense and frankly i think there's no doubting his contribution
*  to the field so my sense is if richard dawkins can illustrate that one can make contributions
*  to the field without using journals as the primary mechanism for distributing what you've
*  come to understand then it's obviously a valid mechanism and it's a far better one from the
*  point of view of accomplishing what i want to accomplish yeah it's really interesting
*  there is of course several levels you can do the kind of synthesis and that does require a lot of
*  both broad and deep thinking is exceptionally valuable you could also publish i mean i'm
*  working on something with andrew huberman now you can also publish synthesis sure that's like
*  review papers they're exceptionally valuable for the communities it brings the community together
*  tells a history tells a story where the community has been it paints a picture of where the path
*  lays for the future i think it's really valuable and richard dawkins is a good example somebody
*  that does that in book form that he kind of walks the line really interestingly
*  you have like somebody who like neil degrasse tyson who's more like a science communicator
*  richard dawkins sometimes a science communicator but he gets he gets like close to the technical
*  to where it's a little bit it's not shying away from being really a contribution to science
*  no he's made he's made real contributions in book form yes he really has fascinating i mean
*  roger pinerose i mean similar similar kind of idea that's interesting that's interesting synthesis
*  does not especially synthesis work work that synthesizes ideas does not necessarily need to
*  be peer reviewed it it is peer reviewed by peers reading it well and reviewing it that's it it is
*  reviewed by peers which is not synonymous with peer review and that's the thing is people don't
*  understand that the two things aren't the same right peer review is an anonymous process that
*  happens before publication in a place where there is a power dynamic right i mean the joke of course
*  is that peer review is actually peer preview right your biggest competitors get to see your work
*  before it sees the light of day and decide whether or not it gets published and you know again when
*  your formative experience with the publication apparatus is the one i had with the telomere paper
*  there's no way that that seems like the right way to advance important ideas
*  yeah and you know what's the harm in publishing them so that your peers have to review them in
*  public where they actually if they're going to disagree with you they actually have to take the
*  risk of saying i don't think this is right and here's why right with their name on it i'd much
*  rather that it's not that i don't want my work reviewed by peers but i want it done in the open
*  you know for the same reason you don't meet with dangerous people in private you meet at the cafe
*  i want the work reviewed out in public can i ask you a difficult question sure
*  there is popularity in martyrdom there's popularity in pointing out that the emperor has no clothes
*  that that can become a drug in itself
*  i've confronted this in scientific work i've done at mit
*  where there are certain things that are not done well people are not being the best version of themselves
*  and particular aspects of a particular field are in need of a revolution and part of me wanted to
*  point that out versus doing the hard work of publishing papers and doing the revolution
*  publishing papers and doing the revolution basically just pointing out look
*  you guys are doing it wrong and then just walking away are you aware of the drug of martyrdom of
*  the the ego involved in it that it can cloud your thinking probably one of the best questions i've
*  ever been asked so let me let me try to sort it out first of all we are all mysteries to our
*  self at some level so it's possible there's stuff going on in me that i'm not aware of that's
*  driving but in general i would say one of my better strengths is that i'm not especially ego driven
*  i have an ego i clearly think highly of myself but it is not driving me i do not crave that kind of
*  validation i do crave certain things i do love a good eureka moment there is something great
*  about it and there's something even better about the phone calls you make next when you share it
*  right it's pretty it's pretty fun right i really like it i also really like my subject right there's
*  something about a walk in the forest when you have a toolkit in which you can actually look at creatures
*  and see something deep right i like it that drives me and i could entertain myself for the
*  rest of my life right if i if i was somehow isolated from the rest of the world but i was
*  in a place that was biologically interesting you know hopefully i would be with people that i love
*  and pets that i love believe it or not but you know if i were in that situation and i could just
*  go out every day and look at cool stuff and figure out what it means i could be all right with that
*  so i'm not heavily driven by the um the ego thing as you put it so i i i'm completely the same except
*  instead of the pets i would put robots but so it's not it's the eureka it's the exploration of
*  of the subject that brings you joy and fulfillment it's not the ego
*  well there's there's more to say no i really don't think it's the ego thing um i will say i also have
*  kind of a secondary passion for robot stuff i've never made anything useful but i do believe i
*  believe i found my calling but if this wasn't my calling my calling would have been inventing stuff
*  i really i really enjoy that too so i i get what you're saying about the analogy quite quite well
*  um as far as the martyrdom thing i i understand the drug you're talking about and i've seen it
*  more than i felt it i do if i'm just to be completely candid and that this question
*  is so good it deserves a candid answer i do like the fight right i like fighting against people i
*  don't respect and i like winning but i have no interest in martyrdom one of the reasons i have
*  no interest in martyrdom is that i'm having too good a time right i very much enjoy my life and
*  such a good answer i have a wonderful wife i have amazing children i live in a lovely place
*  i don't want to exit any quicker than i have to that said i also believe in things and a willingness
*  to exit if that's the only way is not exactly inviting martyrdom but it is an acceptance that
*  fighting is dangerous and going up against powerful forces means who knows what will come of it right
*  i don't have the sense that the thing is out there that used to kill inconvenient people i
*  don't think that's how it's done anymore it's primarily done through destroying them reputationally
*  which is not something i relish the possibility of but there's a difference between a
*  willingness to face the hazard rather than a desire to face it because of the thrill
*  right for me the thrill is in fighting when i'm in the right i think i feel that that is a worthwhile
*  way to take what i see as the the kind of brutality that is built into men and to channel it to
*  something useful right if it is not channeled into something useful it'll be channeled into
*  something else so it damn well better be channeled into something useful it's not motivated by fame
*  and popularity those kinds of things it's there you know you're just making me realize that
*  enjoying the fight
*  fighting the powerful and idea that you believe is right
*  is a kind of um
*  it's a kind of optimism for the human spirit it's like we can win this it's almost like you're
*  turning into action into personal action this hope for for humanity by saying like we can win this
*  and that makes you feel
*  good about like the rest of humanity that if there's people like me then we're going to be okay
*  even if you're like your ideas might be wrong or not but if you believe they're right
*  and you're fighting the powerful against all odds then we're going to be okay
*  that that that's if i were to project i mean that because i enjoy the fight as well i think
*  that's the way i that's what brings me joy is it's almost like uh it's optimism um in action
*  well it's a little different for me and again i think you know i i recognize you you're familiar
*  you're familiar your construction is familiar even if it isn't mine right um for me i actually
*  expect us not to be okay and i'm not okay with that but what's really important if i feel like
*  what i've said is i don't know of any reason that it's too late as far as i know we could still
*  save humanity and we could get to the fourth frontier or something akin to it but i expect
*  us not to i expect us to fuck it up right i don't like that thought but i've looked into the abyss
*  and i've done my calculations and the number of ways we could not succeed are many and the
*  number of ways that we could manage to get out of this very dangerous phase of history is small
*  but the thing i don't have to worry about is that i didn't do enough right that i was a coward that
*  i you know prioritized other things at the end of the day i think i will be able to say to myself
*  and in fact the thing that allows me to sleep is that when i saw clearly what needed to be done
*  i tried to do it to the extent that it was in my power and you know if we fail as i expect us to
*  i can't say well geez that's on me you know and you know frankly i regard what i just said to you
*  as something like a personality defect right i'm trying to free myself from the sense that this is
*  my fault on the other hand my guess is that personality defect is probably good for humanity
*  right it's a good one for me to have it you know the the externalities of it are positive
*  so i don't feel too bad about it yeah it's funny so yeah our perspective on the world
*  are different but they rhyme like you said because i i've also looked into the abyss and
*  it kind of smiled nervously back so i have a more optimistic sense that we're going to win
*  more than likely we're going to be okay i'm right there with you brother i'm hoping you're right
*  i'm expecting me to be right but back to eric is he had a wonderful conversation in that conversation
*  he played the big brother role and he was very happy about it he was self-congratulatory about
*  it i mean can you talk to the ways in which eric made you a better man throughout your life
*  yeah hell yeah i mean for one thing you know eric and i are interestingly similar in some ways and
*  radically different in some other ways and it you know it's often a matter of fascination to people
*  who know us both because almost always people meet one of us first and they sort of get used
*  to that thing and then they meet the other and it throws the model into chaos but you know i had
*  a great advantage which is i came second right so although it was kind of a pain in the ass to be
*  born into a world that had eric in it because he's a force of nature right it was also terrifically
*  useful because a he was a very awesome older brother who you know made interesting mistakes
*  learned from them and conveyed the wisdom of what he had discovered and that was uh you know i don't
*  know who else ends up so lucky as to have that kind of person blazing the trail and also probably
*  you know my my hypothesis for what birth order effects are is that they're actually adaptive
*  right that the reason that a second born is different than a firstborn is that they're not
*  born into a world with the same niches in it right and so the thing about eric is he's been
*  completely dominant in the realm of fundamental thinking right like what he's fascinated by is
*  the fundamental of fundamentals and he's excellent at it which meant that i was born into a world
*  where somebody was becoming excellent in that and for me to be anywhere near the fundamental of
*  fundamentals was going to be pointless right i was going to be playing second fiddle forever
*  and i think that that actually drove me to the other end of the continuum between fundamental
*  and emergent and so i became fascinated with biology and have been since i was three years
*  old right i think eric drove that and i have to thank him for it because you know i mean i never
*  thought of you so eric drives towards the fundamental and you drive towards the emergent
*  the physics and the biology right opposite ends of the continuum and as eric would be quick to
*  point out if he was sitting here i treat the emergent layer i seek the fundamentals in it
*  which is sort of an echo of eric's style of thinking but applied to the very far complexity
*  he's uh overpoweringly argues for the importance of physics the fundamental of the fundamental
*  he's not here to defend himself is there an argument to be made against that or biology
*  the emergent the study of the thing that emerged when the fundamental acts at the universal at the
*  cosmic scale and builds the beautiful thing that is us is much more important like a psychology
*  like a psychology biology the systems that we're actually interacting with in this
*  human world are much more important to understand than low level theories of
*  quantum mechanics and general relativity yeah i can't say that one is more important i think
*  there's probably a different time scale i think understanding the emergent layer is more often
*  useful but the bang for the buck at the far fundamental layer may be much greater so for
*  example the fourth frontier i'm pretty sure it's going to have to be fusion powered i don't think
*  anything else will do it but once you had fusion power assuming we didn't just dump fusion power
*  on the market the way we would be likely to if it was invented usefully tomorrow but if we had
*  fusion power and we had a little bit more wisdom than we have you could do an awful lot and that's
*  not going to come from people like me who you know look at dynamics can i can i argue against that
*  please i think the way to unlock fusion power is through artificial intelligence is so i think most
*  of the breakthrough ideas in the futures of science will be developed by ai systems and i
*  think in order to build intelligent ai systems you have to be a scholar of the fundamental of the
*  emergent of biology of the neuroscience of the way the brain works of intelligence of consciousness
*  and those things at least directly don't have anything to do with physics well you're making
*  me a little bit sad because my addiction to the aha moment thing is incompatible with you know
*  outsourcing that job like i don't want to outsource that thing to the ai moment
*  you know and actually i've seen this happen before because some of the people who
*  trained heather and me were phylogenetic systematists arnold kluge in particular and
*  the problem with systematics is that to do it right when your technology is primitive you have
*  to be deeply embedded in the philosophical and the logical right your method has to be based in
*  the highest level of rigor once you can sequence genes genes can spit so much data at you that you
*  can overwhelm high quality work with just lots and lots and lots of automated work and so in any in
*  some sense there's like a generation of phylogenetic systematists who are the last of the greats
*  because what's replacing them as sequencers so anyway i maybe you're right about the ai
*  and i guess i'm makes you sad i like figuring stuff out is there something that you disagree
*  with eric on they've been trying to convince them you failed so far but uh you will eventually
*  succeed you know that is a very long list eric and i have have uh tensions over certain things that
*  recur all the time and i'm trying to think what would be you know the ideal in the space of
*  science in the space of philosophy politics family love robots well all right let me i'm
*  just going to use your podcast to make a bit of cryptic war and just say there are many places
*  in which i believe that i have butted heads with eric over the course of decades and i have seen
*  him move in my direction substantially over time you've been winning he might he might win a battle
*  here or there but you've been winning the war i would not say that it's quite possible he could
*  say the same thing about me and in fact i know that it's true there are places where he's
*  absolutely convinced me but in any case i do believe it's at least you know it may not be a
*  totally even fight but it's it's more even than some will imagine um but yeah we have um you know
*  there are things i say that drive him nuts right like when something you know like you heard me
*  talk about the um what was it it was the autopilot that seems to be putting a great many humans in
*  needless medical jeopardy over the covet 19 pandemic and my feeling is we can say this almost
*  for sure anytime you have the appearance of some captured gigantic entity that is censoring you on
*  youtube and you know handing down dictates from the who and all of that it is sure that there will be
*  a certain amount of collusion right there's going to be some embarrassing emails in some places that
*  are going to reveal some shocking connections and then there's going to be an awful lot of
*  emergence that didn't involve collusion right in which people were doing their little part of a
*  job and something was emerging and you never know what the admixture is how much are we looking
*  at actual collusion and how much are we looking at an emergent process but you should always walk in
*  with the sense that it's going to be a ratio and the question is what is the ratio in this case
*  i think this drives eric nuts um because he is very focused on the people i think he's focused
*  on the people who have a choice and make the wrong one and anyway he may question of the ratio is the
*  distraction to that i think i think he takes it almost as an offense because it grants cover to
*  people who are harming others and i think i think it offends him uh morally and if i had to say i
*  would say it alters his judgment on the matter um but anyway certainly useful just to leave open
*  the two possibilities and say it's a ratio but we don't know which one
*  brother to brother do you love the guy
*  hell yeah hell yeah and you know i'd love him if he was just my brother but he's also awesome so
*  i love him and i love him for who he is so let me ask you about uh back to your book hunter gatherer's
*  guide to the 21st century i can't wait both for the book and the videos you do on the book
*  that's really exciting that there's like a structured organized way to present this
*  um a kind of uh from an evolutionary biology perspective a guide for the future using our
*  past as it's the fundamental of the emergent way uh to uh present a picture of the future
*  let me ask you about uh something that you know i think about a little bit in this modern world
*  which is monogamy so i personally value monogamy one girl ride or die there you go right or not
*  that's exactly it but that said i i don't know what's the right way to approach this but
*  from an evolutionary biology perspective or from just looking at modern society that seems to be
*  an idea that's not what's the right way to put it flourishing it is waning it's waning
*  um so i suppose based on your reaction you're also a supporter of monogamy or the you value
*  monogamy are you and i just um delusional um what can you say about monogamy from the context of
*  your book from the context of evolutionary biology from the context of being human yeah i can say
*  that i fully believe that we are actually enlightened and that although monogamy is
*  waning that it is not waning because there is a superior system it is waning for predictable
*  other reasons so let us just say it is there is a lot of pre-trans fallacy here where
*  people go through a phase where they recognize that actually we know a lot about the evolution
*  of monogamy and we can tell from the fact that humans are somewhat sexually dimorphic
*  that there has been a lot of polygyny in human history and in fact most of human history was
*  largely polygynous but it is also the case that most of the people on earth today belong
*  to civilizations that are at least nominally monogamous and have practiced monogamy and that's
*  not anti-evolutionary what that is is part of what i mentioned before where human beings can swap out
*  their software program and different mating patterns are uh favored in different periods
*  of history so i would argue that the benefit of monogamy the primary one that drives the evolution
*  of monogamous patterns in humans is that it brings all adults into child rearing now the reason that
*  that matters is because human babies are very labor intensive in order to raise them properly
*  having two parents is a huge asset and having more than two parents having an extended family
*  also very important but what that means is that for a population that is expanding
*  a monogamous mating system makes sense it makes sense because it means that the number of offspring
*  that can be raised is elevated it's elevated because all potential parents are involved in
*  parenting whereas if you sideline a bunch of males by having a polygynous system in which one male
*  has many females which is typically the way that works what you do is you sideline all those males
*  which means the total amount of parental effort is lower and the population can't grow so what
*  i'm arguing is that you should expect to see populations that face the possibility of expansion
*  endorse monogamy and at the point that they have reached carrying capacity you should expect to see
*  polygyny break back out and what we are seeing is a kind of false sophistication around polyamory
*  which will end up breaking down into polygyny which will not be in the interests of most people
*  really the only people whose interests it could be argued to be in would be the very small number
*  of males at the top who have many partners and everybody else suffers is it possible to make the
*  argument if we focus in on those males at the quote-unquote top with many female partners
*  is it possible to say that that's a suboptimal life that a single partner is the optimal life
*  well it depends what you mean i have a feeling that you and i wouldn't have to go very far to
*  figure out that what might be evolutionarily optimal doesn't match my values as a person
*  and i'm sure it doesn't match yours either you know try to can we try to dig into the that gap
*  between those two sure i mean we can do it very simply selection might favor your engaging in war
*  against a defenseless enemy or genocide right it's not hard to figure out how that might put your
*  genes at advantage i don't know about you lex i'm not getting involved in no genocide it's not going
*  to happen i won't do it i will do anything to avoid it so some part of me has decided that my
*  conscious self and the values that i hold trump my evolutionary self and once you figure out that in
*  some extreme case that's true and then you realize that that means it must be possible in many other
*  cases and you start going through all of the things that selection would favor and you realize
*  that a fair fraction of the time actually you're not up for this you don't want to be some robot
*  on a mission that involves genocide when necessary you want to be your own person and accomplish
*  things that you think are valuable and so among those are not advocating you know let's suppose
*  you were in a position to be one of those males at the top of a polygenist system we both know why
*  that would be rewarding right but we also both recognize do we yeah sure lots of sex yeah okay
*  what else lots of sex and lots of variety right so look every red-blooded american
*  slash russian male could understand why that's appealing right on the other hand it is up against
*  an alternative which is having a partner with whom one is bonded especially closely right and so
*  love right well you know i don't want to i don't want to straw man the polygyny position obviously
*  polygyny is complex and there's nothing that stops a man presumably from loving multiple partners and
*  from them loving him back but in terms of you know if love is your thing there's a question about
*  okay what is the quality of love if it is divided over multiple partners right and what is the net
*  consequence for love in a society when multiple people will be frozen out for every individual
*  male in this case who has it and what i would argue is and you know this is weird to even talk
*  about but this is partially me just talking from personal experience i think there actually is a
*  monogamy program in us and it's not automatic but if you take it seriously you can find it and
*  frankly marriage and it doesn't have to be marriage but whatever it is that results in a lifelong
*  bond with a partner has gotten a very bad rap you know it's the butt of too many jokes but the truth
*  is it's hugely rewarding it's not easy but if you know that you're looking for something right if
*  you know that the objective actually exists and it's not some utopian fantasy that can't be found
*  if you know that there's some real world you know warts and all version of it then you might actually
*  think hey that is something i want and you might pursue it and my guess is you'd be very happy when
*  you find it yeah i think there is uh getting to the fundamentals of the emergent i feel like there
*  is some kind of physics of love so one we there's a conservation thing going on so if you have like
*  many partners yeah in theory you should be able to love all of them deeply but it seems like in
*  reality that love gets split yep now there's another law that's interesting in terms of
*  monogamy i don't know if it's at the physics level but if you are in a monogamous relationship by
*  choice and almost as um in slight rebellion to social norms that's much more powerful like if you
*  choose that one partnership that's also more powerful if you if like everybody's in a
*  monogamous this pressure to be married and this pressure of society that's different because
*  that's almost like a constraint on your freedom that is enforced by something other than your own
*  ideals it's by by somebody else when you yourself choose to i guess create these constraints
*  that enriches that love so there's some kind of love function like e equals mc squared but for love
*  that i feel like if you have less partners and it's done by choice that can maximize that and
*  that love can transcend the biology transcend the evolutionary biology forces that have to do much
*  more with survival and all those kinds of things it can transcend to take us to to a richer
*  experience which we have the luxury of having exploring of happiness of uh of joy of fulfillment
*  all those kinds of things totally agree with us and there's no question that by choice when there
*  are other choices imbues it with meaning that it might not otherwise have i would also say you know
*  i'm i'm really struck by and i have a hard time not feeling terrible sadness over what
*  younger people are coming to think about this topic i think they're missing something so important
*  and so hard to phrase that and they don't even know that they're missing it they might know
*  that they're unhappy but they don't understand what it is they're even looking for because
*  nobody's really been honest with them about what their choices are and i have to say if i was a
*  young person or if i was advising a young person which i used to do again a million years ago when
*  i was a college professor four years ago but i used to you know talk to students i knew my students
*  really well and they would ask questions about this and they were always curious because heather
*  and i seemed to have a good relationship and many of them knew both of us so they would talk to us
*  about this if i was advising somebody i would say do not bypass the possibility that what you are
*  supposed to do is find somebody worthy somebody who can handle it somebody who you are compatible
*  with and then you don't have to be perfectly compatible it's not about dating until you find
*  the one it's about finding somebody whose underlying values and viewpoint are complementary
*  to yours sufficient that you fall in love if you find that person opt out together get out of this
*  damn system that's telling you what's sophisticated to think about love and romance and sex ignore it
*  together right that's the key and i believe you'll end up laughing in the end if you do it you'll
*  discover wow that's a hellscape that i opted out of and this thing i opted into complicated
*  difficult worth it nothing that's worth it is ever not difficult so we should we should even just
*  skip the whole right a statement about difficult yeah all right i just i want to be honest it's not
*  like oh it's you know it's non-stop joy no it's freaking complex but um but worth it no question
*  in my mind is there advice outside of love that you can give to young people you were a million
*  years ago a professor is there advice you can give to young people high schoolers college students
*  about career about life yeah but it's not they're not going to like it because it's not easy to
*  operationalize so and this was a problem when i was a college professor too people would ask me
*  what they should do should they go to graduate school i had almost nothing useful to say
*  because the the job market and the market of you know pre-job training and all of that these things
*  are all so distorted and corrupt that i didn't want to point anybody to anything right because
*  it's all broken and i would tell them that but i would say that results in a kind of uh meta level
*  advice that i do think is useful you don't know what's coming you don't know where the opportunities
*  will be you should invest in tools rather than knowledge right to the extent that you can do
*  things you can repurpose that no matter what the future brings to the extent that you know if you
*  as a robot guy right you've got the skills of a robot guy now if civilization failed and the
*  stuff of robot building disappeared with it you'd still have the mind of a robot guy and the mind of
*  a robot guy can retool around all kinds of things whether you're you know forced to work with uh you
*  know you know fibers that are made into ropes right your your mechanical mind would be useful
*  in all kinds of places so invest in tools like that that can be easily repurposed and invest in
*  combinations of tools right if civilization keeps limping along you're going to be up against all
*  sorts of people who have studied the things that you studied right if you think hey computer
*  programming is really really cool and you pick up computer programming guess what you just
*  entered a large group of people who have that skill and many of them will be better than you
*  almost certainly on the other hand if you combine that with something else that's very rarely
*  combined with it if you have i don't know if it's carpentry and computer programming if you take
*  combinations of things that are even if they're both common but they're not commonly found
*  together then those combinations create a rarefied space where you inhabit it and even if the things
*  don't even really touch but nonetheless they create a mind in which the two things are live
*  and you can move back and forth between them and you know step out of your own perspective by moving
*  from one to the other that will increase what you can see and the quality of your tools and so anyway
*  that isn't useful advice it doesn't tell you whether you should go to graduate school or not
*  but it does tell you the one thing we can say for certain about the future is that it's uncertain
*  and so prepare for it and like you said there's cool things to be discovered in the intersection of
*  fields and ideas and i would look at grad school that way actually if you do go or
*  i see i mean this is such a like every course in grad school undergrad too was like this little
*  journey that you're on that explores a particular field and it's not immediately obvious how useful
*  it is but it allows you to to discover intersections between that thing and some other thing
*  so you're bringing to the table this these pieces of knowledge some of which when intersected might
*  create a niche that's completely novel unique and will bring you joy i have that i mean i took a
*  huge number of courses in theoretical computer science most of them seem useless but they totally
*  change the way i see the world in ways that are i'm not prepared or it's a little bit difficult
*  to kind of make explicit but taken together they've allowed me to see for example the the
*  world of robotics totally different and different from many of my colleagues and friends and so on
*  and i think that's a good way to see if you go to grad school as as a opportunity to explore
*  intersections of fields even if the individual fields seem useless yeah and useless doesn't
*  mean useless right useless means not directly applicable but a good useless course can be the
*  best one you ever took um yeah i took uh james joys a course on james joys and that was truly useless
*  well i took uh i took immunobiology in the medical school when i was at penn as uh i guess i would
*  have been a freshman or a sophomore i wasn't supposed to be in this class it blew my goddamn
*  mind and it still does right i mean we had this i don't even know who it was but we had this great
*  professor who was like highly placed in the world of immunobiology you know the course is called
*  immunobiology not immunology immunobiology it had the right focus and as i recall it the professor
*  stood sideways to the chalkboard staring off into space literally stroking his beard with this
*  bemused look on his face through the entire lecture and you know you had all these medical
*  students who were so furiously writing notes that i don't even think they were noticing the person
*  delivering this thing but you know i got what this guy was smiling about it was like so what
*  he was describing you know adaptive immunity is so marvelous right that it was like almost a
*  privilege to even be saying it to a room full of people who were listening you know
*  but anyway yeah i took that course and you know lo and behold that's covid gonna be useful well
*  yeah suddenly it's front and center and wow am i glad i took it but um anyway yeah useless courses
*  are great and actually eric gave me one of the greater pieces of advice at least for college
*  that anyone's ever given which was don't worry about the pre-reqs take it anyway right but now
*  i don't even know if kids can do this now because the pre-reqs are now enforced by a computer
*  but back in the day if you didn't mention that you didn't have the pre-reqs nobody stopped you
*  from taking the course and what he told me which i didn't know was that often the advanced courses
*  are easier in some way the material is complex but you know you know it's not like intro bio
*  where you're learning a thousand things at once right it's like focused on something so if you
*  dedicate yourself you can you can pull it off yeah stay with an idea for many weeks at a time
*  and it's ultimately rewarding and not as difficult as it looks yeah can i ask you a ridiculous
*  question please what do you think is the meaning of life well i feel terrible having to give you
*  the answer i realize you asked the question but if i tell you you're gonna again feel bad i don't
*  want to do that but look there's two there can be a disappointment is no it's going to be a horror
*  right because we actually know the answer to the question oh no it's completely meaningless there
*  is nothing that we can do that escapes the heat death of the universe or whatever it is that
*  happens at the end and we're not going to make it there anyway but even if you were optimistic
*  about our ability to escape every existential hazard indefinitely ultimately it's all for
*  none we know it right that said once you stare into that abyss and then it stares back and laughs or
*  whatever happens right then the question is okay given that can i relax a little bit right and
*  figure out well what would make sense if that were true right and i think there's something very
*  clear to me i think if you do all of the you know if you if i just take the values that i'm sure we
*  share and extrapolate from them i think the following thing is actually a moral imperative
*  being a human and having opportunity is absolutely fucking awesome right a lot of people don't make
*  use of the opportunity and a lot of people don't have opportunity right they get to be human but
*  they're too constrained by keeping a roof over their heads to really be free but being a free
*  human is fantastic and being a free human on this beautiful planet crippled as it may be
*  is unparalleled i mean what could be better how lucky are we that we get that right so if that's
*  true that it is awesome to be human and to be free then surely it is our obligation to deliver that
*  opportunity to as many people as we can and how do you do that well i think i know what job one is
*  job one is we have to get sustainable the way to get the maximum number of humans to have that
*  opportunity to be both here and free is to make sure that there isn't a limit on how long we can
*  keep doing this that effectively requires us to reach sustainability and then at sustainability
*  you could have a horror show of sustainability right you could have a totalitarian sustainability
*  that's not the objective the objective is to liberate people and so the question the whole
*  fourth frontier question frankly is how do you get to a sustainable and indefinitely sustainable
*  state in which people feel liberated in which they are liberated to pursue the things that actually
*  matter to pursue beauty truth compassion connection all of those things that we could list as
*  unalloyed goods those are the things that people should be most liberated to do in a system that
*  really functions and anyway my point is i don't know how precise that calculation is but i'm
*  pretty sure it's not wrong it's accurate enough and if it is accurate enough then the point is
*  okay well there's no ultimate meaning but the proximate meaning is that one how many people
*  can we get to have this wonderful experience that we've gotten to have right and there's no way
*  that's so wrong that if i invest my life in it that i'm making some big error sure that life is
*  awesome and we want to spread the awesome as much as possible yeah you sum it up that way spread the
*  awesome spread the awesome so that's the fourth frontier and if that fails if the fourth frontier
*  fails the fifth frontier will be defined by robots and hopefully they'll learn the lessons
*  that the of the mistakes that the humans made and build a better world i hope with very happy here
*  and that they do a better job with the place than we did but i can't believe it took us this long
*  uh to talk as i as i mentioned to you before that we haven't actually spoken i think at all
*  and i i've always felt that we're already friends i don't know how that works because i've listened
*  to your podcast a lot i've also sort of uh love your brother and so like it it was like we've
*  known each other for the longest time and i hope we can be friends and talk often again i hope to
*  that you get a chance to meet some of my robot friends as well and fall in love and i'm so glad
*  that you love robots as well so we get to share in that love so i can't wait for us uh to interact
*  together so we went from talking about some of the worst failures of humanity to some of the most
*  beautiful aspects of humanity what else can you uh ask for from a conversation thank you so much
*  for talking to you know lex i feel uh the same way towards you and i really appreciate it this
*  has been a lot of fun and i'm looking forward to our next one thanks for listening to this
*  conversation with brett weinstein and thank you to jordan harbinger's show express cpn magic spoon
*  and four sigmatic check them out in the description to support this podcast and now let me leave you
*  with some words from charles darwin ignorance more frequently begets confidence than does
*  knowledge it is those who know little not those who know much who so positively assert that this
*  or that problem will never be solved by science thank you for listening and hope to see you next
*  time
