---
Date Generated: April 12, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 9217s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'alex gladstein', 'artificial intelligence', 'artificial intelligence podcast', 'bitcoin', 'censorship', 'china', 'cryptocurrency', 'dogecoin', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex podcast', 'mit ai', 'olympics', 'russia', 'social media']
Video Views: 326560
Video Rating: None
---

# Alex Gladstein: Bitcoin, Authoritarianism, and Human Rights | Lex Fridman Podcast #231
**Lex Fridman:** [October 16, 2021](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kSbMU5CbFM0)
*  The following is a conversation with Alex Gladstein, Chief Strategy Officer at the Human
*  Rights Foundation and the Oslo Freedom Forum. In recent times, Alex has focused on how cryptocurrency
*  and especially Bitcoin can be a tool for empowering democracy and civil liberties in the world,
*  most crucially parts of the world that are living under authoritarian regimes.
*  As a side note, let me say that I have been learning a lot about the ways in which money
*  can be used to amass power, and in the same way, the decentralization of money can be used to
*  resist the corrupting nature of this power. Alex and I do not agree on everything, but we strive
*  for the same betterment of humanity. He's sensitive to the suffering in the world and is dedicating
*  his life to finding solutions that lessen that suffering. Whether Bitcoin is one such solution,
*  I don't know, but I think it has a chance, and that means it is worth exploring deeply.
*  I'm staying on this path of learning patiently and with as little ego as possible. I hope you
*  come along with me on this journey as well. This is the Alex Friedman podcast. To support it,
*  please check out our sponsors in the description. We recorded this conversation a while ago,
*  and I thought I lost the audio and was really disappointed with myself for messing this thing
*  up. Luckily, last week I found it and so rescued from out of the abyss of nonexistence. Here's my
*  conversation with Alex Glasstein. What are some universal human rights that you believe
*  all people should have? Free speech, freedom of assembly, freedom of belief, freedom to
*  participate in your government, the freedom to have privacy, the freedom to own things,
*  property rights. These are all basic, fundamental negative rights, what we call them. These are the
*  basic fundamental human freedoms. What does negative rights mean? Negative rights are
*  liberties and positive rights are entitlements. So after World War II, when the UN came together,
*  it was largely a compromise between the communist Soviet Union and the free United States. So the
*  US had on its side of the UN Declaration of Human Rights, a bunch of liberties, essentially,
*  things like free speech, freedom of association, freedom of assembly. The Soviets wanted entitlements
*  like the right to work, the right to have housing, the right to water, the right to a vacation.
*  So you actually read the UN Declaration for Human Rights. It's a negotiation between the Soviets and
*  the Americans. Later, there was another document in the 70s released called the International
*  Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. And this is what Ahrefs uses as its sort of like lodestar,
*  its founding document. And this is like essentially an international agreement on
*  the negative rights. Those are the things we choose to focus on, because essentially,
*  authoritarian regimes can commit fraud and claim they're giving the positive rights, the entitlements,
*  without having any of the negative liberties. And they can do that because they don't have any like
*  free speech or press freedom. When you take people's basic fundamental freedoms away,
*  it's quite easy to make like a Potemkin village and pretend that there's the entitlements and
*  that we have good health care. And, you know, it's the same sort of thing that authoritarians
*  have done for decades, Cuba and Venezuela and the Soviet Union. Do you think it's possible for
*  authoritarian regimes to manipulate, to kind of lie about the negative rights as well, by saying
*  that the people have free speech, the people have the freedom for assembly and all those kinds of
*  things? Can't you still manipulate the idea that the citizenry still has those rights?
*  The opposition leader of Malaysia, Anwar Ibrahim, he once told me the funny joke that, you know,
*  in my country, we have freedom of speech, we don't have freedom after speech. So yeah, they can
*  absolutely manipulate whatever they want. But I've done research into socioeconomic data.
*  And I guess what I'm telling you is that authoritarian regimes, which make up
*  53% of the world's population across 95 countries, about 4.3 billion people, those who live under
*  those regimes are subject to massive fraud when it comes to things like literacy rates,
*  life expectancy, any sort of socioeconomic data, economic growth. They can do this because there's
*  no free press. So for us at the Human Rights Foundation, and for people like me, we believe
*  that the negative rights, the liberties, the things that are in, for example, the Bill of Rights and
*  the US Constitution, these things are the table. And then we can build on top of that, we can build
*  the rest of our societies on top of that. The freest countries in the world have both the negative
*  liberties and the entitlements, like Norway, for example. But there's a big difference between
*  Norway and North Korea. In North Korea, they only claim to have the entitlements, and they
*  definitely don't have the liberties. Do you think there's one right that's more important than
*  others? You kind of suggested the freedom of the press, maybe freedom of speech, that if you take
*  that away, all the other ones kind of collapse along with like from a ripple effect. Is there
*  something fundamental that you like to focus your attention on to defend, to protect, to make sure
*  it's there? Yeah, I think free speech is probably the most fundamental. It's probably why the
*  founders chose to make it into the First Amendment. A lot of things are downstream from there.
*  Property rights are also very, very important. Obviously, we've seen the toll of violent
*  redistributionism, you know, in over the last hundred years, whether it was Lenin or Stalin
*  or Mao or other regimes and everywhere from Ethiopia to colonialists everywhere to North Korea.
*  It's not a pretty legacy. Is free speech clear to you as a concept? There's been quite a few debates,
*  especially in the digital age, what it means to violate freedom of speech. There's been a lot of
*  new, like novel mechanisms for people to communicate with each other, especially on social
*  networks. And it seems that unclear because a lot of times those are managed by private companies.
*  It's unclear how much protection do the citizens have to have when they're communicating. A lot of
*  people are being censored on these social platforms. Some people, even presidents, get removed from
*  those social platforms. Have you thought about the freedom of speech in the United States, but in the
*  world, as it's implemented in the 21st century, given the internet and all those kinds of things?
*  There is a Soviet dissident named Natan Sharansky who
*  survived the regime. And he wrote a book in which his thesis was essentially the way that you can
*  define a free society is through something called the town square test. Can you go to
*  a public space where you live and criticize your ruler loudly without fear of retribution?
*  If you can do that, you have free speech. I think that's a pretty good litmus test.
*  Most people in this world cannot do that. If you live in Havana, if you live in Moscow,
*  if you live in Beijing, you cannot do that. And that's not a free society.
*  In Austin, Texas, in Boston, Massachusetts, in London, in Santiago, Chile, in Tokyo, Japan,
*  in many democracies, you can do that. And I think that's a really helpful basic sort of litmus test.
*  Does the content of the criticism matter? Can it be complete lies, meaning
*  conspiracy theories that involve claiming that the leader is, let's say, a lizard
*  slash pedophile slash, you know, I'm not saying that those are lies, look into it,
*  but they're very unlikely phenomena. So like, does that matter?
*  I think it ends poorly when the state tries to restrict speech. I think that's kind of how I
*  would define censorship. I think censorship and deplatforming are two different things.
*  Private companies, you know, they get to make up their own rules about what's allowed on their
*  platforms. And I think that's very different from a government with guns and an army,
*  restricting the speech of its citizens with threats of violence. These things are different for me.
*  That violence is a fundamental difference. I don't know, I've gotten the chance to have dinner with
*  Alex Jones, and I've talked to him a few times offline. And it does, I understand why people are
*  so off-put by him. But it does bother me that he's universally removed from every platform.
*  It feels like there's many more evil people, bad people, compared to Alex Jones, who still are
*  given a voice on these platforms. And so I'm uncomfortable with the universality of the
*  application of this censorship by these platforms. But on the flip side, you're right, there's not a
*  violence, there's not tanks, there's not guns behind that censorship.
*  Yeah, it's a bit of a generalization, but Alex Jones would be in prison or dead if he were in
*  North Korea or in Cuba or in Russia or in China, that the authorities would not tolerate him to do
*  what he did. And here he can kind of do what he wants. He's encountering some resistance in
*  the marketplace of ideas, large organizations, corporations, and a lot of public sentiment.
*  In different parts of our country don't like him. They're doing their best to drown out his voice.
*  But that's very different from a violent threat of censorship from the state. And that's what we
*  study. That's what I study. What is the state doing? That's kind of paramount for me.
*  Yeah, and that's true. Because in the marketplace of ideas, there could be a company that springs
*  up that gives Alex Jones a platform. And the United States is not going to prevent those
*  companies from functioning. Of course, there's from a technology perspective, there is AWS
*  removing Parler from the platform and gets a little weird as you get closer and closer to
*  the computer infrastructure, because then you get closer and closer to the state. Actually,
*  the more you get to the infrastructure that's usually managed by the state,
*  the closer it gets to the control of the state. I would argue AWS is pretty damn close to
*  the infrastructure that's kind of controlled by the state. If you especially look at other nations,
*  China, Russia, there's, I don't know who runs the computer infrastructure for Russia and China,
*  but I bet the state has complete oversight over that. And so that level of computer
*  infrastructure having control about which social networks can and cannot operate is very uncomfortable
*  to me. But you're right, I think it's good to focus on the obvious violations of these
*  principles as opposed to the gray areas. Of course, the gray areas are fascinating.
*  You mentioned HRF, Human Rights Foundation. What is it? What is its mission?
*  Yeah, so I've been working for HRF since 2007. We are a charity, a non-profit, a 501c3 based
*  in New York. And our mission is to promote and protect individual rights and freedoms
*  in authoritarian societies around the world. So again, we define about 95 countries as authoritarian,
*  meaning it's either a one party state or opposition politicians are outlawed or persecuted.
*  There's no real free speech. There's no press freedom. There's no independent judiciary.
*  There really aren't checks and balances. And even trying to create like a human rights organization
*  or like an environmental group would be illegal. And the majority of the world's population lives
*  in that environment. That's very important. You said 53%.
*  4.3 billion people. And I saw you outlined a lot of different
*  sources of suffering in the world. And then you sort of put people living under authoritarian
*  governments as like more than all of them. I forget all the examples you provided, but
*  sure. I mean, it's yeah, maybe you can mention if you remember.
*  The number of people who are refugees, the number of people who suffer from natural disasters,
*  the number of people who live under abject poverty, the number of people who don't have
*  access to clean drinking water. All of these are dwarfed by the number of people who live under
*  authoritarianism. And yet it's not something that we talk about a lot because people are
*  mercantilist and the powers that be are happy to sacrifice freedoms and privacy for money.
*  We live in a profit seeking world. To get evidence of this, take a look at the list of sponsors
*  of the upcoming Olympics in China, where the CCP is currently committing genocide against the
*  Uighur population. Or look at the number of people and the famous investors who went to Saudi Arabia
*  a couple months ago for the Davos in the desert. I mean, Ray Dalio was there. All kinds of people
*  were there. Or at least they were invited and they said they were going to go. And this is a
*  government that at the time was torturing a female activist who just wanted to drive a car.
*  This is a government that had murdered Jamal Khashoggi in a brutal fashion just a couple years
*  earlier. So I mean, at the end of the day, when it comes down to brass tacks, I mean,
*  the powers that be, even the free countries are led by people who are very, very happy to sacrifice
*  all these pretty words about human rights when it comes down to profits, unfortunately.
*  So do you think capitalism, that's maybe one of the flaws of capitalism, is it turns a blind eye to
*  injustices against human nature, against the human rights? Like it turns a blind eye to
*  authoritarian governments? Look, I think that at the end of the day, like
*  free trade is actually really good. And you can just look at France and Germany as an example of
*  how like a capitalist structure would develop. If you have two capitalist actors, they're very
*  unlikely to fight each other. There's very unlikely to be violence, right? These are two countries which
*  basically murdered some large percentage of each other's male population three times in a hundred
*  years in three different wars, right? And now today, war is like unthinkable. And a lot of that is
*  because of increased collaboration, increased trade. So when you have two capitalist actors,
*  they act in a very productive way with each other. But as soon as you introduce an authoritarian
*  actor, all bets are off. So I think what you have is a conflict between capitalist actors and
*  authoritarian actors. And at the end of the day, people need to, yes, have more than just
*  capitalist intentions. In the geopolitical level I'm talking about, they need to actually take a
*  stand for principles. Otherwise you have athletes and businesses and governments that are all too
*  happy to do business with the Chinese Communist Party, for example, right now. I think that there
*  is a little more than just kind of the pure profit, yes. You mentioned what are the signs
*  that the state is an authoritarian state. How do you know if you're living in an authoritarian state
*  or when you study another nation and analyze the behavior of another nation, how do you know that's
*  an authoritarian state? Is it as simple as them having a dictator? Is it as simple as them declaring
*  that they don't have a democracy or is there something more subtle? There's a couple good litmus
*  tests. One is actually, can you have a gay pride parade? That's a good one. It actually lines up
*  perfectly. It doesn't matter what religion the dictatorship is. They don't like minorities and
*  they love to scapegoat, whether it's gays or religious minorities, etc. So it lines up pretty
*  well. If you cannot have a gay pride parade in your country because you're fearful that you're
*  going to get the crap kicked out of you, you probably live in an authoritarian regime.
*  I'm sure that's not just about some kind of homophobia. Why is that? That's really interesting.
*  Because that's right, I'm going through... Fascism scapegoats minorities.
*  There's an other, you create an other group and then you...
*  Yeah, Uganda is a great example of this, but so is Saudi Arabia, so is China, so is Cuba. These
*  are all regimes which demonize the LGBT communities. It's interesting because maybe you can correct me,
*  but from my very distant outsider perspective, the way that certain authoritarian governments
*  speak about gay people is it's almost like, what is it, we don't have gay people in our country
*  kind of idea as opposed to scapegoating, which is like... Well, denial is the most powerful form of
*  demonization. I mean, this is what the Iranian dictatorship does. A few years ago when Ahmad
*  Ahmadjad, who was then sort of the de facto leader, he came to Columbia University and he tried to
*  give a speech, which you can look up, and he tried to claim that there were no gays in Iran.
*  And that's the most powerful form of demonization is trying to just wipe out your
*  utter existence. There's other good litmus tests too. For example, you can think about comedy.
*  Can you make money making fun of your government on television? If you cannot, you live in a
*  dictatorship most likely. I mean, it's shocking to people that I work with who live in dictatorships
*  when I tell them that not only are comedians able to safely make fun of our government,
*  but they get paid very well to do so. That's a hallmark of a free society. So that's another
*  good litmus test. Hear that Tim Dillon, you should go to North Korea, check it out.
*  Yeah. And look, there are tons of flaws with democracies.
*  This is a really good test by the way. The United States is a deeply flawed
*  country in many ways. Our prison system is a disaster. There's a horrible war on drugs.
*  We committed a grievous crime in my opinion, by invading Iraq. We did a lot of problematic things,
*  but our core architecture is still an open society. The people who criticize the US the most
*  usually live within it. And if they were to move to a different country and try to use that criticism
*  against their new rulers, they wouldn't fare so well. So whether it's Chomsky or whomever,
*  if they were to go to Cuba and live in Cuba and try to criticize Cuba like they do America,
*  it wouldn't last very long. So I think what's important to distinguish between
*  open societies and closed ones, or like free societies and authoritarian regimes,
*  it doesn't mean that your government's going to be good all the time. What it means is that the
*  citizens have a way to push for reform, have a way to hold the rulers accountable. So even if you
*  don't like what the US government does, whether it was under Biden or Trump or Obama or Bush,
*  we can rotate them through voting. And we have an independent Supreme Court that rotates over time.
*  And we have people that we can elect directly to serve our interests. And then there's like
*  a free press and there's lobbyists and all kinds of people that jostle for power. So there's a
*  separation of powers. And I like to think about a free society really as like at the bottom
*  of the foundation of the pyramid really would be free speech. And then you would have civil society,
*  like for example, human rights organizations, environmental groups, stamp collectors, athletes,
*  any groups that come together beyond the government's sort of strict instruction.
*  And then on top of that, at the third level, you have separation of powers. Again, what I'm describing.
*  So authoritarian regimes don't really have any of these layers to them, right? And then at the top,
*  then you put elections. But the elections are meaningless if you don't have the foundation below.
*  Every dictator gets elected. Kim Jong-un gets elected. He's the only person on the ballot.
*  Every dictator from Hitler to Chávez, they all got elected. Elections on their own mean literally
*  nothing. You have to have these other layers beneath to actually be an open and free society.
*  I think it's very important for people to understand.
*  Although Hitler in an interesting way at a certain point just said,
*  I'm going to be a ruler forever, which is interesting. There's an important switch that
*  happens when you, as opposed to having a facade of elections, you even, you just put that aside
*  and saying basically like, we're not even doing this. Yeah, there's like a ladder that you climb
*  the election and you pull the ladder up and then no one else can climb up. This sadly happened in
*  Egypt and it was quite predictable after Mubarak was ousted after the Arab Spring. You know,
*  Morsi came in and it looked like, you know, the Muslim Brotherhood was not really going to be
*  very democratic. But it didn't really matter because then the military came back and now we
*  have Sisi, who's even worse than Mubarak. So a lot of times in these regimes, unfortunately,
*  it's very difficult for people to build that democratic society afterwards. Some people have
*  told me that when you live in a totalitarian or authoritarian regime, it's kind of like a political
*  desert. What grows in the desert? Scorpions and cacti, right? So basically people with very extreme
*  views because you as an authoritarian ruler, your best method for control is to get rid of the
*  moderates. You have to crush the moderates. That's very important. You want to have the only
*  opposition to you be extremists. That way, when you go and have negotiations with the United States,
*  you can kind of hold up the terrorists or whomever the extremists and say,
*  it's either us or them, right? And then the realists who run the US government are going
*  to choose you. And that's why one of the reasons why the US government has supported so many
*  dictators around the world over the last few decades. Do you think authoritarian systems
*  emerge naturally? Like that's the natural state of things. If you take, if you incorporate what
*  human nature is, well, is there always going to be corrupt people, the rest of the top?
*  And we almost have to construct systems that protect us against ourselves kind of thing.
*  Another way to ask that is what kind of systems protect us from our own human nature?
*  We started with authoritarianism or autocracy, right? Ruled by one or a small group, oligarchy.
*  And all humans lived under this structure for the virtual bulk of all human existence. Only until
*  pretty recently did we start having actual democracy. The idea that we should be ruled
*  by rules, not by rulers, very powerful. Invented in many places across the world,
*  Western Africa had this idea, and so did the ancient Greeks. And they started to implement it.
*  Although, as most know, we didn't have full democracy for a long, long time because it was
*  only property owners, only men, only people of a certain race. But this idea that we can rotate
*  our rulers and that we could be ruled by rules is extremely powerful. And it really, for me,
*  the ideas behind this, I think, unlocked a lot of the industrial revolution,
*  these small personal freedoms that were allowed in some countries, but not others.
*  And they unlocked a lot of the scientific innovation over the last few hundred years.
*  And to me, there's a really straight line between scientific inquiry, free speech,
*  freedoms, and then more prosperity and more effectiveness as a civilization. So I think that
*  democracy, ruled by the people, is definitely an upgrade from autocracy or oligarchy, which
*  should be ruled by one or ruled by a small group. And I think that the democratic revolution
*  has been an incredible thing for our world. And you can do half class full, half class empty.
*  The half class full is that almost half the world lives under democracy. That's an incredible
*  achievement. But just under half. Yeah, just under half. But that's billions of people.
*  It's billions of people. And if you look at the progress of things, it's getting better and better
*  I mean, if you know, yeah, we're a little bit of a stalemate here. Democracies really
*  blossomed between World War Two and the year 2000, especially in the 80s and 90s, you had an
*  incredible wave of fall, you know, where many, many authoritarian regimes fell, and were replaced by
*  democracies. I think around 2015, the acceleration kind of came to a standstill a little bit.
*  There's some good news in some countries, and there's bad news in others. Like in the last 10
*  years, you've had, for example, the Philippines has gone backwards. Thailand has gone backwards.
*  Bangladesh has gone backwards. Turkey has gone backwards. That's like a half billion people
*  right there. So you've had some positives. Like, you know, there was positive movement forward in
*  Armenia, Malaysia, some other countries. But we're kind of at a stalemate right now. And
*  what most people fear about where we are right now, who I respect, is what is the digital
*  transformation of the world due to this like, progressive democracy, or of open societies?
*  And that's what concerns me the most. Oh, interesting. So I've, and we'll talk about
*  one of the most fascinating technologies, which is Bitcoin, how it can help. But
*  I have a sense that technology, like most technological innovations will give power
*  to the individuals, will give, will fight authoritarian governments as opposed to give
*  more power to authoritarian governments. But your sense is there's ways to give,
*  for technology to be utilized as a tool for the abuse of the citizenry.
*  I've seen both. In my work at Ahrefs, I started by helping to put together backpacks with foreign
*  information that we sent to the Cuban underground library movement. So in Cuba, you know, to own a
*  book at the time, you had to have the government's permission. There's very little internet
*  penetration. Okay. So we would send in movies, you know, V for Vendetta, dubbed into Spanish,
*  and people would sit inside their homes. Yeah, and they'd watch it. And they would answer
*  questions with each other. And it's very powerful. And then after that, I worked with people inside
*  North Korea, we would send in flash drives. We have this program called Flash Drives for Freedom.
*  We've sent over 100,000 flash drives in our work into North Korea, a country of about 25 million
*  people. That's a lot. It's a big, big difference. That's, you know, many, many millions of hours of
*  films, books, movies, etc. So I've seen the power that technology can have where, you know, in the
*  60s and 70s, you know, to get to break an information blockade, you had to like send in crates of books
*  into a communist country. So now all of a sudden, you can send the entire contents of what was
*  once the Library of Alexandria on something the size of your thumbnail. That's remarkable.
*  So obviously, I've seen the positives of technology, and we'll certainly get into Bitcoin.
*  But I'm, you know, very concerned about essentially big data analysis, like what people call AI or
*  general, you know, specific kinds of AI. Like, very concerning. I think these are very authoritarian.
*  I mean, it's very hard to make a case that AI is going to be good for human rights. Very difficult,
*  in my opinion. But it may be good for health. It may be good for our efforts to protect the planet.
*  It may be good for a lot of scientific things. I find it very hard to believe it'll be good for
*  civil liberties. Oh, that's fun. This is fun, because I disagree. Give me your examples.
*  I'm serious. What AI applications will improve civil liberties? I thought you meant examples
*  of stuff that's already out there, because I can give you examples that, for example, the kind of
*  things that I would like to work on, but also the kind of things I'm hoping to see, which is
*  AI could be used by centralized powers, by governments, by big organizations like Facebook
*  and Twitter and so on, to collect data about people. Right. Right. But I believe there's a
*  huge hunger among people to have control over their own data. So instead, you can have AI
*  that's distributed, or people have complete ownership of their little AI systems. So the
*  kind of stuff that I would like to build or like to see to be built is, you could think of it as
*  personal assistance or AI that's owned by you, and you get to give it out. You have complete control
*  over all of your data. You have complete control over everything that's learnable about your day
*  to day experiences that could be useful in the market of goods and ideas and all those kinds of
*  things. So it has to do with, so I know you talk about surveillance, which is very interesting.
*  It's who gets to have control of the data. And I think, I believe there's a lot of hunger
*  among regular people to have control over their data, such that if you want to create a business,
*  you have a lot of money to be made from a capitalist perspective by providing products
*  that let people control their data, where you have no control.
*  Sounds like to me you're describing encryption, or at least the ability to encrypt, the ability to use
*  to use digital keys to secure your property. And that to me is a very powerful force for
*  individual rights, very powerful. And it's what animates Bitcoin ultimately, which we'll get into.
*  But for me, at least the way I look at it today in 2021, the threat from big data analysis
*  used by governments and authoritarian regimes is terrifying. I mean, to actually see what the
*  Chinese Communist Party is doing, where they have hundreds of millions of cameras overseeing
*  society, cameras that can tell who's a Uyghur and who's a Han, that to me is terrifying.
*  And everything is sorted instantly. There are supercomputers that are built in Urumqi,
*  in Xinjiang, for this explicit purpose. And it allows the government to quickly sort
*  and basically commit genocide a lot faster. And it's really scary. So I do agree, and I've seen
*  personally how powerful technology can be as a force for freedom. But I'm very, very worried
*  about big data analysis in the hands of governments. See, that's funny, because I tend to see
*  governments as ultimately incompetent in the space of technology to where they will always be lagging
*  behind. So you look at what the Chinese surveillance systems are doing. I believe once it starts
*  getting bad enough, that technologies would be created to resist that. So to mess with it from
*  the hacker community, but also from the individual communities. So surveillance is actually very
*  difficult from a centralized perspective to detect, to collect data by you, to detect everything you
*  are, because you can spoof a lot of that information. So I believe you can put power in the hands of the
*  citizens to sort of feed the government fake data, to confuse it at a mass scale to where
*  it'll make their surveillance less effective. But that could be very hopeful.
*  Yeah, I mean, the practical application in Xinjiang, which is a territory the size of Alaska,
*  where a large percentage of the population has been put into prison camps,
*  the current issue of The New Yorker has an absolutely harrowing essay that tells the story
*  of one such woman who in, I believe, 2017 got sucked into one of these camps, and it took her
*  a year or more to get out. And she's talking about how in each home in Xinjiang, each home has a QR
*  code on it that the police can scan and get like a quick instant download of who lives there.
*  Each car has, you know, like a scannable code. Every single person has their DNA taken,
*  and the DNA is being sifted through and analyzed by algorithms. So this is like the Chinese
*  government's laboratory for how can we use technology to oppress, sort of like digital
*  Leninism. And that to me is one of the biggest risks in our world today, and it's not talked
*  about enough. That's interesting. So technology basically enables the automation of oppression.
*  Absolutely. So like,
*  but to define technology, big data analysis, and, you know, maybe specific AI, etc. does.
*  But encryption allows us to fight back. It's very important people understand we have tools to fight
*  back. The, you know, Big Brother can only grow if it can feed on your data. If it can't get your
*  data, it can't grow. So you have to willingly give up stuff to the cloud for this monster to grow.
*  We can make the monster hungry and shrink it if we give it less data. And I think that's where
*  I would agree with you in terms of wanting to empower people to be able to do stuff
*  on their own terms in a sovereign way. And yeah, maybe you're kind of thinking like the personal
*  assistant who helps out Tony Stark or something like that. And that's, yeah, as long as there's
*  no back doors, and that's a sovereign thing that you've popped up and created and you have the keys
*  to. Absolutely. But practically speaking, if we're talking about the world today as is,
*  we need to be concerned about the way that authoritarian regimes are using big data
*  analysis. And they're going to buy this software and this equipment from the Chinese government.
*  They're already doing it. Street level surveillance has already been purchased
*  by governments everywhere from Latin America to Sub-Saharan Africa to the heart of Europe.
*  There's been huge scandals in Britain over their purchase of Chinese surveillance technology.
*  Part of the Chinese government's Belt and Road campaign, which is basically to build the
*  infrastructure of this century and to be in control of it, is this idea, part of that idea is to ship
*  out and install surveillance technology, both at the telecom level and at the surveillance level
*  across dozens of countries around the world and have that back door. There's this national security
*  law in China, which states that companies that are Chinese, which are abroad, are mandated to
*  send data back to Beijing. So they are building this huge global surveillance state. And again,
*  not talked about enough, you should go Google and research the Belt and Road.
*  I think it's very important that we confront this.
*  Yeah, I'm really glad you're talking about it because it's probably important to understand.
*  I'm also hopeful that as people get educated about how much their data when collected,
*  unencrypted, but in general, can be used to harm them. I mean, it's almost like an education.
*  I feel like if you know, it's a double-edged sword because I feel like people become fearful
*  too easily and that actually has a very negative effect on the quality of life. In some sense,
*  you want to have tools that allow you to live freely as opposed to live in fear. If you live
*  in fear, that's not a good way to live. So it's a balance. It's a free society versus a fear
*  society. And look, people are, it's all about the trade-offs you make in your daily life.
*  Living more privately with more freedom is less convenient. You trade freedom and privacy for
*  convenience and comfort and speed. Absolutely. It's an engineering decision in everything that
*  you do. In the West, in advanced democracies, we have not necessarily personally seen
*  the results of that trade-off because we live in these free societies that have these checks and
*  balances and freedoms. But as soon as you step into an authoritarian state and you make those
*  trade-offs, your life immediately becomes more restrictive. And what people are worried about is
*  that even in advanced economies, market democracies, et cetera, people are worried that they might not
*  survive the great social digital transformation. Look at what the NSA is capable of doing.
*  For now, it's not that big of a problem because we still have free speech. But it's deeply
*  concerning what Snowden revealed. And it's a nice reminder that we need to be focused on privacy and
*  encryption and on helping users become more sovereign, regardless of where you live. It's
*  kind of like a crutch to live in a free society. It's almost like a free lunch in a way.
*  You're not going to be sent to a prison camp because of the color of your skin or your beliefs
*  or what you say about the government. And you're very lucky. Again, most people do live in a society
*  where you can be persecuted for those things. And I feel like, especially in America, we forget that.
*  We're distanced from that really strong reality. On the topic of Snowden and the NSA,
*  what should we be thinking about? Because that feels like already an outdated set of conversations
*  because of the information we've gotten from the past. It feels like everything's gotten quiet now
*  in terms of how much we actually know about the... It's hugely important. I think the two lessons
*  from Snowden are, A, the Patriot Act and the War on Terror and mass surveillance are not necessary
*  for our democracy and for our freedoms. This was a false choice. We never had to sacrifice them to
*  be safer. And we've seen that. Government has spent hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars
*  on these surveillance programs that you can read about if they amounted to very little,
*  except for tremendous bureaucratic waste and erosion of our freedoms. But at the same time,
*  we need to practice more privacy. And the dramatic increase in the usage of Signal, for example,
*  has been really, really great to see. It's fantastic that tens of millions of people
*  are downloading Signal and using it. You should try to be onboarding more and more of your
*  conversations onto Signal, for example, where governments can't see what you're saying. Maybe
*  they can see the metadata. Maybe they can see that you sent your phone number, sent a message to
*  someone else's phone number at this time, but they can't see what's inside. So using encryption in
*  your life is very, very important. That's a good starting point. I would say that's kind of step A.
*  The ideas of democracy, the ideas of the balance of power,
*  all the ideas that we were talking about, the constructs,
*  were inventions. I wonder if there's other inventions that will allow us to sort of
*  not engage, not give governments or any centralized institutions so much power.
*  Like, why do citizens have to use Signal? Because that's an effort. You have to understand
*  exactly why. So that's a nice little solution for a particular set of problems. But there's
*  a million other ways that data, I'm sure, is being collected constantly. If we don't create
*  a system that prevents the establishment of these centralized powers, then we'll always have this
*  problem. Yeah, I think we can keep it simple for the purposes of this conversation. You have
*  politics, information, and money. Those are the three things I would encourage us to focus on.
*  In politics, yes, someone invented democracy. I mean, whether it was the Greeks, the West Africans,
*  or many others around the world around the same time invented this idea that we should be ruled by
*  rules and not by rulers, right? And that has evolved dramatically, right? And then you have
*  information. Information also used to be highly centralized, right? Think about how rich you had
*  to be to gain access to a library before the printing press, or how much money you had to have,
*  or how close to the king or the feudal lord you had to be to be able to have that ability. But now,
*  the majority of the world, billions of people have access to all information in their pocket,
*  and they can set up an account on social media and get their word out. So not only politics,
*  but information has been dramatically decentralized. And I would say that encrypted messaging
*  is kind of a corollary to that second innovation. And as much as now people are more effortlessly,
*  signal is a lot easier to use than PGP, for example, they're more easily able to practice
*  privacy when it comes to having private messages globally. These are all good things, and we need
*  to keep pushing. And I think money is honestly maybe the most important piece, and that's why
*  I spent so much time thinking about Bitcoin. Okay, so politics, information, money.
*  Let's talk about money. What is money and why is it important to think about in the context of
*  human rights? I have witnessed money be peripheralized. It has taken a back seat in
*  the human rights conversation. The idea of currency, who makes the money, who makes the rules,
*  who issues it, who sets the interest rates, all these things. It is not on the menu of human rights
*  activists. If you just do a systematic study of the human rights discourse over the last several
*  decades, money is not there. It's also not really taught in schools. Children don't really learn
*  about money. Where does it come from? It's kind of hidden from a lot of our discourse.
*  Only really when I got into Bitcoin did I start learning more about money. I spent 10 years at
*  the Human Rights Foundation, and we did all kinds of programs around the world. We convened Oslo
*  Freedom Forums in different places, and I got to meet hundreds of dissidents. Very rarely did they
*  ever speak about currency or bank accounts or moving money from one place to another.
*  But when I started asking them, they always had amazing stories about money, always. My friend,
*  Ivan Mawire, who started the This Flag movement in Zimbabwe, which ended up toppling Robert Mugabe,
*  when I asked him to come to San Francisco to give a talk about hyperinflation, which he lived through,
*  he said, no one's ever asked me to do that before, but I'll come. And he came. This was about three
*  years ago. And the first thing he did when he got on the stage is he opened up a shirt and he brought
*  out a necklace that had the 1980 Zimbabwean dollar on it. And he said, we in the activist community
*  wear this as a symbol of where our country used to be, because the Zimbabwean dollar used to be
*  worth two British pounds. And then of course, over the next two and a half decades of economic
*  mismanagement and corruption by Mugabe, it got inflated out of existence, right? You've seen
*  those like hundred trillion dollars in Zimbabwean notes. So he had to live through that, which was
*  terrible and crushing. But he is an expert on money. If you actually talk to human rights
*  activists about money, they know a lot about money. They're just not usually asked to talk about it.
*  So for me, when I studied money or look at money, it's really about control. Who's creating it? And
*  how much does the population know about the creation of that money? And when it comes to
*  Bitcoin, it's really the people's money. Like there is no shadowy force in charge of it. We
*  all know the rules. We all know how it's going to get minted and how it's going to get printed.
*  And that information is out there for everybody to see. And there's no special group of rules
*  for one group of people or another group. A billionaire and a refugee are the same in the
*  eyes of the protocol. This is a rather revolutionary concept. And in the same way that democracy allowed
*  us to decentralize politics and have checks and balances. And in the same way that the internet
*  is this culmination of technologies that allowed us to decentralize information,
*  access to and control over it. Bitcoin decentralizes money. I mean, no longer, again,
*  is there one group of people who can just change it arbitrarily. We're all in the same playing
*  field. And I think that that is a tremendous innovation. You know, from one perspective,
*  money and inflation, hyperinflation is a kind of symptom of corruption,
*  as opposed to the core of the corruption. And at the flip side, in terms of resisting the corruption,
*  resisting the abuse of human rights, it's interesting to think that fighting inflation
*  or fighting the mismanagement of the money supply
*  is a way to fight back authoritarianism or to fight authoritarianism. And that's an interesting
*  concept that I think was introduced to me by just plugging myself intellectually into the Bitcoin
*  community, but also just cryptocurrency in general. It's not that money is a symptom,
*  you know, money is a tool to fight back too. Absolutely. So in what way can Bitcoin be used
*  to fight authoritarianism? Not just in the United States, but all of those 53% that you're referring
*  to, how can Bitcoin help? So we talked about authoritarianism and we talked about the
*  surveillance state. To me, Bitcoin has two kind of key mechanisms through which it can help us.
*  Number one, it's a sovereign savings account. It's debasement proof, meaning the government
*  cannot print more whenever they want. This is very, very different from fiat currency,
*  which by its very name, its very nature, can be issued on sort of demand, right, by the rulers.
*  And while I live in a country where the rulers do a reasonable job of managing the money,
*  most people aren't so lucky. So only 13% of humans in the world live in a country that's
*  a liberal democracy with property rights and has what we call a reserve currency,
*  meaning a currency so stable and desirable that other countries save in it at the central bank
*  level, right? You basically have the US, the UK, Australia, Switzerland, the Euro and Canada.
*  I mean, those are like reserve currencies and these are liberal democracies where people have
*  reasonable guarantees over property rights. Everybody else either lives under like a weaker
*  currency or an authoritarian regime. That's 87% of the world's population, almost 7 billion people.
*  So for them, a sovereign savings account that's permissionless, meaning you don't have to have ID
*  to use it, is a big, big deal. And a lot of people talk about Zimbabwe or Venezuela has some like
*  isolated cases. Oh, well, you know, hyperinflation only happens in those two countries. I actually
*  did some research into this and there's about 1.3 billion people who live under double or
*  triple digit inflation. This is not an isolated instance. We're talking huge countries. Nigeria,
*  200 million people, 15% inflation. Turkey, 15% inflation for 100 million people. Argentina,
*  40% inflation for a country of 45 million people. So you can go down the list. There's about 35
*  countries where like people's earnings, their wages are literally disappearing in front of their
*  eyes over a matter of weeks or months against things like the dollar, gold, real estate, right?
*  So this is a huge issue. It absolutely is a human rights issue for me. I mean, when it comes to your
*  time and energy, having control over that or having it stolen from you, I think this is pretty clear.
*  And Bitcoin is like an immediate, low cost, easily accessible solution for people. And I've learned
*  this not from my own assumptions, but by talking to people, by interviewing dozens of people,
*  whether it's in Sudan, which currently has triple digit inflation, or people who've escaped from
*  Syria, who have used Bitcoin to get their wealth out of the country, and then also to make payments
*  back to people inside, or Venezuela or elsewhere. It's very, very powerful.
*  I think some very small percentage of people who have used, have owned Bitcoin was something like
*  1% of the world. Whatever that number is, it's small. Call it 2% for the purposes of our
*  calculation. About a little under 200 million people. Wow. Yeah. At most, right now. So if we
*  look at Zimbabwe, Sudan, if we look at- Small percentages of people. Do you think the technology
*  is mature enough? Because it's not just about the idea, it's also about the implementation of it.
*  Like, you know, Bitcoin, for the most part, requires access to the internet. Yeah. And
*  what do you think about accessibility of this technology now as a method of activism in the
*  worst parts of the world? We often think, like all the conversations we've had about Bitcoin is
*  essentially middle class, like wealthy people relative to the rest of the world. They're kind
*  of talking the sort of investment and high concept ideas. Then there's also the people in the world
*  who are suffering, who are living through hyperinflation. They may not have a computer
*  access to the internet. Like how do you think Bitcoin can help there? Yeah. So again, we have
*  one clear use case, which is a sovereign savings account that you can control, right? The other
*  use case is an unstoppable payments network. This is very important for people who live behind,
*  for example, sanctions. Like the US like basically weaponizes the dollar and like sanctions different
*  countries. And instead of sanctioning like a handful of rulers, for example, which I would
*  support, this is like a Magnitsky or smart sanctions. Sometimes we'll just say, we're just
*  going to shut off this whole country. So the people suffer. Cuba or Iran are good examples.
*  Average people suffer, right? So people in those two countries I just mentioned, Cuba, Iran, or even
*  Palestine, which is also sort of like blockaded by the Israelis. So you have Cuba, Iran, Palestine,
*  are three good examples where people inside all three of those countries now are using Bitcoin to
*  do commerce, do their business, send money back and forth. So it's sanction resistant. Sanctions
*  resistant. It does not get stopped by sanctions, right? And also it's again, remittances are
*  extortionate. I mean, the average remittance costs has a high fee, takes several days. If your family
*  is in Ghana or something like that or Nigeria and you live in the United States, it can take time to
*  use Western Union. Sometimes, you know, it gets paused, it gets lost. There's issues. You have to
*  deal with customer service. Screw that. I mean, you know, the person has a cell phone, which
*  increasingly is the case. I mean, by the end of next year, more than five or six billion people,
*  depending on different estimates, will have smartphones basically by the end of 2022.
*  We're talking like the vast majority of humans will have access to smartphones.
*  They can all have sovereign Bitcoin wallets. And there's even ways to access Bitcoin without
*  the internet. But I mean, we can get into that. There's like hardware wallets and so on. What do
*  you mean by sovereign Bitcoin wallet? You know, most users today are using Bitcoin in a in a
*  custodial manner. So this is kind of like having a bank account where you have a deposit
*  account at a bank, right? So you have a claim, right? You go to the bank and they have some of
*  your money and you take it out, right? You use it with an ATM. So what I would call non-custodial
*  Bitcoin use would be similar to withdrawing cash from an ATM. You have it. It's a bearer instrument.
*  Okay. So when I, it's what's called the bearer instrument. I know. I'm so sorry. I'm outside this
*  community. It just sounds fun. No, no, no. It's yeah. So like a bearer instrument would be like
*  a bar gold or a bank note or Bitcoin that you control, meaning you have the seed phrase, right?
*  Which for the listeners essentially is 12 to 24 English words that you write down on a piece of
*  paper. That's your like password to get into your Bitcoin account. And that gives you that bearer
*  instrument quality, right? But unfortunately, most users still use Bitcoin in a custodial way,
*  meaning they buy it on Coinbase or Square or something like that. You would put into the
*  custodial category like a bank. Yeah. And look, the good news is you can withdraw to your own
*  control. And in the Bitcoin community, we try to teach this idea that it's not your keys, not your
*  coins in the same way that if you deposit your money at the bank, you might not get it back.
*  I mean, it's low likelihood, but it's very possible. Same thing in Bitcoin. Like if you
*  want to get the full experience, you want to actually custody your own Bitcoin. You want to
*  put it whether it's on an open source software wallet, like the blue wallet is a good one for
*  people to check out, or a hardware wallet like cold card, for example, there's different ways to do
*  this. But essentially, like around the world, people are innovating, like don't think so low
*  of your fellow man. You know what I mean? Like people are able to figure this out. You know,
*  I get a lot of flack from people saying, oh, Bitcoin is so hard to use. I've read this article
*  in your time saying this guy in Silicon Valley lost all of his Bitcoin. That's because he was
*  a moron and didn't care about it. This guy lost all this Bitcoin because it wasn't worth much 10
*  years ago. And he, you know, he forgot the password. But if you're like receiving your remittance
*  from a family member, you're not going to lose the password, right?
*  And you trust in the basic intelligence of people to figure this out and to innovate and so on and
*  figure out. We're watching it, man. Yeah, you know, I'm, it's kind of funny that but people in the
*  United States are not very savvy with money. It's exactly the way you're describing is like when you
*  have very little money, you're going to be savvy with money. You're going to understand exactly the
*  mechanisms that work that are resistant to the corruption that's around you. I mean, I remember
*  sort of growing up in the Soviet Union, the general bureaucracy and the corruption of everything
*  around you, you figure out ways around that. You figure out ways how to function within that kind
*  of system to survive under inflation, under hyperinflation, under all like basically being
*  unable to trust any kind of even the police force and all those kinds of things, you figure it out.
*  And that same way, perhaps Bitcoin could be all the different ways to store and gain Bitcoin.
*  These mechanisms could be something that's figured out in the third world as opposed to in the
*  Oh, I mean, I mean, the capital of Bitcoin could easily be Lagos and not San Francisco. Yes. In
*  terms of users, in terms of people using it. And again, the two use cases as a savings account and
*  as an unstoppable payment rail. These are the two ones that you should really think about. This is
*  how people are using it today. Now, when it comes to, could it possibly be adopted by like a sufficient
*  majority of the population? I say yes. And it's very similar to the way the mobile phone spread.
*  At the beginning, the cell phone was only for rich people. It was only for the elite. It was huge. It
*  didn't work very well. The interface sucked. It was clunky over time. It got smaller and smaller
*  and cheaper and cheaper and easier to use and easier to use. And today everyone benefits.
*  So you're going to watch a similar technology upgrade process with Bitcoin already in the
*  last 10 years. Bitcoin has gotten so much easier to use. I mean, there are now mobile wallets that
*  are so slick. There's one called Moon M U U N wallet from a team in Argentina. And these, these,
*  these guys created it because they saw their own currency devalued like three times in the last 20
*  years. And they've had a hell of a time trying to get their money back and forth in different
*  countries. So they were like, let's make this easy for people. Again, you know, this is,
*  this is the people's money. This is, this is something that cannot be controlled by,
*  by governments or corporations. And that makes it very powerful. And I think it's actually quite
*  exciting to be here in the adoption phase. In the early days. Yeah, man, this is the early days.
*  And you also mentioned that sort of Bitcoin is a, is the mechanism of a peaceful revolution.
*  So it's a way to, to resist authoritarianism in a peaceful way. It's ultimately a mech,
*  you know, you mentioned sort of politics, information and money. It, it seems like in
*  the space of money, this is one of the peaceful mechanisms. It's a way to opt out. You can opt out
*  peacefully from the system. And yeah, it's, it's beautiful. It's beautiful. So, so Bitcoin is
*  currently by far the most popular sort of dominant cryptocurrency. That said, and I look forward to
*  your letters, Bitcoin maximalists. That said, you know, internet Explorer was the most popular
*  browser for quite a long time. And then other browsers came along that out competed it like
*  Chrome, Firefox, people's checkout, brave. It's a great browser. I think it's my favorite browser
*  at this point. Anyway, so why Bitcoin? Why not another cryptocurrency? If you look in the next
*  10, 20, 50, a hundred years, do you think it's possible for another cryptocurrency like Ethereum
*  or something that it's not even here yet to overtake Bitcoin as a mechanism?
*  When you say overtake, what do you mean? What do you mean overtake? You mean number of users?
*  Do you mean a price per coin?
*  Yeah, the number of users, because we're talking about 1%, 2%. And if we are serious about this
*  being in the space of money as a way to give individuals power, fight the centralized powers
*  that use the money system and so on. How do we get from 2% to 50% right to 60% to 80%?
*  That jump, is it obvious to you? Not obvious, but do you think Bitcoin is the way to get from 2%
*  to 50% or are there going to be other cryptocurrencies that may emerge that get us to 50%?
*  Bitcoin is the innovation. The innovation is in having the decentralized mint. No one can change
*  the monetary policy. Everything else is downstream from there. In Bitcoin, the meme would be 21
*  million. There's never going to be any more than 21 million. Every other cryptocurrency either has
*  an inflationary policy, meaning there's going to continue to be more and more of it over time,
*  or its monetary policy can be changed by a small group of people. This is vividly on display in
*  Ethereum, which is the second largest and second most robust cryptocurrency. I've talked to senior
*  Ethereum engineers over the last couple of weeks trying to figure out what is the monetary policy
*  of Ethereum? No one can tell me. No one knows how much ETH is going to be minted in 2022 and 2023
*  after they shift to proof of stake. I've seen estimates that range from 100,000 to 2 million.
*  So at the end of the day, you're going to be trusting a small group of people to make those
*  decisions. That is what we are escaping with Bitcoin. So all these other cryptocurrencies,
*  they might have their use cases. Virtually all of them are not. It's very important for people to
*  know that if you take the 4,500 cryptocurrencies on CoinMarketCap, almost all of them are scams,
*  straight up. Even the ones that have noble intentions, I just don't think are going to
*  add that much value ultimately. I think Bitcoin to me is the innovation, and that's because it has a
*  monetary policy and an issuance schedule that cannot be changed. That's what gets me so excited
*  about it. That's why it's such an important tool for human rights. Yeah, it's interesting because
*  when you grow from 2%, when you grow in the number of people using it, at the scale they're using it,
*  it's going to need to be resistant to governments and institutions messing with it.
*  So it's interesting to see what kind of cryptocurrency would be resistant to that.
*  Obviously Dogecoin is going to win. Well, I mean, look, the number two cryptocurrency in the world,
*  probably by how useful it is to people, is Tether, which is totally centralized, has black lists.
*  So I'm not saying there won't be new digital assets that are lumped into this category that
*  have usage, but it's not the same innovation as Bitcoin. It's just building on this idea of
*  a Eurodollar maybe, like a dollar that is minted outside of the control of the US Federal Reserve.
*  It would be a Eurodollar. So stablecoins are kind of like Eurodollars just minted by private actors
*  in a way, but they're still tied to the dollar. They're pegged to the dollar. They're not escaping
*  the system. Escaping the system is Bitcoin. We aren't reliant on the dollar. We have our own
*  full store value, medium of exchange, unit of account eventually. And the Bitcoin world will
*  be denominated in different terms. And I think everyone, everything else will be tied to it.
*  I really do. It does feel currently like Bitcoin is like pirates or something like that. And there's
*  still like the central banks that are like the main navies of the different nations. It's just,
*  if you talk about scale, so there's going to be a moment if Bitcoin continues to grow in its impact,
*  when governments are going to seriously contend with, you know, what do we do with this?
*  Do you think about those moments? Is Bitcoin, is the cryptocurrency world in general going to be
*  able to withstand the serious legal pushback from countries, from nations, especially authoritarian
*  nations? Yeah. So it's been interesting. It's been 12 years, okay. More than 12 years since Satoshi
*  Nakamoto created Bitcoin. And they haven't been able to stop it. They have tried. They've tried a
*  lot. I wrote a long essay for Quillette on this, like, why haven't governments been able to stop
*  Bitcoin? And my thesis is essentially that there's been like this mix of different kind of technical,
*  social, and economic and political incentives and disincentives that make it very difficult.
*  And I think to me, the best way to think about it is that Bitcoin is like a Trojan horse. So just to
*  actually tell that story just a little bit, because I think it's important to understand the classical
*  mythology tale. I find this very interesting. Of the actual Trojan horse? Yeah, which was told in
*  Aeneid actually by Virgil, right? And the idea was the Greeks had been like trying to take the
*  city of Troy for like a decade at these like impregnable walls and they couldn't do it.
*  And Ulysses and the rest of the Greek army were like, we don't know what to do. So Minerva, the
*  god of strategy and war, you know, kind of like they get this idea from her, I guess, to actually
*  try to use subterfuge and trickery to take over the city. So the idea is, and this was sort of
*  hatched by Ulysses, right, to put this horse together that would kind of be like a gift.
*  So the idea was the Greeks just like pretended to leave, right? They deserted, they left behind one
*  soldier and this horse. And the Trojans looked at it and they were like, what's going on here?
*  And they brought in the soldier and the soldier's like, look, they left, they're so sorry for all of
*  the desecration and blood spill. This is their gift to you. It's, you know, honoring Minerva,
*  you know, it's like this like, you know, trophy for you guys. And there were actually people inside
*  Troy, Cassandra, a prophet, as well as Laocuan, who was like a priest who said, no, no, no, this
*  is obviously a trick. This is obviously a trick. But they were like dispatched and ignored because
*  the horse was like, it was just like so bad ass. So the Trojans were like bringing it in the city.
*  So they brought it in themselves. No blood spilled at all, right? In the middle of the night, of
*  course, we've what you realize is the horse was packed with Greek soldiers and they come out and
*  they let the army in, which was like hiding behind an island. So this idea that like,
*  something could be so attractive that you really can't say no, even if you know what's inside of
*  it, is it played with in Bitcoin. So like, in Bitcoin has this number go up technology, right?
*  It is what we call it in sort of shorthand NGO, NGU, right? But what people don't realize is that
*  NGU is like the Trojan horse inside the Trojan horse is FGU, freedom go up technology.
*  So dictators and rogue regimes and corporations are going to buy mine tax accumulate this thing
*  because it's the best performing financial asset in the world. What they don't realize or they're
*  going to have to ignore is that they're also aiding and abetting this freedom technology,
*  which allows individuals to be sovereign and eventually erodes their power. There's no question
*  that rogue regimes and bad actors have already used and will continue to use Bitcoin. The thing
*  is when you think about a North Korea or a Venezuela and that government instructs some
*  of its bureaucrats and cronies and officials to start stealing Bitcoin or accumulating it or
*  whatever for short term gain to get around sanctions and use it to buy dollars or something
*  like that, right? Which they can't get normally. Well, guess what? All those people who the regime
*  has instructed to like figure this thing out and use it, they're all going to realize, oh my God,
*  this is money the government doesn't control and it's going to spread like a virus. Okay?
*  So this is like the idea of the Trojan horse allegory. I think it's so important and powerful
*  with Bitcoin. All the people talking about Bitcoin today on TV, they don't care about freedom or
*  privacy. They just care about number go up, but what they don't realize is what's concealed within.
*  And that's very, very powerful to me. So the people talking about Bitcoin on TV
*  are maybe investor types. Professional investors, corporations and soon governments. I mean,
*  you just had today this morning on CNBC, the leader of the Republican leader of the House
*  of Representatives, a Congressman saying like, we need to be pro Bitcoin as a country. And the
*  other day, Peter Thiel had a very interesting comment where he was basically like, let's not
*  fall behind China in this race. So you have influential people in our government, like sort
*  of posturing for this, like, you know, Bitcoin race that's going to happen in the next 10 years.
*  You're going to see this. Countries are going to compete to stack Bitcoin. Absolutely.
*  So you believe the thing that's shiny and sexy, like the Trojan horse, the number go up.
*  It's too hard to ignore.
*  And for it to define that a little further is meaning it does seem like the more people get
*  excited and start using Bitcoin, the more its value grows. So it's just a good feedback loop.
*  Yeah, it's a feedback loop. And then the reason you're excited about it, especially is that
*  FG. Yeah, freedom go up. Freedom go up, which is it ultimately gives power to the individuals
*  to decentralize the entire system. Yeah, I mean, like when Tesla stacks Bitcoin,
*  they're just doing that as self-interest. They think it's going to be a good inflation hedge.
*  Fine. But what they maybe don't care about, don't realize, or they don't need to care.
*  I mean, Bitcoin's power is that like co-opts people into promoting a freedom tool, even if
*  they don't care about, or even if they hate freedom, it doesn't matter. So when Tesla stacks
*  Bitcoin and the price goes up and more interest goes up and more people around the world are like,
*  wow, Bitcoin, then more people get involved. Again, more adoption, more price, more developers,
*  better user interface, more privacy tools, more mining, more network security. It's just this
*  positive feedback loop that continues to grow. And it will grow intensely in the next decade as
*  we go through the adoption cycle. And the reason why I'm so excited about this is the human rights
*  world, again, to get back to our previous conversation, is very hard to find people who
*  have the empathy or the altruism to actually make a difference abroad in places like China
*  or Saudi Arabia or North Korea. People are very quick to just like, they'll just quickly
*  toss off the pretty words that they care about human rights as soon as profits come into play.
*  So there's no alignment of incentives, right? The reason why Bitcoin is so powerful is that
*  it aligns the incentives. All of a sudden, they can be as greedy as they want. They are being
*  forced to promote a freedom tool. This I've never seen before, and it gives me a lot of excitement.
*  It's very refreshing because we've been laboring in the human rights space. You have to raise money
*  and it's all nonprofit work and you're begging for people to make a difference for you.
*  Here, you have this incredible asset, which people will accumulate out of self-preservation,
*  self-interest and greed, and yet it will strengthen the power of the individual.
*  That is what we need to fight, big brother. That's what we need to fight. What I'm scared is
*  happening in China. This growing authoritarian state, which is powered by big data analysis,
*  this is our way to fight back. It runs on this really interesting engine, again,
*  that takes advantage of our base nature as humans. I know that it sounds terrible for me to say this,
*  but ultimately, we are self-interested and it is hard to get people to care about others living
*  a thousand miles away. We are localized in our empathy. Speaking as someone who works to help
*  people who live in a hundred different countries, it's very difficult to get Americans to care about
*  what's happening in Belarus or in Kashmir. It just is. But guess what? They're going to
*  definitely care about Bitcoin because they want to see their net worth go up. They want to do
*  better for their family, et cetera. They're going to get into this thing and it's really going to
*  make that powerful tool for everyone else who's using it. This interplay dynamic is fascinating
*  to me. Yeah, I'm somebody who doesn't like the corrupting effects of greed,
*  but it is also human nature. Yeah, I don't like it either, but we have to be realists here.
*  You have to acknowledge it and then maybe use it for your advantage.
*  And it's not just Bitcoin itself. Exchanges today are adopting something called Lightning Network,
*  which is a way to scale Bitcoin on a second layer, much like we had gold bars, which we
*  scaled with paper money. And then we had Visa credit cards, which were a way of scaling the
*  paper notes. Bitcoin scales through Lightning Network. It's a private, instant, globally
*  final settlement network. It's something you all should check out. It's very, very interesting.
*  The exchanges aren't adopting Lightning for its privacy benefits. Lightning operates off the
*  chain, meaning surveillance companies can't do chain analysis on Lightning because it's
*  on an onion-routed second layer that works like the Tor project. The exchanges
*  don't care about privacy. They're doing it because it reduces fees. Lightning is cheaper and faster.
*  So again, we have this really interesting alignment of incentives where the freedom tech is being
*  promoted by people who don't... It doesn't matter what their incentives are. I could care less if
*  they were altruistic or not. And I think this is... And you're going to maybe see this even in the
*  future. There's more things coming in Bitcoin down the pike. Lightning was enabled by an upgrade
*  called SegWit, which took place a few years ago, which was the culmination of the block size
*  conflict. There's another thing coming up called cross-input signature aggregation, which may, if
*  it takes effect in the next few years, it may compel exchanges to collaboratively spend all
*  their Bitcoin together in a way that really protects our privacy and fights surveillance.
*  But they're not going to do it for moral reasons. They're going to do it because it's going to save
*  them money and improve their bottom line. Can you speak to that kind of collaborative
*  so that you can have multiple parties in a single transaction kind of thing?
*  Yeah. You could do that today. Absolutely. It's called the coin join, for example. But right now,
*  it's more expensive to coin join in Bitcoin. You have to pay a premium for your privacy.
*  This would flip that on its head and would basically say, if you have one transaction,
*  hey, pile them all in, have as many parties as you want. The more parties you get in,
*  the cheaper it's going to be per party. Okay? And that's not possible in Bitcoin today,
*  but it might be in the future. But again, the beauty in Bitcoin are these ways that it just
*  aligns human incentives and aligns our most base desires and needs and realities with freedom and
*  privacy. That I've never seen before. And that's why I think it's so interesting.
*  So something that somebody like Eric Weiss actually spoke to this, the idea of blockchain in general.
*  From a 10,000 foot view, the blockchain is a centralized place to keep the record of
*  everything that ever happened. And does that concern you from a privacy perspective,
*  from a control perspective, even though it's managed, especially given the low frequency of
*  transactions for Bitcoin? You can have a lot of small computers across the globe contain the
*  entirety set of transactions, all of those kinds of features. Does that concern you that there's
*  one place where everything is made public in terms of everything that ever happened?
*  No, and I'll give you two reasons. Number one, the Bitcoin blockchain is ultimately a settlement
*  layer. It's kind of like something like Fedwire in the United States. It's a way for institutions
*  to settle with each other. That's what I think it's going to be like in 20, 30 years from now.
*  The average person is never going to touch the Bitcoin blockchain, probably. They're going to
*  use things like Lightning, or unfortunately they may use Bitcoin banks, but they'll either
*  use custodians or they'll use second layer non-custodial solutions to interact. The main
*  chain is going to get very expensive. It's going to be hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of dollars
*  or even more if the dollar starts to weaken to make a transaction on the main chain.
*  And that will be reserved for very large transactions or transactions that need final,
*  final settlement, et cetera, et cetera. And I think that that's fine and that's okay.
*  And it's very important that that ledger, that settlement layer, be kept by thousands of people
*  around the world. The Bitcoin blockchain is not centralized. It is decentralized. It is run by
*  people like me who run a node at home. I run a personal server. I run the Bitcoin blockchain.
*  No one else. You run it. That person runs it. There's no one in full node.
*  Yeah, I run a full node. It's great. I mean, it's pretty easy, man. You run it and that way you can
*  be sovereign over all of your usage, right? And you can run it on a Raspberry Pi with less than
*  150 bucks of equipment. And that's so important because again, there is no Amazon web service
*  vulnerability here. That is a problem. And I agree with you. We're trending in a bad direction. We're
*  like the government could just turn off a big important website or a news source. Well, they
*  can't turn off Bitcoin because it doesn't live on AWS. It lives with us. We are Bitcoin. And I
*  think that that's very, very powerful. And then you can have something like a lightning
*  network where you can escape some of the constraints of the blockchain, depending on your needs of the
*  privacy and all those kinds of things. Everything's an engineering trade-off, but yeah,
*  you can trade off some of the assurances of the base layer to go into lightning, for example.
*  And there you can get more speed and more privacy. And the things that Bitcoin lacks, speed and
*  privacy, for example, you can get on these second layers. So there's all kinds of cool engineering
*  things that people are coming up with. But I also would say anyone who says the blockchain,
*  that's a red flag for that person, doesn't really know what they're talking about. Satoshi didn't
*  use the blockchain in the white paper. Blockchain was a marketing term that people came up with later
*  to try and do this thing that was kind of like it peaked in 2015. And it continues to be an issue
*  today of it's blockchain, not Bitcoin. And that was like a very corporate kind of social attack
*  on Bitcoin to say we could take this like ledger part of this radical thing that's for criminals
*  and all these bad people, but we could take one part of it out and we can bring it over here and
*  we can make it safe for everybody. The real McCoy's Bitcoin, I mean, Satoshi referred to it as a time
*  chain. I mean, really what they're talking about is just these like blocks that are connected
*  chronologically of transactions. It's really not that exciting. The exciting part of Bitcoin is
*  the proof of work, where the transaction processing is done by mining and by energy and by real world
*  expenditures instead of like some central ledger. And when you remove the blockchain from Bitcoin,
*  it's not very, to me it's just not that interesting. I don't know. To me, blockchain,
*  time chain, whatever, philosophically, it's a pretty beautiful idea. I mean, it's pretty simple,
*  but it's nevertheless as beautiful from a, I'm a big database person. It's an interesting way to
*  store information that especially that's totally publicly accessible. I know that to Bitcoin,
*  proof of work is the fundamental idea, but to cryptocurrency and digital money in general and
*  to money, the blockchain is a really interesting idea to me. The way I think about it is it's kind
*  of, you know, physics. And I like that there's a place that you can rely on that's very difficult
*  to mess with. But it's not though, like it's outside of maybe Ethereum. Every other blockchain
*  is easy to mess with. So you're saying that proof of work is what makes it hard to mess with. Absolutely.
*  Proof of work is the key. Right. And Ethereum is about to leave proof of work. So it's about to go
*  to proof of stake, which is literally the existing system where a small group of people get to decide
*  the monetary policy. Yeah. Reputation has a lot of value there and that you could be,
*  it could be manipulated. I may sound brutal, but I'm coming at it from a political science perspective.
*  For me, it's all about freedom versus dictatorship. And that's why I find it so compelling that
*  regardless of how much power or might or how many armies you have, you can't change the rules of
*  Bitcoin. If you're wrong about Bitcoin, what would that look like? What kind of thing that in 10, 20
*  years that you're not wrong. Right. It doesn't pan out. It doesn't pan out, but other things that
*  actually make you feel good about all the hard work you've done do pan out. Something you haven't
*  expected. What might that be? Well, as we've talked about, my career started in human rights
*  and in promoting individual freedom and fighting authoritarianism. That fight will continue on,
*  no matter what happens with Bitcoin. I think it would be a massive failure and a tragedy if
*  this project didn't work. The Bitcoin project? Yes. If the Bitcoin project didn't work, honestly,
*  it's one of the only things that gives me hope because it is an effective way to push back
*  against creeping centralized control. If for whatever reason, and I can't really see,
*  one of the reasons I'm so into it is I can't really see how it's not going to work. Again,
*  I think the Trojan Horse allegory is too powerful. These big centralized actors are going to be too
*  greedy and they're going to want some as opposed to banning it. It's way easier for them to buy it
*  than to ban it. I think that's just what's going to happen. But if for whatever reason it failed,
*  I would have very little hope left because really, the Chinese model of centralizing all
*  of your data and controlling it ultimately is a very, very powerful arch force. I would be
*  concerned that that would be all of our destiny. I do have to push back at a style of communication.
*  You're not doing it today. You're being exceptionally eloquent in arguing these ideas
*  but me, especially just from studying history and being very skeptical from growing up in the
*  Soviet Union, I'm very skeptical and cautious when I see a community of people being very sure
*  of an idea. It doesn't matter what that idea is. There's a huge amount of certainty around Bitcoin.
*  Part of it is an important feature because its numbers go up.
*  So far.
*  Number go up is a really important part of the mechanism to make sure that it grows and
*  impacts network effects because it's really important to get excited about an idea for a
*  take hold. That's the way human nature works and so on. But I also get even something that you
*  mentioned that others may not, if you mentioned blockchain, you're sensitive to the attacks that
*  have been mounted where the word blockchain has been used.
*  People have been fooled. I mean, people in the humanitarian sector have been fooled into thinking
*  that some centralized blockchain project is going to help some refugee all collapsed.
*  It makes me sad that there's a huge number of scams. You know what makes me really sad?
*  A tiny little tangent. There's been recently, I guess with the growing platform or something,
*  there's been a bunch of fake Lex Friedman accounts. Yeah.
*  It must have a million. But not only do they do stupid stuff,
*  but they've been messaging people. Oh, to get the Bitcoin and stuff like that.
*  I'm licked in. Totally. And people write to me and they're saying like,
*  I think it gets people. I think they click on stuff. I think they were not sure. And it makes
*  me think like people are gullible or not gullible, but like they're just like I am,
*  which is they're like hopeful about the world. They're optimistic about the world.
*  You know what's naive about the evil that's out there.
*  This is what goes wrong with Bitcoin. And I've seen it. People fall for these,
*  like, I mean, like in these different countries, I'm trying to like talk to
*  different people about Bitcoin and like the amount of like MLM schemes, pyramid schemes, Ponzi schemes,
*  there are just so many of them. And there's plenty here too. But like in Zimbabwe,
*  I was talking to this guy who is a reporter who studies the effects, like the foreign
*  currency exchange markets. He's just saying one of the main reasons people don't want to get into
*  Bitcoin is because they've been scammed so hard by all these other things. So I would say that
*  that's one way it could go wrong is that like people just continue to be like afraid of it
*  because of things that are like that in the past. Well, it's not just the volatility. It's just the
*  yeah, having you think it's a pyramid scheme, you're not going to want to get involved.
*  And in some sense, if I were to speak to the Bitcoin maximalist community is to maybe ease
*  up on the certainty because that gives me the signal that it's a scam, to be honest. So whenever
*  somebody whenever there's a lot of people being cultishly excited about something,
*  I start being very skeptical. It's like, you know, I used to like Green Day before they became
*  popular. And then the moment they became really popular, I'm like, I don't know,
*  he started wearing mascara is like, I don't like him anymore. So I got I I'm very skeptical about
*  evangelists of an idea because I think Bitcoin on its own is just a powerful idea that stands.
*  But I also understand that in a world of a lot of competing ideas, where there's a lot of scams,
*  and a lot of money to be made through those scams that you have to be that you have to be
*  innovative in the kind of mechanisms you use to break through the scam, the ocean of scams.
*  I took this personality test, and I'm a 99 skepticism. So I was first sadly,
*  because I was first introduced to Bitcoin in 2013. And I was like, whatever. And it took me four
*  years to actually get into it to go down the rat hole. I didn't really start to grasp it and start
*  getting excited about it until 2017. So I was regrettably very, very skeptical for a long time.
*  And I just thought it was like, whatever. So I appreciate that. And you should be skeptical.
*  But ultimately, you got to believe in things like, I believe in democracy, I believe it's good for
*  people, I believe it's better than tyranny. I believe in the internet, I know that we've had
*  issues with centralization of the internet, but I still believe it's better to be connected than to
*  have bridges between us. And I believe in Bitcoin. And to me, it's like a very similar progressive
*  force that we're encountering. But yeah, be skeptical. Nothing will befall you that's bad
*  if you're like cautious and skeptical. That's like a good mentality to have.
*  . . . One thing we haven't talked about, all the violations of the human rights that authoritarian
*  regimes do, there's a, not a positive, but there is a, you mentioned that nationalism is a drug
*  Yeah. There's something beautiful about loving your country, having pride in your country,
*  loving the, there's a feeling of belonging. It could be country, it could be tribe,
*  it could be family. That's really powerful. And that speaks to human nature as well.
*  And that can sometimes overpower everything else. Patriotism.
*  Patriotism. Yeah. And you know, sometimes it can be seen when you study history, when you look at
*  Stalinist, the Soviet Union, or you can even look at Hitler and Nazi Germany, we tend to paint
*  patriotism in a negative light. And then maybe when we look at the United States,
*  but even here in the United States, people often paint patriotism in a bad light. You know, every
*  time I say I love America, so as an immigrant, I love this country. It's funny how that's taken
*  as a political statement that, you know, people, I guess on the right have been more active in
*  saying that they love the country and people on the left have not sort of, it's almost become a
*  weird slogan as opposed to a statement of just love. And I understand that patriotism can be a
*  slippery slope into letting your government, I mean, it's exactly what you're saying, the value
*  of freedom of speech is you hold your government to account for all the ways they mess up.
*  I mean, look, you have patriotism, then you have jingoism, right? It's very important. And we stay
*  on the patriotic side. Like as an American, I'm very patriotic in terms of, I love the values that
*  this country was founded on, if you read the Bill of Rights. And I love the fact that it was just
*  flexible enough that we were able to change it to grant, or at least to try to grant all people the
*  same rights. It was not the original plan of the founders, right? It had to be changed. But since,
*  then we've remained, those laws have remained and they're very good. And I'm very proud of that.
*  What I'm not proud of is the jingoistic part of our country, where we invade other countries and
*  bomb other countries. I'm not proud of our prison system. I think it's a huge stain on our nation.
*  I'm not proud of a lot of things. So I think you can be patriotic, but you can be critical of your
*  country. And that's important. I feel like the jingoistic thing is the thing that we need to
*  watch out for. That's just my own personal take. Out of all the projects that the Human Rights
*  Foundation works on, what's the most important one to you right now? Like what's been occupying
*  your mind? Yeah, I just read, again, this New Yorker piece that just came out that you should
*  read. It's called Ghost Walls. And it's the story of how the Chinese Communist Party is committing
*  genocide right now, just like other regimes did and the Turks did to the Armenians and the Nazis
*  did to the Jews. And it's happening again right now. He said never again. And that's just not
*  true. We're letting it happen. And again, with the business stuff, like Airbnb is like a sponsor of
*  the Olympics. What? At the individual level, at a business level, how does somebody like me, who's
*  just one little aunt, how does somebody like Elon Musk, who is in charge of 10,000 aunts, fight it?
*  Like, how do we push back? A great blueprint is the fight against the South African apartheid.
*  So we did a few events down in Johannesburg. And I've had the pleasure of being able to go to the
*  apartheid museum several times. And it really does a good job of chronicling how they were able to
*  do it. It took a while, there's no doubt. But the way it was done was good. Peaceful action from
*  abroad was very important. So there was like the Sullivan Principles. So like, you can peacefully
*  protest as a company, particular regimes. And it's very effective. And not just corporations,
*  but like, the Olympics is a great example. Like, Chinese government should not be able to host the
*  Olympics. The IOC should say no, not until you close down those prison camps. This is a perfect,
*  peaceful way to push back. No one gets hurt. Same thing when we had the Korean Olympics a few years
*  ago. North Korea should not have been allowed any sort of symbolistic kind of hosting rights there.
*  They have prison camps, gulags that we can see from outer space very clearly. And their regime is
*  the cruelest one on the planet, probably. Why were they able to sit and cheer and, you know,
*  get to sort of co-host those the Olympics? This is spineless. Like the IOC, the Olympics,
*  and major corporations should stand up, especially in the cultural sector where you
*  don't lose anything. Like, you know, or you shouldn't have to lose anything. So I think
*  if we look at the way that we forced the apartheid regime out, this international solidarity of
*  musicians, athletes, performers, celebrities is very, very powerful. Unfortunately, today's
*  celebrities are doing the opposite. We just, you know, had this press release go out yesterday
*  about Aikon. And he's off whitewashing the crimes of the dictator of Uganda and trying to build a
*  future city there with him. You know, if this was the 1980s, Aikon would be raising his fist and
*  saying, we need to, you know, fight the apartheid regime. How do we get back to that? You know,
*  we need to think about that. We have to figure out how to harness celebrities, influencers,
*  and companies and get them to actually stand up for something for once. I mean, that's something
*  we've lost. We've really had a spine against that. And, you know, we've lost it, you know,
*  and you lose things. You lose them forever. Look at Tibet. Tibet was a big cause for people in the
*  90s. Used to go to colleges and kids would have the Tibetan flags all over their dorm rooms. It was
*  like radiohead would have Tibet on the stage and everybody wanted to, you know, free Tibet was a
*  big thing. Well, guess what? Like we lost it for some reason. It's not a thing anymore in Tibet has
*  been totally colonized, you know? So I think it's important that we find a way to unlock
*  an interest in the celebrity classes among athletes, singers, presidents. You know,
*  we need to find a way to punish these people. Yeah, it's surprising because we've become more
*  and more connected so we can communicate more effectively at a large scale. And yet,
*  we seem to be worse and worse at real activism. It seems like the outrage that's overtaken
*  the communication channels has been very US focused and often more about outrage and less about
*  productive activism. I'm very jaded. I mean, it's very difficult to do these things at scale
*  effectively. I do not believe we will be successful in boycotting the Chinese Olympics. We weren't in
*  2008. I don't think they're much more evil now and I don't think we're going to be able to do it
*  this time. And again, to go back to the Bitcoin piece, that's why I'm like very interested in
*  this thing because it doesn't require my altruism. It doesn't require some famous singers and
*  corporation to sacrifice anything. They're literally just going to follow their own profit
*  seeking self-interested motives. And they're going to end up making a stronger human rights tool for
*  other people. Freedom go up. FGU, man. Do you think we're, it's kind of a dark question,
*  but you think we're headed towards a war with China, the United States versus China?
*  I hope not. I hope not. In the cyberspace and potentially even a hot war. I think there's too
*  many people with too much money to be lost to go to a hot war on both sides. But eventually,
*  someone's going to have to stand up. I mean, the subjugation of Hong Kong and the genocide of the
*  Uyghurs and the colonization of Tibet. I mean, Taiwan is the next big thing. I mean, Xi Jinping
*  has made it very clear. You know, Xinjiang, Tibet, Hong Kong, Taiwan. So we're going to have to stand
*  up for Taiwan for different reasons, both for moral reasons, but also for semiconductor reasons.
*  We need TSMC to be on our side. We cannot have China take over TSMC. So there's different reasons
*  why we're going to have to protect Taiwan. And you just hope it's not a hot war. I mean, at this
*  point. Well, but also from inside the governments of China and Russia as well, but China, I guess,
*  is the powerhouse here. How do these governments get reformed? Is there a hope for them to become
*  democracies, like true democracies, representative democracies, and sort of reform them to be
*  ethical players on the world stage? No empire lasts forever. And it's impossible to predict
*  when these regimes fall. I mean, no one thought the Soviet Union was going to fall when it fell.
*  If you study the news and the scholarship of the era, no one knew that the Tunisian government was
*  going to fall after Mohammed Bouazizi lit himself on fire. No one predicted that that would become
*  what we now know as the Arab Spring, right? These things are impossible to predict. And one day,
*  the Chinese regime will fall. We don't know when. Yes. And there's quite a few folks who talk about
*  the fall of the American empire. And it also concerns me that we don't know when that might
*  fall. You assume me as a very excited, naive American. I'm very excited by this project that
*  I think is the beacon of hope in the world still. But that's probably how you feel before it's the
*  end. You want to leave the party before it starts to deteriorate. I think America
*  could continue to have a major, major leadership role for a long, long time.
*  I think certain things we do will become maybe no longer possible in terms of the way we intimidate
*  people on the world stage and especially the way we use our currency as a weapon. I think that
*  that's going to decline over time as we become more of a multipolar world. But I do still believe
*  in America and the values that we're founded on despite all the warts. I do believe in us,
*  and I would prefer us absolutely to be the most prominent of the multipolar world vis-a-vis
*  a regime like Russia or China. Absolutely. There's no question. So we've been talking about states
*  and nations, but can we just briefly talk about Facebook and Twitter and companies that have a
*  huge impact on the world as well? And actually one of the things that make America a great nation is
*  it is the place from which these great companies have sprung up. Is there, from a human rights
*  perspective, is there something that bothers you about Facebook, about these large companies?
*  Is there something we need to fix, something we need to
*  be upset about, fight back on, reform, do some sort of real activism about?
*  I'm very concerned about social media platforms and companies. It almost feels like we're losing
*  the golden age of the internet, when we could go online and interact with each other and share.
*  Be worried about censorship. It feels like that was a golden age in the late 90s, 2000s,
*  and now everything is becoming very politicized. And I'm not sure that there's a solution. I don't
*  think there's a button we can press to fix it. I'm afraid that this is just what happens when
*  societies digitize. I think that certain opinions just become demonized in the
*  room and in the social room that we have on the internet. And I don't know if there's a
*  magical solution there. I do know that there's technological solutions that will allow us to
*  continue to communicate and for creators to reach their audiences without censorship.
*  And that's very exciting. Like right now you could be deplatformed from your,
*  you know, from like whether it's Patreon or YouTube or whatever, and your bank account
*  can be closed down, right? There are emerging ways that Adam Curry, like the Podfather and a
*  bunch of other people are experimenting with, where you can essentially have your audio podcast
*  across a whole bunch of different platforms. So, you know, it's censorship resistant. And then
*  your audience can pay you over lightning in streaming money. Like they can stream you money
*  as they listen. So you're removing the whole advertising piece. You don't need to do
*  advertising anymore. You have this direct relationship with your audience. And this
*  is possible with something like lightning, where you can do streaming money that's censorship
*  resistant. And a lot of the people who are building a lightning network, for example,
*  Elizabeth Stark, who started lightning labs and has done within her company, the people that work
*  with her have built a huge part of the lightning infrastructure. You know, what animates her is
*  this idea of like, again, artists and creators being able to have that direct ability to reach
*  out and have that peer-to-peer relationship with their audience. And I'm excited for that. And I
*  do think that's coming. But I am very worried that the golden age of like centralized social
*  media platforms is kind of behind us. And I'm not sure how to fix that. I don't know if that's like
*  a fixable problem. Interesting. I have a hope that it's a fixable problem. I think it's fixable
*  because there's demand for it to be fixed. That's the way I think about it. Well, is Twitter that
*  bad right now? Like, I mean, it's fixable in as much as you can do verification. So you can give
*  a blue check to someone, and then that person is like more credible. And they go to the top
*  of the comments. And there's like tweaks you can do. You can continue to improve it. But it's not
*  going to fix the fact that like Twitter can decide to kick off the president. And like a lot of
*  people are going to be upset by that, you know? Like there's ways you can improve the UX over time.
*  And they continue to do so. Like Clubhouse is a lot of fun, great phenomenon. So is Twitter Spaces.
*  So they continue to iterate. But the censorship deplatforming piece, I'm not sure is fixable.
*  Because if you watch the US government haul Zuckerberg and Dorsey and whatever in front of
*  Congress, they want more censorship. I mean, our elected leaders want more censorship, right?
*  See, I just believe censorship is a really harsh word. I believe it's possible to create
*  technologies where it's not Twitter doing the censorship, but it's individuals doing their own
*  selection of what they want and don't want to see. So for example, if you get sick and tired of
*  Donald Trump and whatever he says, or you love Donald Trump, you get to select yourself.
*  Like you get to have more control over what you consume. Twitter tries to do that a little bit,
*  but they obviously fail. Where ideas infiltrate our view that we that like misinformation spreads
*  really fast. And conspiracy theories spread really fast to where the immune system that
*  Twitter has created to try to censor conspiracy theories and misinformation is overfiring.
*  And you're now censoring too many people. So that Twitter is exactly the same intuition as you said
*  before, if the state is doing it, in this case, Twitter is kind of the state, it's not going to
*  work out well. But if it individually, if you give power to the individuals to do this sort of the,
*  not even censorship, but incentivization and de-incentivization of great thoughtful content
*  and terrible low effort content, then I feel like that's going to create a system where there's
*  going to be a much more open discourse of ideas, dangerous ideas, difficult ideas, controversial
*  ideas. And people in a decentralized way will be able to use their own intelligence to select
*  content, to share content, spread content. Let's keep it simple. Let's look at one example,
*  Twitter and Jack Dorsey. And I think it's quite clear that what he believes is the solution is,
*  as you're kind of hinting at a more kind of like regionalized system, which is not have one,
*  or we call federated system, right? Which does not just have like one company in charge of
*  everything, but there's an open protocol. And then there's like different instances, right?
*  So Twitter make, you know, Jack's dream for Twitter is that Twitter is this open protocol
*  that the Russian government can use and the Chinese government can use and the Iranian
*  government can use and the American government can use. And then Twitter as a company is going
*  to use too. And you as the customer decide which implementation you want to join. And there's going
*  to be different censorship on each instance or each federation. But the protocol itself would be
*  like untouchable. This is kind of like the idea behind the internet, right? There's like
*  different parts of the internet that are censored, but like at the very bottom of the very bottom
*  of the backbone of it, it's like this globally connected, relatively unstoppable thing, right?
*  So I think that's a pretty good vision. And Twitter's working towards that with the blue
*  blue sky initiative. We'll see. I'm a little skeptical that it like works out because I've
*  used, I use Mastodon, for example. Mastodon is an example of a federated social media. Now it's
*  ruled by a benevolent, each instance is ruled by a benevolent dictator. It's just like, I happen
*  to like this one. So I know. So rather than trust one dictator, Twitter, you could choose which
*  dictator you want to trust. And that's kind of the federated model. And maybe we head that way,
*  but you lose things. When it's federated, you lose the UX, you lose the slickness and the feel and
*  all the millions of dollars they spend on developers. Like Mastodon is like not anywhere close to as
*  nice to use as Twitter. So I feel like it's again, it's this trade off that we make with
*  everything where it's convenience, comfort, speed versus privacy and freedom, right?
*  It's very hard to have something that gives you both. I don't know. I think, I think, yeah,
*  it is a trade off. Have you used one of these things that I have not, it's good. The federator,
*  not, they're not, they're not, but the federator, I don't think it's, it's good. I think it requires
*  genius, it requires skill, it requires great design to come up with a way to, you know,
*  there's a parade of front here. There's a right way to hit that trade off. And I honestly think
*  there's the UX, the experience should be centralized, should be designed by the company,
*  but the data and like a lot of stuff that could be used to violate your basic rights should be
*  owned by the individual. And I think there's a way to decouple those, like create an incredible
*  experience to where you go there and you enjoy the market where you can share your data and have
*  complete control over it and always have, I mean, there's a lot of basic UX ideas. Like just as an
*  example, I think there should always be in everything you design, a one button that's always there
*  that says, forget I ever existed, delete everything you know about me. And maybe it's,
*  maybe it's one button that you click and it asks, are you sure? And you have to be able to say yes.
*  Like that's a feature that's fundamental to a good social network, I believe. Like currently
*  social networks, first of all, most of them don't allow you to do that. They don't make it transparent
*  how much data they had, who they shared it with. And they also make it exceptionally difficult to
*  delete accounts. So like that's a very basic starting point. But that, that having that button
*  means that you have control, but that's step one of the control. There's a transparency of knowing
*  exactly when what data is being shared about you, how much data is already being recorded about you,
*  all that is transparency. And I believe in the, I believe that's a really good business model,
*  because when there's transparency and control, people would be willing to give over a lot more
*  data as long as they know what they're given over, as long as they know what they can delete.
*  Yeah, I guess maybe you're more optimistic about people caring. I feel like not so few people
*  actually care about their privacy and freedom. I've just watched everybody give it up, you know.
*  But we'll see. I guess just to bookend that, I think we're at this moment where obviously
*  the centralized platforms are just so much easier and better to use. And to strike it out and,
*  you know, adventure out and use a, like a federated instance or something even like
*  Keybase, which is kind of like a cool encrypted way to like have group chats. It just requires
*  like a lot of your time and a lot of people don't have that time. But I will say one thing,
*  like I do think there's this future where we do go into more of this like, it's called a tribal
*  model or like tribes, which is this social environment being built on top of lightning
*  by an app called Sphinx. And the idea is like kind of like, it's like a decentralized Slack,
*  like you have your Slack instance, which has like a bunch of people in the community and you have
*  different ways to message each other and it's all encrypted. And then it has like plugins for like
*  things like Jitsi instead of Zoom. So like an open source encrypted video messenger, it has ways to
*  like plug in the content you want to get from like, like different platforms that you follow, like
*  podcasts, things like that. And again, it allows you to pay those people directly in a censorship
*  resistant private way. So it's really nice to connect to the Lightning Network. Yeah. So it's
*  all sort of built on lightning, but the idea you can think about it is like, you're slowly starting
*  to build up the idea of a WeChat, but with freedom principles. Right. Because right now, WeChat's like
*  the king of convenience and comfort, but of course it's feeding all that data to the big brother and
*  the surveillance state. And then we have like our own versions over here in America that are not
*  quite as convenient or amazing, but like we give up slightly less privacy and freedom,
*  but this thing has a lot of promising features to it. It's worth checking out. It's very like
*  early days. Like it feels like, I mean, I was pretty young, but it feels like the nineties in
*  the internet. Like it has that feeling. The sphynx does. Yeah. You know, it's rough around the edges,
*  but you can feel the magic. It's pretty cool. I'm very much like with Steve Jobs on this. I think
*  the founding principles are exceptionally important, but at the end of the day, the design
*  of how sleek it is, how easy it is to use. And that's not just like pretty icing on the cake.
*  That is the icing is the cake because like how easy it is to use, how natural it is. It's the
*  Trojan horse thing. Like you don't get, it has to be pretty and shiny and it has to have, it has to
*  fundamentally connect to the basics of human nature, which is what is pleasant to use. What
*  feels good to use. You have to, you know, to trick people into eating a broccoli, you have to put
*  like a delicious, whatever on it. PGP is a kind of pain to use, right? For you want privacy.
*  Yeah. So signals are not great. Way better. I mean, and it's way better than it was five years ago.
*  And it's, it's not quite as good as like not quite as seamless, right? As like a WhatsApp yet,
*  but it's almost there and they were able to do it. And you're going to see that with Bitcoin
*  wallets as well. I mean, they're, they're almost there. They're like, if you use like a moon wallet
*  is like, I mean, it's so cool looking and it's so seamless and they've spent so many hours thinking
*  about your experience. We are getting there. Whereas 10 years ago, it was like impossible to
*  use. One of the things that signal doesn't have, and I believe these kinds of applications need
*  to have is like a, I hate the term, but killer app, which is like a dumb, but very viral and
*  popular reason to switch it. I didn't see exactly, I mean, I've been using signal, but I haven't seen
*  you know, a big reason to, well, you're on it, man. That's which I mean, the reason I haven't
*  switched everything to it. You know what I mean? Yeah. The Exodus to signal was in January. They
*  had a huge user surge for two main reasons. One hilariously enough, of course, was Elon tweeted,
*  like you should use signal, right? Which is not insignificant. And then the other one was that
*  like WhatsApp changed kind of some of its terms of service and like, you know, announced to all of
*  its users in this little pop-up that it was going to be sort of like changing the way it handled
*  your data. That spooked a lot of people. So these two things really combined and tens of millions of
*  people in the following weeks between January and February joined signal. It's like, it really has
*  had its day in the sun. And they are like frantically trying to keep up with it. Like,
*  and it's really nice to see that this encrypted messaging service, which prioritizes your privacy
*  in a way that, you know, you know, the government again may know like the metadata, but doesn't know
*  exactly what you're saying unless they can get your hands on your phone. I think that's very,
*  very powerful. So it can be done. I don't want to be too jaded here. I think it can be done.
*  Yeah, I think so. I think we can fight back. And I think we can make, continue to make these
*  digital communications tools and platforms in a way that really benefits us.
*  Yeah, I'm not sure, but I'm hopeful as well. I'm hopeful that if you look at the trend of technologies,
*  they ultimately are ones that respect privacy, respect security, and basic human rights. I mean,
*  that's at least the hope. So Gary Kasparov, I'm Russian. He means a lot to me on a personal level.
*  He is the chairman of Human Rights Foundation. What does Gary have to do with anything? What's
*  your relationship like with him? Do you like chess? What are his specific focuses and ideas around the
*  HRF? Can you just speak to it in general? Yeah, so our chairman at the Human Rights Foundation
*  was Vaslav Havel, who of course was like the famous Czech democracy activist who helped lead
*  the Velvet Revolution and then ended up becoming the first democratically elected leader of the
*  Czech Republic after the Soviet Union fell. He passed away in 2011, and it was very difficult
*  to find a replacement because who can fill Havel's shoes? But if one could, it would be Gary,
*  right? So we really tried to get Gary to join, and thankfully he agreed. We've had an amazing
*  relationship with Gary over the years. I mean, he's been relentless in his pursuit of freedom.
*  He could have retired and taken his career in a different direction, and he could be hanging
*  out with Putin and have a pleasure yacht and all kinds of stuff, but he decided to risk it.
*  And if you actually study the times when he was running for president in Russia,
*  Amasha Gessen followed him around in The Man Without a Face. It's a great, great book about Putin.
*  There's a fabulous chapter where she's following around Gary when he's campaigning. And
*  he risked a lot. I mean, he can't go back to Russia anymore. He gave up his country.
*  He's given up a huge amount to be able to speak his mind and to have this dream, this beautiful
*  vision of a free and democratic Russia. He really believes in it. It's been a great experience. I
*  work very closely with Gary. We talk a lot. We do different things around the world together. He's
*  come out to a lot of events in different cities around the world, and he's been a very active
*  chairman. This isn't some figurehead. He's very involved, and it's really, really great. I mean,
*  everything he's involved with is, as one journalist who attends our events says,
*  when he walks in the room, the average IQ of the room goes up pretty significantly.
*  I'm not a big chess person, unfortunately, so I have not been able to connect with him on that.
*  But I think he probably would prefer it that way. All he gets is people who want to talk to him
*  about chess. So here we can talk about human rights strategy and how to improve our fight against
*  dictators. But he really has that moral clarity that I really appreciate.
*  Yeah. He has a lot of fascinating ideas about artificial intelligence as well. He's opened
*  my eyes a little bit to the state of Russia today because I've read most books on Putin
*  in the English language, in trying to understand things. And I try to look at it from a historical
*  perspective, almost like we're living 100 years from now, and I look at Putin as an
*  important figure in the history of human civilization and study it in that way.
*  I think the way Gary looks at it, he probably doesn't appreciate me looking at the way I do.
*  But the way he looks at it is we can still change the direction of Russia, and we individual human
*  beings and we communities and we nations can take actions, have policies that can change the
*  direction of Russia. To me, I take a sort of going to the library passive view of studying
*  fascinating aspects of Russia. To me, Russia means like most of my family suffered through the Soviet
*  Union and I see beauty in suffering, the poetry, the music, the stories. And just there's so much
*  love that emerged from the pain that I just enjoy the music of that. But to Gary and to many
*  activists that I speak to, to them, they love not just the Russia of the past. They have a vision
*  and the hopeful Russia of the future. And they criticize me a little bit for being a little bit
*  too scholarly about the past and ignoring the future. And there's something to that. So he
*  opens my eyes to look to the future of Russia.
*  Gary and a handful of other Russian activists that we work closely with, including Vladimir
*  Karamurza, who again, I mean, it's just incredibly heroic. The man has survived two poisonings by
*  Putin. They like to say that Russians will bring democracy to Russia on their own terms. They don't
*  need our help. This is what Vladimir especially says. But what he does say is that we should stop
*  propping up Putin. That's kind of his stop legitimizing him. That's kind of his argument.
*  He's like, we don't need your foreign interference. We don't need your ideas. We don't need your help.
*  We can do it on our own, but please stop propping up our illegitimate ruler. That's kind of like
*  his point of view, which I think is interesting and fair. Yeah. Let me just say on one unrelated
*  comment. Some people criticize me and others like Joe Rogan for giving people a platform.
*  I think in some cases that's applicable, but I think in most cases,
*  knowledge is power. And there's no such thing as giving a platform. The conversation just shines
*  a light as long as you shine the light well. And as long as in shining the light and having
*  the conversation, you reveal something fundamental about the state of things, about the people,
*  whether that's Putin or some of the other controversial figures that have come up
*  in possible future conversations. So I don't like this kind of platforming idea. I think
*  conversations save us. They don't destroy us. Yeah. So that's journalism though. That's very
*  different from advocacy or strategic thinking about what to do with Russia. Absolutely. Yeah.
*  We should interview everybody and everybody should know exactly what they're thinking.
*  Yeah. But journalism to me has become a dirty word because it's done so poorly by so many people.
*  I listen to sometimes certain programs like, I don't know, like Meet the Press and the
*  Fox Sunday program, just certain things just to tune in and see what different news medias
*  are paying attention to. And the kind of interviews they do, you know, is like five minutes at most,
*  but usually it's like one minute. It's these quick clip things. And it's very gotcha. And they're
*  looking for ways to sort of grab almost a misstatement. They want to catch you off guard.
*  They want to ask the quote, like the harsh question, but without any of the dance of
*  conversation that reveals the truth. You know, you can't just get to the truth by asking it.
*  You have to sneak up on it. And I think that's an art form. And I think that art form involves
*  long form conversation. Like I'm a huge believer in just, I guess that's what's called, I don't know,
*  in depth journalism or whatever, like where you spend months or years on a story.
*  Yeah. In that same way, I think of long form conversation is like, you spend many hours and
*  you spend months and years preparing for those many hours. But like, it's not this like short
*  form trying to get the most controversial little tidbit of a story out. And unfortunately,
*  the funding mechanisms behind journalism are such that they are incentivized clickbait journalism
*  versus like in depth, long form digging for the truth. I have a conflicted relationship with
*  journalism because to me, press freedom is so core and independent journalists around the world
*  are so brave. And especially in countries like Russia or China, et cetera. And really good
*  journalism is still something I absolutely I love and I enjoy like this, especially like to say again,
*  this New Yorker piece on what's happening to the Uyghurs is incredibly well reported. However,
*  by the end on the other hand, you have this sort of click baity journalism that's all about
*  sensationalism and that gets used as a tool. I mean, whether it be against things like privacy
*  or Bitcoin or whatever, you have like people who sensationalize and it gets used in the service of
*  the surveillance state, the war on terror, whatever. It's difficult, but I think journalism
*  is essential to a free society. But it can sometimes be, it can wear my patience thin sometimes.
*  Like, it's been, to be honest, it's been a huge burden on me personally, if I were to just turn
*  this into a therapy session for a brief moment. When I look at people, when I interact with people,
*  I'd like to see the best in them. And the burden that weighs heavy on me is sometimes people I
*  talk to may not be good people. And I don't, I'd love to, I believe everybody has good in them.
*  And I try to focus on that. The burden that weighs on me is sometimes that there may be
*  conversations where that's irresponsible, where I have to also call people out. I have to do enough
*  the hard lifting and the hard work of knowing exactly what are the bad things that that person
*  has done. And I also have the responsibility to call them out on it. And that's for me personally,
*  just an unpleasant feeling. That's where speaking to journalism, like I think journalists are too
*  much focused on the bad things a person has done and not enough on the digging into the full
*  complexity of the human being behind all the things that have been done. But at the same time,
*  I can't have a conversation with Hitler and- Not ask about the prison camps.
*  Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, so from the human rights perspective, one of our programs is we try to
*  go after people who do PR for dictators. So like, and a lot of people do. PR firms in Washington
*  get hired by all these dictators. And they make a lot of money to make them look good. It's called
*  whitewashing or putting lipstick on a pig or whatever you want to do. Astro-turfing is like
*  the fake, make like fake social media accounts to make it seem like you're popular. But whitewashing
*  is a huge issue. So I think it's completely fair to interview dictators and stuff like that.
*  Amanpour does a pretty good job. She's really good. She makes sure that there's no messing around.
*  Her interviews of Museveni recently, the Ugandan dictator, was very good. She's basically like,
*  why are you rigging another election? Please tell us. And she's fearless and she's good. And
*  that can be a helpful thing to have on YouTube as a resource. But it's quite clear when it descends
*  into a PR session. And you just have to be very careful about it. Asma al-Assad, the wife of the
*  butcher in Syria, was profiled by Vogue. And it was this whole Rose in the Desert thing. It's a
*  bunch of nonsense. Terrible, terrible, terrible total propaganda. But a honest interview where
*  you're asking about all the tough questions, very important. So I think it's just a matter of content.
*  Is this a good resource to study whitewashing? To know what manipulative PR looks like?
*  I think if you've researched the topic, you should know it inside you. Because it would be,
*  is there anything you're afraid to ask? Make sure you're asking all the questions. As long as you're
*  asking all the questions that you have, you're good. But if there's something you're afraid to ask,
*  then maybe you're self-censoring, right? That's a good way. It takes us back to that,
*  what is it, that litmus test about, is your country allowed to have a gay pride parade?
*  Yeah. So there's like obvious things that might be on your mind that you just want to ask. And
*  you shouldn't run from them. As long as you feel like you're a free person when you're interviewing,
*  I think you're good. That's beautifully put. Are there books, technical fiction, philosophical,
*  that had an impact on your life that you recommend? Or even resources like blogs, films?
*  I have four books I'll briefly mention. Number one is The Fear. The Fear had a deep impact on me.
*  The Fear was written by Peter Godwin. It's about the systematic dismantling of Zimbabwe under
*  Robert Mugabe. Peter Zimbabwean. And it is a riveting book. I think everyone should read it
*  because it helps you understand what it's like to go through, not just authoritarianism, but also
*  hyperinflation. And I mean, really, you know, at the end of the day, what The Fear describes is how
*  Mugabe took this country in the 1980s. And he actually brought it back in time to the 1920s,
*  in terms of infrastructure, literacy rates, health rates, all these things. He stole so much from the
*  people. And it's a heartbreaking book, but it's a very important book. And it's a way to do
*  excellent, excellent journalism. So The Fear is a good one.
*  Isn't this a personal story?
*  Absolutely. Yeah, because he was, it's part of his whole family story. And he's in there,
*  he's interviewing people personally. So I would say that one.
*  Is it also connected, sorry to interrupt, is it from the inflation perspective, is it a good study
*  of hyperinflation and the effects? Does Bitcoin at all come as a discussion of money? Does that come
*  into the, or is it purely the experience of inflation is almost a symptom of an authoritarian
*  A little bit, a little bit. I would say it's not deep. I have another book on that, which I'll
*  recommend in a second. But I would just say that it's, it's a very powerfully written book about
*  how society can basically deteriorate and how you can lose everything. The second book is,
*  I just mentioned it, but The Man Without a Face by Masha Gessen, incredible book about modern Russia
*  and Putin, just a masterpiece. So that one is-
*  Could be one of your favorite books about Putin and Russia?
*  That one's the best. I mean, she's just so fearless, incredible. She interviews Putin
*  in the book at the end. It's really good. Third one is a fiction book called The Mandibles,
*  written by Lionel Shriver. This one's good. It's a good gift book. It's funny. It's dark. It's witty,
*  but it's about the United States losing its status as the reserve currency and going into
*  hyperinflation. And what's interesting is that the characters in the book map where we are today.
*  The book itself is about the late, I think it's the late 2020s. And we have a populist president
*  who decides to announce that the United States is basically going to default on its debts. And the
*  rest of the world comes up with a new currency and everybody switches to that one and the dollar
*  overnight becomes worthless. And all these economists are saying, no, it's fine. Inflation
*  won't be a problem. And there's this one character who's an economist and he's basically, he gets to
*  the point where he's living as a refugee in Prospect Park in Brooklyn and he's still saying
*  everything's fine. So it's dry, it's witty, but it's also about the surveillance state.
*  It's about centralization of power. It's really good. So The Mandibles, I would highly recommend.
*  So those three books. And then on the topic of Bitcoin, because we talked about it a lot,
*  I would just say that my portal into Bitcoin was The Internet of Money by Andreas Antonopoulos.
*  And I did it by audiobook. And I just think this is an important one for people to start with
*  because he goes through all the main concepts, whether it be proof of work or how the network
*  functions. But he does it in a way that's extremely engaging and really fascinating. And it really
*  just kind of like sparked my curiosity. Is it discussing the technical sides or also
*  the philosophical? Because a lot of people mentioned sort of the Bitcoin standard is
*  the philosophical entry into the whole Bitcoin world. Very different from the Bitcoin standard.
*  It's more for the average person. It's not a history book. It's a collection of his talks
*  that he gave over two or three years. It's not very technical. It's very approachable.
*  And some of it might be dated now because it's 2015, 2016.
*  But I mean- It's great to hear a shout out for Andreas because he seems to be one of the
*  seminal figures to sort of make Bitcoin ideas accessible. Andreas is the goat.
*  Andreas is the goat. Andreas is the goat. I know a lot of people have issues with some of his
*  more recent work, but Andreas is the goat. I mean, he's the reason I'm in Bitcoin.
*  That's fascinating. And it's funny to watch the Bitcoin maximalist immune system also attacking
*  him. And this whole feedback mechanism is working together. It's fascinating.
*  Well, I probably consider myself a maximalist, but I really like Andreas.
*  So I think there's room for nuance.
*  There's room for nuance in this world. I'm glad to hear that. If people are fascinating by your
*  work, what is the way to get more of Alex? So two years ago, I came together with seven
*  other people from around the world and we wrote a book in a book sprint. We lived in a house for
*  four days. We wrote a book together. It was really cool. It was like a design sprint, but we did it
*  in book format. And my co-authors are from Nigeria, Venezuela, the Philippines,
*  from former Soviet Union, from all over. And it's called The Little Bitcoin Book. And
*  I'm still proud of it. It's a hundred pages. It's something you give to somebody who knows
*  nothing about the topic. And it's not a technical book. It's about the sort of social political
*  aspect of it. Like, why is it important for you, for your finances, for your freedom,
*  for your future? And we've translated it into like a lot of languages by now.
*  I think English, Spanish, and Portuguese are for sale and the little Bitcoinbook.com,
*  you know, you go buy it. But we've made it as a free PDF in Mandarin, Hindi, Punjab,
*  Korean, Uighur, which I was really excited about, Arabic, Farsi. And I mean, it spreads, man. It's
*  been really, really cool. So I'm proud of that. I also made a video that did very well for Reason
*  magazine called Why is Bitcoin Protecting Human Rights Around the World? It's five minutes. And
*  it just, I feel like I tried to boil everything that I want to tell you into this five minute
*  video. So there's that. Would recommend that. And then if you're interested in the why have
*  governments not stopped it, which I think is really intriguing, I wrote this long essay in
*  Quillette in February called, you know, why haven't governments banned Bitcoin? And maybe
*  that'll be a helpful guide to some folks. Is it speaking to the Trojan horse idea that there's
*  something enticing about it? Yeah, at the end, it does get into that. But it really also just kind
*  of goes through technically, why is it hard to do a 51% attack? Like, why, like, if a government
*  wanted to, could it really get all that equipment? There's a semiconductor shortage, like you can't,
*  like, there's like certain things that stop governments from doing it, right. And same thing
*  with like this idea of a 6102, which would be based on the idea of the executive order 6102,
*  which is from 1933, when FDR made holding gold illegal in the United States, the idea is that
*  like banks would go around now with governments and try to like steal everybody's Bitcoin. Well,
*  in Bitcoin, we have like a practice called proof of keys day every January 3rd, you know, which is
*  coinciding with the launch of the Bitcoin blockchain, where we all like withdraw our keys from exchanges,
*  and we'd be sovereign users. What we're doing is we are preparing for a 6102 attack, which will one
*  day probably come, right. So the essay just goes through all of the like possible attacks. And it
*  runs through like the ones that happened, like the Chinese and Indian governments, the two largest
*  governments in the world, both tried to attack Bitcoin by banning their citizens from exchanging
*  fiat for Bitcoin. It didn't work interest instead exploded. It's like the barbers try sand effect,
*  where, you know, by, by making something public and saying you shouldn't do x, it actually
*  increases attention about x a lot more, right. So I think there's a lot of interesting game theory
*  there that people would enjoy. Do you think, are you seriously concerned about this kind of thing
*  where the ideas of sovereignty and that Bitcoin espouses would would actually one day be tested?
*  Do you have like a legitimate concern? Because you said like one day very well might.
*  Do you think it might go down? Well, first of all, Bitcoin has been attacked again, many times. And
*  we talk about the, you spoke about this with Nick Carter on your show, the sort of protocol wars
*  or conflict or whatever, right. And Bitcoin almost died a whole bunch of times during that and ended
*  up surviving. Oh, wow. I didn't, I didn't know how bad the blocks. Oh, it got really bad. It was
*  it was a sort of a very existential threat and Bitcoin survived. And that's why I'm so intrigued
*  by it is that it basically survived an attack in an environment several years ago when Bitcoin was
*  much more vulnerable than it is today. It survived an attack by a conglomeration of Chinese billionaires,
*  Silicon Valley corporations, and a ton of people who owned the majority of the hash rate and all
*  this infrastructure. They had 83% of all the hash rate and they couldn't get what they wanted. And
*  that was so intriguing to me. Like, why didn't it, why didn't it get killed? So as Nick said,
*  I think you should read The Block Size War, which is a book on that you can get on Amazon by Jonathan
*  Beer, really good kind of like really important to understand the scaling conflict and the visions
*  over the different visions of what Bitcoin should be. And you know, again, people like me believe
*  it should be a freedom tool, not like a payments technology for retail. And I'm just, I'm glad it
*  worked out the way it did because it almost didn't. Do you think human civilization will
*  destroy itself? So if we think about all the threats facing human civilization, nuclear war,
*  natural or engineered pandemics, you know, we talk about human rights violations, we talk about
*  authoritarian governments taking control of the money supply. Yeah. But do you have
*  great and grander concerns for the future of human civilization?
*  Do you have hope for us becoming a multi-planetary species?
*  Yeah, I mean, I guess long term, we'd want to decentralize, right? We don't want a single
*  point of failure. The earth is a single point of failure. But no, I mean, you look at all this kind
*  of like space fiction and I mean, who would want to live on Mars, man? It's like a freaking desert.
*  I mean, the earth is so beautiful. I hope we can save it, you know, it's just so gorgeous.
*  When you look at the earth compared to any other like exoplanet or whatever you look at it,
*  I mean, the earth is so spectacular and wondrous and singular. I think we've got to do everything
*  we can to save it here. That's funny. I mean, I sure a lot of people would have said that about
*  Europe before the explorers ventured out Columbus and the rest onto the unknown. The thing about
*  human nature is that we are explorers too. We are. Some small fraction of us are insane enough to
*  explore in the most dangerous grounds. And I'm pretty sure there's quite a few people that would
*  love to take the first step on Mars, the first few steps on Mars in the harshest of environments,
*  even when the odds of survival extremely low. And I'm thankful for those people
*  because I sit back and drink my vodka back here on earth and enjoy good friendships because I think
*  ultimately that step to Mars is going to be a first step into a multi into exploring and colonizing
*  the rest of the galaxy. Mars might be a harsh environment, but maybe space is not like other
*  planets, other exoplanets, but also forget planets, just creating colonies that flow about in space.
*  There's exciting technologies that were yet to be discovered, yet to be engineered and built
*  that I think require that first painful step. Like, yeah, the journey of a thousand miles
*  starts with one step. I think Mars is that first step. Yeah, no, I was born the day before the
*  Challenger blew up and it was always so tragic for me to look back on that because that really
*  altered our arc in terms of space exploration. If that had not happened, we'd be on a very
*  different arc and I do respect and admire people pushing for exploration, but at the same time,
*  I just want to recognize we know how unique earth is and I do think we got to do everything we can
*  to protect it. But I think you avoid answering the question if we're going to destroy ourselves.
*  Oh, yeah, I guess if we do not decentralize properly out into different
*  physical spaces, probably, I guess. Yeah.
*  Do you have concerns that are immediately facing you? So,
*  not in terms of the injustices on the world, but nuclear war?
*  Yeah, look, I'm a lot more concerned about what's happening right now. What is destroying
*  ourselves? If you were to go and see what's happening in Xinjiang or North Korea right now
*  or Eritrea, that is destroying ourselves and it's already happened. So I guess the end,
*  that's why I said yes. I mean, if you don't decentralize and power is completely under one
*  person, life is destroyed as we know it. And you don't have to go into science fiction
*  to know what a totalitarian hellscape dystopia is. There's several that exist already and
*  let's try to help those people at the same time as we're trying to push out into space
*  would be my counter, I guess. Yeah, I agree with you. In my mind,
*  just sort of destruction and suffering are next door neighbors. So we don't need to destroy all
*  of human civilization. If a large fraction of it lives in conditions that we would equate to
*  suffering, that's not a good world. Is there advice that you would give to young people today
*  about life, about career, about how they can help a world where 53% are living
*  under authoritarian governments, but in general, a world that's full of injustice,
*  but also full of opportunity? Just thinking about my own upbringing,
*  I went to a public school here and we never learned about money. It was never part of our curriculum.
*  Even personal finances was not part of our curriculum. You could take like an optional
*  course to learn about business or something. I think that that would be really valuable
*  as a young person or as a teenager to start incorporating into your children's lives as
*  curiosity about what is money. I think it would be very healthy, regardless of what path that takes
*  them down. Because we don't think about it enough, either from an administrative sort of personal
*  finance thing about responsibility, or more fundamentally, what is it and who creates it,
*  where did it come from. Both of those things are very important. My advice to a young person would
*  be to get to the point where you feel like you can answer the question, what is money?
*  You ultimately see money as a kind of power and freedom and a mechanism of suffering.
*  It's so core to everything. The United States, whether you want to call it the Pax Americana,
*  the empire, the hyper power, whatever you want to call this moment in time where the US is
*  dominant around the world, it is because of the fact that we have this petrodollar system
*  where we are able to force the Saudis and other oil producing nations to sell their oil in dollars.
*  That is really inescapable, inseparable from our power. That's very rarely talked about.
*  It's very important to understand. If young people could start thinking about that stuff,
*  it'd be good. It sounds silly to say, but I remember being really uncomfortable that I was
*  dependent on my parents at a young age for financial. You need to be 18 to have a bank
*  account or whatever. One of the people that we supported at Ahrefs through our, we do software
*  development funding for people in Bitcoin, open source projects. One of the guys we funded is this
*  very young, smart prodigy. He's like 17. One of the reasons he got into Bitcoin was because he
*  wanted to have control of his money when he was 14. If you think in history, people who invented
*  all kinds of incredible contributions to science or math, a lot of them did it before they were 15.
*  Think about that maturity that is capable and possible in many people. I've participated in some
*  of the years ago, some of the selection processes for the Thiel Fellowship, which is really amazing.
*  These people who are 14, 15, 16, who don't need to go to college, they're already so smart,
*  they can figure it out, but they wouldn't be allowed to have a bank account. Hey, that's cool.
*  Now you have a permissionless money. You can open up yourself without permission from your parents.
*  That's kind of cool. Yeah, that's fascinating to me. I feel like I would have loved my parents
*  more. If you had a little more separation. If I had freedom to fully realize myself,
*  because I felt like I was a little bit trapped by, I don't know, it's not explicit, right? It's a
*  little bit, it's like a subtle push that you're somehow dependent on them. I mean, part of that is
*  I think it actually very much has to do not talking about money. What does it take to operate as an
*  individual entity in this world? Knowing that when you're 10 years old, knowing that when you're very
*  young, then you see how amazing it is to have the support of your parents until you're 18. Have that
*  freedom. Have the freedom to appreciate the value your parents bring and at the same time,
*  the freedom to leave in some capacity to carve your own path. I mean, just all of that, I think,
*  for weirdos like me, especially, because I was a very non-traditional path that I think it would
*  be very empowering and certainly would be empowering in the third world. Not just weirdos like you. Yeah,
*  I was going to mention one of the people I got who taught me about Bitcoin, her name is Roya Mapoob.
*  She's an Afghan technology CEO. And in 2013, she started paying her employees in Bitcoin because
*  they were not allowed to open bank accounts, the women that worked for her. She started the
*  country's first female, all-female software company. And if they brought cash home,
*  their husbands or uncles or brothers would steal it from them. There's a power patriarchal dominance
*  thing going on. But they had phones and she was able to pay them in Bitcoin and no one knew. And
*  it gave them that power. And that's always stuck in my mind as a very interesting effect of this
*  kind of thing, of permissionless money, that it can be an empowerment tool. So, absolutely.
*  So in your own personal life, where did the deep concern for the suffering in the world come from?
*  Where was that born?
*  I was going to be an engineer, actually. And then in 2003, we invaded Iraq and I got very interested
*  in why we did that as a nation. And I switched my focus of study to international relations. And
*  that's how I kind of went down the kind of political science, democracy, rabbit hole,
*  and ended up getting a job at the Human Rights Foundation. So I'm very much a child of like
*  9-11 and the Iraq War. Those are the two really formative events for me personally.
*  Can you break that apart a little bit? What illusion about this world was
*  broken apart by the invasion of Iraq?
*  Well, I think first of all, 9-11 just shifted the world dynamics completely from a focus on
*  big power politics between the US, Russia, and China to this new threat of Islamic terror.
*  And a lot of it we learned later, a lot of the things we did were manufactured, choreographed,
*  like there were no WMDs in Iraq. The reason our rulers said we needed to invade and destroy this
*  country was a lie. And that I think has really been forgotten. I think a lot of the Zoomers
*  like today don't really know a lot about that time period. I mean, it was pretty crazy. Unanimously,
*  Democrat, Republican, Joe Biden, Hillary Clinton, and the Republicans, everybody wanted
*  to invade this country. And it was very, it's very, it's a confusing time. There's a really
*  good book by Ian McEwen called Saturday, a fiction book that takes place during I think 2003. And
*  it's One Day in the Life of the Doctor in London. It's really good though to revisit this time
*  because he has two characters, he has characters in the book, one of whom is very pro-war and one of
*  them is very against war. Basically, he, the father himself is pro-war and his son is against it. And
*  they have all these debates. And it's nice to go back to revisit at that time was, it's really
*  crazy. And it really showed you that like the media could be captured into like helping promote
*  this idea of like invading another country. So I was very curious about why we did it and like who
*  who was pulling the strings and why, what are the reasons that we went. And what's really interesting
*  is that like, I took all these courses on it, interviewed all these decision makers, whether
*  they were like neocons or whatever different people who were involved. And the whole like dollar
*  reserve currency thing like really never came up until like, I learned about it more recently
*  because of Bitcoin. Like, and today when I look back, it seems kind of obvious that the reason we
*  invaded Iraq was because Saddam Hussein wanted to sell oil in euros. It seems really obvious when
*  you go back and look at the chronology of it. And we were like, no, we actually don't want you to
*  sell dollars in euros, because that would threaten the dollar. So we're gonna invade you and then
*  you're not going to do it. And then no one else is going to like sell dollars in euro, oil in euros.
*  I guess you could say the same thing about Qaddafi, but we as a nation have very much protected our
*  reserve currency, let's put it that way. Yeah, actually, one of the things that Bitcoin community
*  has motivated me to do is to look back to the histories that I have studied myself from just
*  even the two world wars, the history of the 20th century from a perspective of the monetary system
*  of money. And it's interesting. It's interesting to look at human history in the context of money.
*  Can't we be patriotic and be pro-America, but like not want the petrodollar? Like, I should be proud
*  of my country. Why do we need to be propping up the Saudis? Why do we need to be, you know,
*  threatening to invade other countries if they sell their oil for a different currency? I think we can
*  be just as powerful as we are today, if not more powerful in a Bitcoin world. If you think about
*  the infrastructure Americans are building, all the innovations we're building, all the wealth we have,
*  I think we'll be fine, better than fine. And we won't have these horrible negative externalities.
*  It's really an optimistic vision for the future. I thought we learned the lesson of 9-11 and the
*  invasion of Iraq and Afghanistan. But maybe- Biden announced we're leaving Afghanistan this year.
*  20 years. For what? The Taliban are going to take over again. I mean, that's like at least the good,
*  the longest war, right? The forever wars. I feel like the past 20 years or whatever it is,
*  18 years, 19 years, we've been very skeptical about invading other countries.
*  We've been skeptical about military intervention in other nations.
*  Well, our leaders certainly haven't. We're at, what do we have, like seven active wars right now.
*  The Russians and the Chinese, everybody's starting to invade everybody else.
*  I mean, so yes, but I meant to a degree that I was worried about, like conflicts with,
*  hot conflicts with Iran, with North Korea, those kinds of things.
*  There was not as much war mongering as I was afraid about. But yes, you're absolutely right.
*  There's a big presence by the United States and other nations and across the world that's
*  the military industrial complex is a thing that has huge detrimental ripple effects throughout
*  the entirety of our governments. Yeah. So the big question is how do we
*  prevent the rise of this like authoritarian surveillance state in China while at the same
*  time kind of defusing the military industrial complex on our side? That to me is like the
*  biggest challenge of our time. I don't have the answer, but we should keep digging.
*  Yeah. I believe there's a technology and technological innovations.
*  You're suggesting that perhaps one of the technological innovations like
*  is Bitcoin. Bitcoin's a big part of it. Yeah.
*  On the money side, I think the information side, there's innovations that are open.
*  That's possible. And the political side, I'm the most skeptical about.
*  I just feel like there's without hot wars that we don't seem to make any kind of progress.
*  Bureaucracies just grow. Corruption and greed grow. And human nature does not do well in the
*  political arena. So I hope technology can outpace the darker sides of human nature.
*  So you're busy fighting the demons, the darkness that's out there, but looking in the mirror,
*  you're a finite being. Unfortunately, this ride ends for you pretty soon.
*  Mm-hmm. Do you ever ask yourself about the meaning of it all?
*  Of why the hell us descendants of apes are even on this thing,
*  striving so hard to make a better world for ourselves?
*  I don't often zoom out that much. I feel like my day job is pretty interesting.
*  It keeps me very engaged with all the stuff we've been talking about.
*  As far as the meaning of life, though, it seems quite clear that we do have the possibility
*  as a species to create these beautiful communities and constructs and to share an exploration
*  of the world together. That is often marred by cold realities that we've discussed. But
*  I do feel like in a way that the meaning of life is that pursuit, of course biologically,
*  is to spread our species, right? But also to pursue knowledge and science and innovation
*  and freedom, most importantly. I think freedom has to guide us or else we end up with prison camps.
*  If we don't let freedom guide us, we end up with the prison camps. So we need to have scientific
*  innovation and adventurism and colonization of the stars, but without the slavery and without
*  the prison camps. I think that's so key. There's something about the creation of beauty that seems
*  fundamental to human nature. And what seems beautiful is these communities that don't have
*  suffering, they don't have injustice. And we have some kind of inner sense of what is injustice.
*  I don't know, like some of the human rights that you've mentioned earlier,
*  they're just philosophical constructs, but they also seem to be somehow deeply in us, too.
*  We have a sense of what is right and what is wrong. It's not just a kind of illusion that we've all
*  agreed on. Arbitrary power, torture, executions, we know these things are wrong. I mean, we know
*  they're wrong. We don't have to read a book to know that. But you do need to, people can get
*  brainwashed. I mean, you talk to people who've grown up in North Korea that they don't know any
*  better. They don't know what's going on in the outside world. So they've never experienced
*  anything differently. So that's why, look, technology can play a big role here in terms of
*  the meaning of it all. It can really help emancipate, liberate people, at least so that
*  they can make their own choices about what to do, at least so that we're on a level playing
*  field. So technologies like the internet and Bitcoin, they can at least give you the option
*  to do things your own way on your own terms. And then from there, we'll see. I think it's important
*  that we have design choices where we can have a little more say and that not everything be
*  pre-programmed for us. That would be very disappointing. So I mean, the open web and
*  encryption in Bitcoin, these are things that help prevent social engineering and that promote more
*  freedom and more possibilities, honestly, and more entrepreneurship and more creativity and more
*  scientific inquiry. I mean, think about the people who tried to shut down scientific inquiry 500,
*  600 years ago or whatever that were trying to say, you know, the earth was the center of everything
*  and they were wrong, you know, and then, you know, all these conservative religious types
*  throughout history have always said that, you know, there's no value in science and there's
*  no value in technology and they've been wrong the whole time. So let's continue pushing here.
*  Let's continue pushing. It's kind of scary to me sometimes, humbling, beautiful, but also scary to
*  think of. You mentioned North Korea, people are kind of living in ignorance. It's scary to me to
*  think about how much ignorance there is in the world today, like how little I know personally,
*  or us as a human civilization knows that it's yet to be discovered. Well, there's a difference
*  between laziness and ignorance, right? Like, so I would be lazy if I didn't, you know, take advantage
*  of the internet, right? Someone in North Korea doesn't have the option. They don't have the option.
*  There's literally no way for them to access the internet. So there's kind of like social laziness
*  that philosophers have warned about forever, that we basically become sheep,
*  okay? And then there's actual like brainwashing and censorship that's possible, like by closing
*  off your population and keeping them off like the internet, right? So I think these are two very
*  different concepts. Absolutely. But I also mean just like not even laziness, but cognitive limitations
*  and just historical scientific limitations. Like, you know, we're a very young species,
*  like all of the exciting stuff we've been talking about have happened on the scale of decades,
*  maybe centuries. It's very, we're very young and all the cool stuff we've come up with.
*  And it's just humbling to think about how little we know. But you're right that, you know,
*  ultimately having the freedom to keep exploring, keep venturing out, even if we later discover that
*  a lot of the stuff we've been doing now is ethically horrible. If you think about animals,
*  or I think about robots a lot, the kind of things we might be doing to other consciousnesses that
*  are here on earth might be, we might see as atrocities later on, but ultimately you have
*  to have the freedom to explore those kinds of ideas. And without that freedom,
*  you don't even get the chance to be lazy.
*  Yeah. I mean, look, don't be a sheep. Okay. It's easy to be a sheep.
*  No offense to sheep.
*  And there's some practical things, man. Get on signal, start encrypting your messages,
*  take control over your privacy. The media doesn't want you to, but check out Bitcoin.
*  You can be your own bank. You can transact with people around the world and no one can stop you.
*  This can put a stop to a lot of arbitrary power and a lot of human rights violations.
*  Don't use WeChat. Question more. Research what's happening in Xinjiang. Learn about
*  what's happening in the genocide in that country and let's think about how we can build our
*  societies so that we never have that kind of power concentration ever again.
*  Each of us can make a difference. Alex, it's a huge honor to talk to you. I've been a fan of
*  your work. A lot of people spoke really highly of you as one of the beacons of hope for our human
*  souls. I'm really glad we got a chance to talk. Thank you for wasting all this time with me today.
*  It's been an honor. Thanks, man. A lot of fun.
*  Thanks for listening to this conversation with Alex Gladstein. To support this podcast,
*  please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from
*  Alice Walker. The most common way people give up their power is by thinking they don't have any.
*  Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
