---
Date Generated: April 13, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 10936s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'anthony pompliano', 'artificial intelligence', 'artificial intelligence podcast', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex podcast', 'mit ai']
Video Views: 719453
Video Rating: None
---

# Anthony Pompliano: Bitcoin | Lex Fridman Podcast #171
**Lex Fridman:** [March 25, 2021](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IHg6ixt3CKc)
*  The following is a conversation with Anthony Pompliano, entrepreneur, technology investor,
*  prolific writer, podcaster, and Twitter user on topics of finance, cryptocurrency, technology,
*  and economics. I highly recommend his popular podcast and daily letter called The Pomp Podcast
*  and The Pomp Letter. Quick thank you to our sponsors Theragun Muscle Recovery Device,
*  Sun Basket Meal Delivery Service, ExpressVPN, and Indeed Hiring website. Click their links
*  to support this podcast. As a side note, let me say that I'll be having many conversations in the
*  coming months about cryptocurrency with people of all kinds of backgrounds and worldviews.
*  Those who are proponents of Bitcoin like Anthony, Nick Carter, Robert Breedlove, Alex Glassdean,
*  and many others, and those who are proponents of other cryptocurrency technologies like Vitalik
*  Buterin, Charles Hoskinson, Richard Hart, Sergei Nazarov, Sylvia McCauley, and many others as well.
*  I'm not framing this as a debate. I'm simply looking to explore exciting ideas in the space
*  of technologies that could very well change human civilization and AGI civilization as well.
*  I appreciate that some communities are a bit more intense in their style of communication than others,
*  but I personally am only interested in open-minded, respectful collaboration in exploring
*  ideas. I personally like to approach conversations by considering that I may be wrong about
*  everything and am looking to learn. I won't engage in groupthink, social signaling,
*  outrage mobs, mocking, and derision. If you do, I understand. It's just not my thing.
*  I send you my love either way and hope to meet you in person over some drinks,
*  some good laughs, and a good conversation one day. No matter the difference in style or substance,
*  we're all just human after all. This is an amazing ride we're all on together.
*  Buy the ticket, take the ride, as Hunter S. Thompson said. Whether you pay for that ticket
*  with Bitcoin, Ethereum, the dollar, gold, seashells, a beer, or just a good old smile.
*  This is the Lex Friedman Podcast and here is my conversation with Anthony Pampliano.
*  You served in the U.S. Army for six years and spent 13 months in Iraq in 2008 and 2009.
*  Can you tell the story of why you joined the Army and what were some of the moving difficult
*  lasting experiences from the time you served? Sure. I joined when I was 17 years old. I needed
*  my parents to basically sign in order to join. I graduated a semester early from high school
*  and thought I was going to play football in college and enroll in the spring semester.
*  When that didn't happen, I was working at Chick-fil-A in Quiznos and had in my mind,
*  look, this is probably not the path in life that I want. I knew I was going to go to college,
*  I knew I was going to go play football in the fall, but I had this window of time.
*  I walked into a recruiting office and just basically was like,
*  I'm assuming you guys need some help. They gave me the whole pitch and gave me a signing bonus.
*  You can go jump out of planes and go do all this crazy stuff. I just said, okay, let's do it.
*  This was close to 9-11. This was in 2006, about five years after.
*  Do you remember 9-11? What impact did that have on your thinking about this?
*  I was in eighth grade, if I remember correctly. I remember being in school when it happened.
*  I walked into a classroom and the entire class, somebody else's class, they were all talking to
*  the teacher about something. The second that me and a couple other kids walked in, everyone
*  got real quiet and the teacher was like, hey, go back to your home room. It was just a weird,
*  what's going on? Then next thing I know, they called all of the students into the cafeteria.
*  This is back before every classroom really had a television in it and cable and all that kind of
*  stuff. When we were there, they basically just said, listen, there's been this event that's
*  occurred. All of your parents are going to come pick you guys up and they'll explain it to you.
*  To a kid in eighth grade, you're basically like, what happened? I got home and I remember talking
*  to my dad about it. My dad basically gave me the core American talking points. Somebody from another
*  country came here and tried to kill Americans and was successful in doing that. To some extent,
*  he just said, and I'm willing to bet we're going to go back after him.
*  Did that wake you up a little bit to the idea that there's evil out there? Even just the idea
*  of terrorism for many people, when it hits you on your own land, it really shakes up your mind.
*  In some sense, World War II, that's why World War II was fundamentally different for Americans
*  than it is for the people in Russia, in England, in France, and in Europe in general.
*  There's something about when there's families, women, children dying on your own land,
*  that's different. That was one of the first times in America where, of course, it's Pearl Harbor,
*  but this is in recent history, it's like they hit us here. That was a profound
*  idea. I think America was very, very good at exporting the violence elsewhere for a long time.
*  There was this element of complacency, but also this element of really just American superiority.
*  That doesn't happen here. I think that that woke people up not only to the idea that other places
*  around the world may not like the American ideals, may not like democracy and capitalism and that,
*  but also maybe we aren't as big, tough, and secure as we thought we were.
*  Obviously, I think you see the over rotation with a lot of the security theater that came
*  after that of almost psychologically, let's make our citizens feel like they're safe,
*  even if the things that we're doing don't necessarily change that apparatus.
*  On top of that, I think that it really woke people up to extremism around the world.
*  I don't know if necessarily there was a change in the extremism as much as it just was an awareness
*  thing. How many people drew a line from, was it 92 or 93 with the World Trade Center bombing,
*  to deep levels of extremism and hatred of the American industrial complex? Probably not that
*  many. 2001, a lot of people. I think that was, again, as a young kid, you don't understand a
*  lot of this stuff. You basically just, hey, somebody came here and tried to kill Americans,
*  and so we should go fight back, was the response I think that I had.
*  LW What role did that have psychologically for you when you then in 2006 joined the army?
*  This is a very different joining the army than in a time when it's more peaceful. Here you're
*  essentially facing, I don't know if you see it that way, but there is a war on terror, and I know
*  that people criticize that whole formulation framework of thinking, but nevertheless,
*  you are going to Iraq, you are going to Afghanistan, you're going to these places
*  and are fighting these complicated, it's not even clear what you're fighting.
*  JS Yeah. I think that there's a couple of key pieces. One of the actual most impactful data
*  points, if you were, or stories for me was the Pat Tillman story. I played football in high school,
*  and I was going to go play in college and seeing this NFL player who basically just one day said,
*  hey, I'm going to go and do this instead and walk away. I don't know necessarily if it was a,
*  I want to pursue the same story, right? And obviously he ended up dying and so not exactly
*  the end result that you want, but I think it was almost like he made it okay if you were on a
*  certain trajectory in life to go take this detour and to go do it. But the second thing is I was 17,
*  pretty stupid when you're 17, pretty naive when you're 17, right? And so I almost kind of backed
*  into the deployment because I signed up as a reserve member. And so basically the plan was to
*  sign up for the reserves. I was going to go to basic training, get all the kind of education
*  and qualification. I was going to go to college and then after college, maybe there's a chance
*  that you will go and serve or do whatever. For me, I ended up getting deployed when I was a
*  junior in college, literally got pulled out of school. And so at 20 years old, it's not exactly
*  what you thought you were signing up for, right? Especially to kind of leave school to go do it.
*  And then on top of that, I probably had an advantage over most people, both on the entry
*  to combat and the exit to kind of a combat situation, which was football. So I always
*  explained that in hindsight, you're in a male dominated testosterone driven kind of combative
*  sport where it's us versus them and there's training and injuries and just kind of all of
*  the things that go into playing a combat sport like football to now they give you guns, but you
*  still have a uniform on, still male dominated. It's just a little bit more serious in terms of
*  the injuries and potential death and things like that. But also on the exit from that deployment,
*  most guys I was there with, they're going back to being prison guards, police officers,
*  working at the lumber yard, just kind of everyday Americans. And so I had the fortunate ability to
*  go back into kind of that combative environment, go back to play football. And so it was almost
*  this like deescalation on the way out where they take your guns away. We still got a uniform,
*  still male dominated, still combative. And then eventually you're just a normal citizen.
*  And so I think that in some weird way, I was very fortunate to kind of on the entry and exit,
*  have that experience where other guys didn't. So what you were deployed to Iraq,
*  were there any memories, experiences that changed you or in general, like you're probably a different
*  man on the other side of it. How did that time change you? I think there was two main takeaways
*  that I took, right? So one was not a specific moment, but on multiple occasions. I remember
*  we were driving down the road and I would look and there would be a 10, 12, 14 year old kid.
*  And if you've never seen somebody who literally has hate and disdain in their eyes,
*  just not necessarily to you personally, just to the uniform, to what you stand for, to all the stuff.
*  When you see it, you see it. Right. And I always think of, if you've ever watched the movie,
*  a 12 strong and in it, they've got this Afghan Afghanistan warlord and he's talking to a bunch
*  of soldiers and he says, you know, you don't have killer eyes. You do, you do. And he's just like,
*  he can just tell, right? He's, he's seen so many soldiers. And so I think that that was a,
*  a memory on a number of occasions where I just saw a young kid and I just said, they hate us.
*  Right. And it's not you personally, it's what you stand for. But the really big event was when you
*  first get to these combat zones, a lot of times what will happen is you basically, your unit teams
*  up with a unit that's leaving and there's a handoff and it happens over a couple of weeks. And so you
*  can imagine almost, you know, 1% of our team goes out with 99% of their team, then five, 95, 10, 90,
*  all the way till it's 50, 50. And then eventually it rotates. And then it's majority of our team and
*  a small number of their team. And so what a lot of people will explain is the two most dangerous
*  times in war are actually the first two or three weeks and the last two or three weeks.
*  When you first get there, you don't know who the people are. You don't know the terrain. You don't
*  know, you know, kind of the local cultures and who to look out for, what signs, all that kind of stuff.
*  And the last two or three weeks is you basically think you've survived the deployment. You're
*  looking forward to going home. So you become complacent, things like that. And so we made it
*  through that transition period with no issues. But the literally the very first mission that we
*  went out as a team ourselves, 100%. There was two separate incidents. One was we were driving
*  Moldyknight and what we think was a sniper shot at a truck that I was in. I was standing up outside
*  of it along with another guy. And that was kind of just a wake up call again of never been shot
*  at before. Right. And so I'll never forget. You kind of heard this whiz go by and the guy next to
*  me was from a rural Pennsylvania. And he just said, you know, look, I never been shot at before
*  either, but I've done a lot of hunting, get the fuck down. Okay. And so we kept driving that night.
*  And later on in the night, an IED went off. A guy ran over an IED who was at the front of the convoy.
*  And when that IED went off again, I'd never been in a convoy that had been blown up before, but the
*  training kicks in. And so immediately every single person starts screaming out IED, IED,
*  and they start looking and trying to figure it out. And you realize the United States military
*  did a fantastic job training us before we went. Because in that moment, nobody thought about
*  anything. You just did what you had been programmed to do. And so ultimately kind of through the end
*  of that event, there was a US soldier that ended up dying. He was shot in the head. And when we got
*  back to the base, kind of after that entire event, I think it just hit us. We are at war. And if we
*  make mistakes here, that is the cost of, you know, kind of those mistakes. And this was somebody who
*  I didn't know. It was somebody who literally showed up kind of as secondary support for our unit
*  and basically was there to help us. Right. And so it was one of those weird situations where
*  you have this emotional connection because it's somebody who shared an event with you,
*  but you didn't know them. Right. And you learn their name later and you understand that they
*  have a family and they have young kids and all this stuff. And so again, as a 20 year old kid,
*  you're kind of processing all this and you just realize like the gun I have in my hands,
*  it's real for a reason. Right. And we better take this seriously. This is not, you know,
*  us joking around in kind of the barracks and, you know, all the things that you would expect,
*  you know, guys are doing the army. So I think that was like the moment where I said,
*  Hey, I'm going to learn a lot here. And I got to make sure I get home.
*  And you snap it into the training. But nevertheless, I mean, you're somebody who
*  thinks philosophically about this world now, right? You're very intelligent and things deeply
*  about the world. So looking back, you mentioned hatred in the 14 year old kid's eyes. There's
*  death. So the way you kind of describe this whole story is like training kicks in this,
*  this shit is serious. Like this is, you know, there's a reason there's a gun in your hand.
*  So there's a strategic element. There's like, you have to get the job done. There's a task at hand,
*  but at the same time, if you zoom out, there's a kid who has hate for you. Some of those kids
*  would probably, if they could, would kill you for the thing you stand for in the uniform.
*  And then there's bullets flying at you. And then there's people that some of them you might
*  already care for deeply are dying. What the hell do you make of that? Do you think about that?
*  Does any of that haunt you? How do you think about the world having witnessed that?
*  Yeah. A lot of times when we would talk about it, we were there. If I was that kid,
*  I would want to kill that person too. Right? I would have hatred as well. Right? Imagine if in
*  the United States tomorrow, you and I woke up and there was tanks rolling down the street from
*  another country and they were basically imposing their rules on us, whether they thought it was
*  the right thing to do or not. The soldiers were there and they were doing this. We would probably
*  feel not so great about it. Right? At kind of a minimum and at a maximum, we'd be really,
*  really pissed off. We would fight back. And so what you don't understand when you're in the heat
*  of the moment is why does this person feel this way? And so what's very weird is, well, what
*  happens if a year ago US soldiers came through, they got shot at, they returned fire and they
*  killed that kid's uncle? You'd be pissed off. Right? And so you just start to understand,
*  we look at war very black and white. We look at it very much from a clinical perspective. We're
*  going to go, we're going to go kind of invade somewhere. We are the most dominant military
*  in the world. We're very good at invading and we will crush wherever we invade. But when you're
*  actually on the ground, what you understand is the humanity of it all. Right? And so what becomes
*  very interesting is pretty much every veteran I know that comes back, they're some of the largest
*  pacifists in the world. And I always revert back to Marcus Luttrell, who's a famous Navy SEAL.
*  And there's a movie made about him and his story. He gave a speech one time that I saw.
*  And he basically said, listen, if you're a politician, your job is to be the diplomat,
*  do everything you possibly can not to send me and my friends anywhere. Because when you send us,
*  we're going to bring hell with us. Right? And understand that is the business that we are in.
*  But every single other person up until we get sent has a job to do to prevent having to send us.
*  And I think that ultimately that's where you see a lot of kind of this generation that has fought
*  in Iraq and Afghanistan that says, listen, maybe we shouldn't be running around the world being the
*  police. Maybe we shouldn't be going and invading all these different countries. Because when you
*  actually get to see firsthand what happens, it's just something that we should avoid at all cost.
*  But if we have to go or we have to actually send soldiers somewhere, understand what happens when
*  that occurs. And the United States is the best in the world at doing it. Do you think,
*  thinking about that kid with the hatred, do you think there will always be hatred in the world?
*  Do you think from another perspective, do you think there'll be war always? Is that a fundamental
*  aspect of human nature or is that something we can escape? Yeah. So war, I think, has like very
*  negative connotations in terms of bullets and bombs and death and kind of just very morbid type
*  understanding. Conflict, on the other hand, I think people look at and say, of course,
*  there will always be conflict, right? You just can't have billions of people all on the same
*  planet without some level of disagreement, whether that's a disagreement of ideas,
*  disagreement over physical geography or something else. And so I think conflict will always exist.
*  The question is, what form does war take moving forward? And so in my mind, it's starting to look
*  a lot more clinical, right? A lot more drones, a lot less soldiers on the ground, a lot more use
*  of special forces and kind of these small, highly specialized teams rather than kind of big mechanical
*  armies. And then you get into like the information warfare and kind of cyber warfare and you start to
*  understand that we're at war with a lot of people right now, right? Doesn't mean we're
*  necessarily dropping bombs on their countries. Doesn't necessarily mean we're sending soldiers
*  there, but on a daily basis, we are engaged in these kind of cyber battlefields. And so if that's
*  where war starts to play out, it one changes the tools and tactics and techniques that we need to
*  arm our country and other countries we're arming themselves with, but it also changes the way that
*  we think about war, right? It sounds a lot less worrisome if I say, hey, we're going to go to war
*  with a country, but by the way, there's going to be no death, right? Okay. Like that doesn't sound
*  nearly as bad as, hey, we're going to go send 10,000 soldiers and some percentage of them are
*  going to die on the battlefield. And then we're going to basically pipe back videos and articles
*  saying that American soldiers are dying. Yeah. There does seem to be a fundamental difference
*  between the, the gang is con style. Like if I would feel differently, if somebody like hand to
*  hand with a knife murdered my family versus cyber security, why I stole all their data,
*  stole all their money, stole everything they own, falsified their identity, all that kind of stuff
*  that those are both traumatic events, but they do seem to be fundamentally different, but maybe
*  that's actually very narrow style thinking because ultimately you have to think about
*  what is life and what's happiness. And it's like the summer I thinking, I'm not sure what's more
*  painful. If I take it to myself, like, I'm not sure what I would rather live through being stabbed
*  like to death or having my identity stolen, all my money stolen or maybe
*  reputation destroyed, like with lies or something like that.
*  That's very interesting to think about. If you think about quality of life and all those kinds
*  of things. Well, one's finite, right? One, the pain ends and the other is kind of a long prolonged,
*  almost torture. So it's physical pain versus psychological pain. It's really interesting to
*  think about. And I think another key piece to this, which I don't have answers to, but there
*  is an element of emotion and rage in the physical violence versus again, more of that clinical
*  information warfare. And so it's really easy to show a battlefield where there's death on both sides
*  and bombs being dropped and buildings destroyed. It fits very well into propaganda for everyone
*  involved, right? Regardless of what side they're on. When you start talking about cyber warfare,
*  how many times have we seen a big company get data hacked or information hacked and we all read the
*  headlines, maybe throw a tweet out and then move on with our day and don't remember it anymore.
*  And so it's just very, very different, I think, in the emotion and response that it invokes in people
*  when they hear about it as well. Given the conflict, do you think people are fundamentally
*  good? Are we all sort of like blank slates that could be evil given the environment or good given
*  the environment? Or can we kind of, is there some base that we can rely on that people,
*  if left to their own devices, will be good and trustworthy and honest? I think you have to
*  separate out intention from action. So if you talk to some of the most heinous criminals in the world,
*  they've rationalized their actions. And so you've got to ask yourself,
*  what is the level of which they understood what they were doing, that they intended to be malicious,
*  nefarious, and kind of do bad things versus the actual actions themselves? And so even as a society,
*  if, let's say, for example, you were to walk down the street and you were to murder somebody on the
*  sidewalk completely unprovoked, we would look at you and say, you are a sociopath, you have
*  everything wrong with you, and that is somebody that we do not want in our society. And therefore,
*  we will levy the extent of rule of law against you in order to protect society from you. And you
*  become that monster, that beast. If in the same situation, somebody walks in your house with a
*  knife and you murder them or you kill them, now we put you up on a pedestal as a hero.
*  And those are two very, very different responses. They may be just as morbid,
*  they may be just as violent in terms of the actual actions. The intentions, the way it's perceived,
*  is very, very different. And so I think that as a world, we like a very black and white, clean cut,
*  good, bad. I think the world's a lot more messy than that. And I think that a lot of times when
*  you look at intention, it's hard for us to tell what somebody's intention is. But I've looked at
*  a lot of people who are both considered very good and also a lot of people are considered very bad.
*  And they sound very similar in terms of the motivations for their actions. And so I think
*  that it's just a really hard problem that probably doesn't have a perfect solution or an answer.
*  Do you give much value to the intention? Or do you think it's better to look at the results of the
*  behavior as opposed to the underlying ideology, the underlying intention of the behavior?
*  I think that intention gets at the question of like, are people inherently good or bad?
*  Yeah.
*  Right. I think that they're generally inherently good. And the intention is driving towards the
*  thing that they believe is the best outcome or the best thing for them to pursue. The action,
*  I think, is where we spend most of our time focused on. And frankly, we actually may be
*  a better society or kinder as a humanity to each other if we spent more time looking at intention
*  rather than action. But again, if somebody walks down the street and murders somebody,
*  it's really hard to have a conversation. And it may be inappropriate for us to have a conversation
*  about intention versus any level of action. Right.
*  So you're one of the prominent, I would say even the faces of the world of cryptocurrency,
*  Bitcoin, that whole entire world was dive straight in and ask,
*  do you think, do you consider yourself a Bitcoin maximalist?
*  I think that the way I really look at it is I work backwards off of what is the maximalism that I
*  believe in. And the world that I believe in is kind of an automated world that is run on these
*  open decentralized protocols. And what we ultimately do is we return sovereignty and
*  individualism and kind of personal responsibility and liberty to people over institutions. And what
*  we end up doing is we end up kind of taking what has historically been a very analog or physical
*  world economy and geographic rule. And we then kind of put it in the cloud. And this digital
*  economy becomes the prevalent way that we all conduct commerce, communicate, et cetera. And so
*  it's less about any one single technology to me. Right. I think that it's pretty stupid for people
*  to almost in a way, put an inanimate object up for some sort of obsession. To me, it's much more
*  about the ideals, the ethos, and the most rational and likely path to that kind of end result or that
*  world that I think is at this point just a foregone conclusion. So the distinction there,
*  maybe people don't know the terminology, maximalism is basically saying, I really think this is a good
*  idea. Like, if you prefer a certain kind of diet, you could be a keto maximalist saying like, this is
*  probably, maybe it's not 100%, but probably the diet that's healthiest for humans kind of thing.
*  In the same sense, Bitcoin maximalism is saying, you know, of course, we don't know, there's a lot
*  of uncertainty, but this particular technology seems to be the best representations of some set
*  of ideals that defines progress in the future. But you're drawing a distinction between sort of
*  cult-like obsession about an object of any kind, whether it's keto or Bitcoin and just sort of
*  believing that a technology is the best representation of a particular set of ideals.
*  And you believe that sort of this moving into the cloud, both the distributed nature of it,
*  but also just the digital nature of it is something that's going to be a positive step for humanity.
*  Yeah, I would even take maximalism a step further. And it's not just the kind of singular
*  viewpoint of this is the best. It's also an element of it's anti everything else.
*  So, you know, take keto, for example, the keto diet is not only the best diet, all the other diets
*  are bad. And so it's a very binary view of the world. I think that what's probably most
*  misunderstood about, let's take Bitcoin as a specific example, is that most of the people who
*  are labeled Bitcoin maximalist, they would be open-minded if they believe that something else
*  came along that was a superior technology or had a better kind of probability of achieving, again,
*  that ultimate vision. I think where there's this controversy and kind of clashing of ideas is that
*  the Bitcoin community believes Bitcoin is the best way to do that and has very specific arguments as
*  to why the other things are not. And so what ultimately ends up happening, which is very weird
*  in the investing world, it's unlikely that you and I are going to sit down, you're going to buy
*  Apple stock is the best stock and there's no other stock that's worth anything. And then also,
*  it's very weird if you said to me, you know, this stock is worth zero. And that's where everything
*  that I own, I've put on a short on one single company, right? There's diversification, there's
*  much more kind of probabilistic thinking in finance in general. When it comes to this specific world
*  of cryptocurrency and kind of digital assets, if you will, is there's two main groups of people who
*  are trying to build two very, very different things at the onset. But when you unpack it and
*  you start to spend more and more time on it, you realize they're actually trying to accomplish the
*  same thing in two different ways. So Bitcoin is seen, I think, as a digital currency, right? Kind
*  of the idea that this is going to ascend to become the next global reserve currency. It's a programmatic
*  kind of transparent money. And it's essentially just 180 degrees difference than the inflationary,
*  you know, non-transparent fiat currencies that exist in the world. You then look at kind of
*  everything else, right? And you have a lot of smart contract platforms and various things that
*  they're all going after. Ethereum with kind of the world computer approach, and you can kind of go
*  down the line with all their other arguments as to what they're trying to build. I think the big
*  difference just comes down to innovation versus security. And when you simplistically look at it
*  via that lens, you actually understand where both people are coming from.
*  When you say security started to interrupt, do you mean financial security? Or do you mean like
*  literally the security of the particular cryptocurrency? The technical security of
*  a blockchain. So when you look at, let's say Bitcoin versus Ethereum, right? Bitcoin has
*  decided and that community has decided security is the number one thing that you have to optimize for.
*  So decentralization over everything else in terms of transaction speeds, cost, anything that you
*  could come up with that is something that would be important for a currency. The number one thing to
*  optimize for is security. And as we have seen with a lot of technologies, right? Facebook's Libra,
*  or now what's known as DiEM is a great example, not having decentralization is susceptible to
*  the nation state. And so a lot of these other platforms and blockchains, they say security is
*  important, but it's not the most important thing. We believe there's a trade off between
*  a little less security and transaction speed or composability or whatever it is. And so take Ethereum
*  as kind of the second largest community and blockchain by market cap. It was created because
*  somebody wanted to, or a group of people wanted to do something on Bitcoin. They felt like they
*  couldn't do it. And so they said, Hey, we're going to go create something that has these smart
*  contracts that we can then go do here. Again, this is technology, right? So the tribalism of like,
*  you're right, you're wrong to me is a little childish, just in the sense of like the market
*  is going to decide what is most valuable. And then when you go inside of that community, like
*  there's a lot of dumb ideas people are trying to build around Bitcoin. There's also a lot of really,
*  really great ideas that people are trying to build around Bitcoin. Same thing in the Ethereum world.
*  And so what you end up getting, I think, is the tribalism really comes out of the idea that there's
*  a ticker price that is attached to all of this, right? If you go back in history of technology,
*  venture capitalists didn't sit around the table and yell and scream at each other in this like
*  religious zealot way, right? Because you bet on one type of cloud computing platform and I bet on
*  another one, right? Just the market's going to decide we're both going to work on and try to
*  make ours successful. Here, I think that the sensitivity and mainly comes out of the Bitcoin
*  community is that a lot of this is being funded not only by venture capitalists and kind of
*  professional money managers and asset allocators. There's also this element of including the retail
*  investor and the public. And so whether it's through ICOs or some other forms of capital raising,
*  there's arguments for it saying, hey, look, this now gives kind of the little guy some sort of
*  access and ability to do it. But there's also arguments against it. Some people say, hey,
*  it's easier to dupe them and it's easier to run scams and kind of all this stuff. And so ultimately,
*  I think that crypto is this like arena of ideas. It is literally the war of attrition. And what
*  will end up happening is 10 years from now, you and I will talk and we're going to say, well,
*  the market said X was valuable and Y wasn't. And so all of the tribalism from between here and there,
*  it's fun. It's engaging, whatever, but it doesn't really matter.
*  Yeah, because the public is involved. There's a lot of personalities. And so a lot of times we
*  focus on the extreme personalities that do a lot of maybe pardon the French shit talking. And so we
*  kind of focus on that, but that's not necessarily representative of the communities involved.
*  Let's talk about Bitcoin first, and then it'll help us use as a kind of comparison to
*  Ethereum or whatever else. So when you think about what is money, right, that's kind of the
*  first question people really kind of go down the rabbit hole on. And ultimately today, it's a
*  belief system, right? And you may believe that one currency has more value over another because
*  it's backed by a certain military or a certain government has a monetary policy that you believe
*  in or don't believe in. But ultimately it's a belief system that there's nothing backing this
*  other than a government asks you to pay your taxes in it, right? And they can have a monopoly on
*  violence in terms of they can put you in jail if you don't pay your taxes. They can go to other
*  countries and they can invade and do all this stuff. It wasn't always like that, right? It was
*  historically a layer one technology was gold. And so gold was a fantastic store of value. You knew
*  that if you held gold, it wasn't going to be inflated away. It was sound money was outside
*  the system and no one could create more of it. The reason why that's important is because that
*  optimization for store of value served as the bedrock of the entire stack of money for 5,000
*  years. And so the problem with that though, again, trade-off between store of value is it was really
*  hard to transact with, right? If I came in here and you said, Hey, I want a couple of ounces of
*  gold and I had a whole bar, I'd have to literally shave off the ounces of gold. It's heavy to carry
*  around. If you said to me, Hey, you're in one city, mail it to me, it's really expensive. There's all
*  these issues with it. And so ultimately what people said was, well, let's create a second layer on top
*  of that gold in order to make it easier to transact. And so we created paper claims on the gold. So,
*  Hey, don't carry around the gold in your pocket anymore. Put it in a vault or a bank. They're
*  going to issue a paper claim. Now you and I can trade these paper claims around. And at any point,
*  if you want the gold, you just show up and you say, Hey, give me three ounces of gold or two bars or
*  whatever. And so that actually made the store of value. It allowed that to be the anchor and kind
*  of the most important part, the security of your purchasing power. But now it became easier to
*  transact. And then eventually we built layers even on top of that. So everything from electronic money,
*  kind of electronic Q-sips, all the way to credit and other systems on top of that gold. 1971 comes
*  around and obviously we DPEG from that gold, right? And it was a temporary measure at the time. We
*  ended up not going back to it. And so what you moved or transitioned from was sound money, which
*  was outside the system. No one could create more. To now the government had full control. They could
*  create as much as they wanted to. They tried to be responsible and disciplined, but obviously hard
*  to do. Sometimes we've been really good at it. Sometimes we've been less good at it. And then
*  you go around the world and some countries have absolutely sucked at it. And some have been good
*  at it. And so when you look into the Bitcoin world, I think that when you look at the
*  optimization for security, similar to gold store value, people hold it. Purchasing power has gone
*  up a lot year over year. It's like a 200% year over year compound annual growth for over a decade.
*  Right. And so you measure this in kind of the U S dollar exchange price, et cetera.
*  But there's still a lot of people who will yell and scream about it's slow. It's costly, right?
*  All the things around those transactions that are obstacles or challenges. And so there's basically
*  two schools of thought, and this is where we kind of get into the bifurcation. Some people just said,
*  Hey, this technology is antiquated. We can't use it. It doesn't make sense. And so what we're going
*  to do is we're going to go build something new. And so you go get, you know, kind of all of the
*  various versions there. The Bitcoin community says, no, just like gold had paper claims and
*  other things built on top and layer two, three, four, five, we're going to do that here. And so
*  they've already started to build kind of this layer too, where it's easier to transact. It's
*  cheaper. It's faster, et cetera. And so I actually think that both of those worlds are going to
*  coexist in the future. The big question is just which one has more importance, right? So again,
*  get out of binary. It's just probabilistically. And so my personal belief is that the security,
*  that the store of value component as the bedrock for a monetary system is essential, right? Like
*  that is the most important thing because you can always improve the other components,
*  but you can't go back and fix that kind of core piece. So if money is an idea that we all,
*  it's like an emergent idea that we believe in, you're saying that security is one of the most
*  fundamental catalysts or fuels for that idea to sort of take hold and be stable and sort of take
*  over the world. The other stuff is really nice to have, but if you don't have the security,
*  you're not going to, like, it's not going to spread in a viral sense in our human brains.
*  Well, and especially in light of the kind of the macro economy, right? So like what's so
*  fascinating about the last 12 months is in investing in general, the best returns,
*  and I kind of put that in air quotes a little bit, is something that is different than everything
*  else and right. So being different and wrong just means you're an idiot, right? Being different
*  and right means that that's where kind of the outsized returns are. And so if you look around
*  the world at currencies today, they're all the same. They're all inflationary, unlimited supply,
*  controlled by a government, decisions made in a very non-transparent process. And what we've
*  watched is the manipulation of all of those currencies over the last 12 months. In direct
*  contrast to that is this thing, Bitcoin, which is outside of the system, has a finite supply,
*  transparent and programmatic monetary policy. And so when you see those two systems kind of
*  in comparison to each other in the United States, there's a lot of people who say the dollar works
*  great for me. I can go to the ATM, I can get out physical cash. If I want to swipe a card,
*  I could do that. My money in my bank doesn't lose 50% of its value in a day in terms of purchasing
*  power. The dollar's pretty good. When you go to other countries, that might not be the case.
*  And so I do think that there's kind of a relative analysis that goes on here. If you compare Bitcoin
*  to the dollar, there's all kinds of arguments to make that the dollar is better as a medium of
*  exchange today. But if I go and I tell you, well, what about in these kind of extreme examples of
*  Venezuela, Zimbabwe, Turkey, et cetera? And so I think that that's kind of one perspective to view
*  this through is security versus all of the innovative components of a medium of exchange,
*  et cetera. The second thing though, that I think is really, really important is around censorship.
*  And so when you look at, again, every currency in the world today, every single financial service,
*  they're highly susceptible to censorship. And actually, I would argue the United States is
*  in the business of censorship in terms of how many countries around the world do we sanction
*  and cut them off in either a minimal or a very material way from the global financial system.
*  So when you define, when you talk about censorship, do you mean just the
*  censoring your ability to operate freely in the world?
*  Well, look at it a little bit differently, which is that the United States has kind of the American
*  superior order because we have the bombs, the bullets, the soldiers, and that military might,
*  we basically impose our will around the world. And so there's a very strong argument to be made
*  that there are certain countries around the world that are being sanctioned,
*  that the people of those countries did nothing wrong. Now, the governments are bad, right? In
*  terms of the way that you and I would look at democratic rule or communism or whatever it is,
*  but the people are being hurt as well. So there's a whole group of people who would just argue,
*  listen, we shouldn't hurt anyone at the expense of punishing one person or a group of people.
*  There's other people who argue against that. But I do think that if you really kind of zoom out
*  and you say, I'm going to take myself out of the Western worldview, and I'm simply going to look
*  at this as we're all part of the human race, it's censorship. And there might be an argument for
*  censorship, but there also might be an argument against the censorship. And so what Bitcoin does
*  as that specific kind of payment network is it says anyone in the world with an internet connection,
*  I don't care where you were born, what language you speak, what religion you are, your wealth
*  status, your education status, none of it matters. If you have an internet connection, you can plug
*  into this monetary system and you can move value around the world to anyone else without asking
*  for permission. And in the United States, we basically have that ability in the US dollar
*  traditional banking system. I can pretty much send money to almost anyone I want,
*  unless they're a really bad person that's on some list or something.
*  Most people in the world don't have that capability. And so what you're essentially
*  doing is you're democratizing access to a true store value and a medium of exchange.
*  And so what you see in many of these countries is that when their currency starts to fail,
*  the first thing that a government or a group of people in power and influence do
*  is they lock the citizens into the currency with capital controls.
*  Why? Because if you let them out, it exasperates the problem. And so now what we're seeing is
*  we basically are giving a tool to billions of people around the world that is a peaceful protest.
*  You and I had no say at all when not only the Federal Reserve and elected officials here in
*  the United States, but central banks around the world over the last 12 months decided to create
*  trillions of dollars and inject it into the monetary system. They have arguments and some
*  of them are very good arguments as to why they should do that. They're trying to mitigate short
*  term pain. Long term, they'll figure out the other issues. They have very elaborate and well
*  articulated viewpoint as to why they're doing it. But you and I had no say. And so when you start
*  to look at, we have a very small group of people in this world, both in our country and in countries
*  around the world that make these decisions that have very, very far reaching kind of impact.
*  And on top of that, in many cases, there's actually not that much kind of accountability
*  because usually these are not elected officials who are making some of these decisions. These
*  are appointed and you can argue that, Hey, we elected somebody who appointed them. But at the
*  same time, that accountability isn't quite there. And so I think ultimately, when you just back out
*  you say, you know, what is Bitcoin and why is it important to the world? It is giving access to
*  anyone in the world with an internet connection to a store of value and a monitoring network
*  that allows them to peacefully protest and to opt out of a system that pretty much is not working
*  for majority of people in the world. So it's moving the power from these centralized places,
*  sometimes on elected to the individuals and to the people. So the dollar does seem to work
*  for Americans and for many people in the world, but you kind of have a vision, you paint a picture
*  of a future where potentially we move to cryptocurrency. So what kind of trajectory do you see where
*  Bitcoin can become the main currency in the world or at least cryptocurrency become the main way
*  of storing value in the world and basically overtake the dollar?
*  Yeah. So I always go first to, we don't need to have competition, like in terms of like a
*  direct competition between the dollar and Bitcoin. If you look at most technologies in the world,
*  the really valuable ones are actually market expanding technologies rather than simply just
*  market share stealing technologies. So if you look at Uber, for example, Uber didn't just say,
*  hey, I'm going to go take out all the taxis. It actually drastically expanded the market for
*  people. Now there's literally millions of people in the United States who don't have cars because
*  they use Uber, right? And so I think that Bitcoin is very similar in that, yes, there is a component
*  of medium of exchange in terms of the dollar, but also there is this component of just store value
*  assets in general. And so when you start to look at Bitcoin specifically, I think that what you're
*  seeing is you're seeing a generational gap where young people say, I grew up with a phone in my
*  hand. I'm digitally native. The whole idea of going to the bank and sending a wire or going to an ATM
*  and getting physical cash is an antiquated idea in their mind, right? I one time asked my brother,
*  he's 24 years old. And I said, Hey, how do you send money to your friends? And he gave me one
*  answer, which I expected, which was Venmo. And the second answer I didn't expect. He said Uber.
*  I said, how do you send money via Uber? He said, well, we get in a car together. And at the end,
*  we split the ride. And so again, you and I have probably both done that, but I never thought of
*  it as a way to send money to each other. And so it is a psychological difference between even me,
*  who's only a decade older than him or so, and his peer group. And so I think as we're watching
*  Bitcoin continue this ascent, ultimately what we're seeing is an entire generation of kids are
*  saying, listen, if I look at financial assets across the board, I have stocks, I have bonds,
*  I have currencies, and I have commodities. I know that bonds from a real rate return perspective
*  is flat to negative, right? I'm going to make no money on this because I have a belief that my dollar
*  is being devalued. And actually what we're starting to see is again, the internet has broken down
*  these walled gardens and kind of the centralized hubs of information in that if you were to look
*  at, let's say the stock market from 1971 to today in dollar terms, it's a 45 degree angle,
*  right up into the right, right? You know, it's kind of seven, eight, 10% growth every year.
*  And it's amazing. Just get invested in the stock market and you'll make money over a long period
*  of time, regardless of the dips along the way. If you denominate that same stock market in gold,
*  the stock market is down since 1971. And so is it so much that the stock market is accruing true
*  value or is it that the underlying currency in which it is denominated in is being devalued,
*  right? And I was being devalued in a very disciplined way, right? In terms of, it's not
*  like it went 50% devaluation in a short period of time, but it's still being devalued. And so I think
*  that people are waking up to this idea that a traditional 60, 40 type global portfolio doesn't
*  work anymore, right? 40% of it in bonds is just not going to get it done. And so when you start
*  to look at this, people first look at Bitcoin via two main ways, in my opinion, they look at it. One
*  is a store value. Should I actually go and put some of my wealth there, use it as a savings
*  technology, right? We ask people in the traditional world, if you're a teacher, a fireman,
*  an accounting, you know, mid-level manager, we say, Hey, go do your job, be the best in class as a
*  fireman or as a teacher. And then, Oh, by the way, you'd be a professional investor as well,
*  because if you just put your dollars in your bank account, you're literally going to have your wealth
*  devalued away over time. So you can't just save, you have to invest. That is a really tall task for
*  people. They have a hard enough time just doing their job, right? Taking care of their family,
*  right? Now they got to go be an investor. So I think savings technology for Bitcoin standpoint is
*  if you buy Satoshi's or Bitcoin over time, it will increase from a purchasing power standpoint,
*  because there's a fixed supply and demand continues to rise. But then you start to look at,
*  well, what other assets do people put in their portfolios, whether it's art, it's real estate,
*  it's precious metals, or something else. Most of those assets are not because people actually
*  think that they're going to go up in value over time. They're using the store value, right? The
*  reason why somebody buys gold is because the store value, right? Historically, that's a narrative
*  driven type asset though. We tell people it's scarce. We tell people that it is a store value.
*  When you look at it though, we don't know how much gold exists in the world. We have a good estimate,
*  right? But we don't actually, we can't prove how much there is. We don't know how much is coming
*  out of the ground every day. Again, great, fantastic estimate, but we can't prove it. And we don't know
*  what the total supply is. And that's what you mean by narrative driven. We can't really prove it,
*  like mathematically. You, I, and everyone else in the world has lived in a narrative driven world
*  for the last couple of decades, right? And what the internet and digital technologies have done
*  is it opened up the possibility and the desire from people to have a world now where I can
*  validate things. So when I see that headline, I want to see you say whatever happened to the news.
*  If you're the subject of the news, rather than have somebody else tell me the story. If I see
*  that you say something is scarce, prove to me that it is scarce. And so I think that's kind of a
*  psychological shift. The younger generation is starting to understand because ultimately you and
*  I probably grew up in a world where our parents could tell us a story and we just believed it,
*  you know, dad or mom says it must be true. If my brother hurts a story, what does he do? He goes
*  to Google and he looks it up, right? He comes back and usually tells my parents that you got the story
*  wrong. Right. And so I think that, that, that provability or that, that validation ends up
*  becoming really, really important. And so, you know, look at something like gold. I think that
*  people are drastically underestimating the shift that's underway right now.
*  Gold is one down in value since April or I'm sorry, August of 2020. And so in a
*  timeframe where central banks have had historic quantitative easing, literally $6 trillion in the
*  United States, the one asset that historically has been the best store of value and has, you know,
*  in 2008 financial crisis hit an all time high based on the government response has actually
*  suffered for a main part of this financial crisis. You then look at central banks around the world
*  who have been very large holders of gold for a long time and net buyers on a monthly basis
*  for multiple months over the last six months, they've been net sellers of gold.
*  And then you start to look at jewelry demand. So the actual non-monetary value of gold and that
*  demand for gold jewelry peaked in 2013 and has continued to fall since. And so what you start to
*  say to yourself is take just the asset of gold, which about $10 trillion market cap, and you say,
*  okay, well, jewelry demand continues to fall even if it's at a slight rate, but it's continues to
*  contract. You have central banks that now at some times are net sellers and sometimes net buyers,
*  right? So, okay, again, contraction there. And then from the investment standpoint, the actual price,
*  the daily price of this continues to fall, which is a signal that there's a contracting demand from
*  an investment perspective. That's 93% of all use of gold, only 7% of it's used for actual technology
*  and metal conduction and things like that. And so you have a $10 trillion asset that it appears. And
*  again, maybe data changes and I'll change my mind and other people change their mind, but it appears
*  is on the decline. And so if that happens, you're going to get the contraction of a $10 trillion
*  asset. Where's all that value go? And what you're seeing is at the same time that that asset is
*  contracting, you're also seeing a massive influx from not only retail investors, not only kind of
*  the wealthy and the elite, but also from financial institutions, corporations, pension funds, et cetera,
*  into this kind of digital sound money. So you're saying that there's a kind of shift from gold
*  to Bitcoin because they have a lot of the same properties, except one is in the physical space
*  the other is in the digital space. So do you see like central banks quietly potentially switching out
*  from sort of gold to Bitcoin? Like naturally just doing, seeing the pattern that you're referring
*  to now, but more drastically into the future where there's a complete shift. If you line up the gold
*  community and the Bitcoin community next to each other, they'll agree on all the problems that they
*  see in the world, right? They'll actually agree on the solution that sound money is the solution.
*  Where they differentiate is the gold communities believes that is the analog application of sound
*  money, right? The physical gold, that is the solution. The Bitcoin community believes the
*  digital application of sound money, Bitcoin. Can you define sound money by the way? Sound money is
*  just outside the system and no one can create more of it. So nobody controls it. Scarcity is fundamental.
*  Exactly. Why is scarcity important in money? Well, I think scarcity just has this very high
*  correlation to value across all assets, not just money, right? Money happens to be the unit of
*  account that we use in terms of daily commerce. But whether it is, as we're seeing now, sneakers
*  or whatever it is, scarcity ultimately is that signal of value, I think. And that's just been
*  the way that humans derive value for literally thousands and thousands of years. Yeah, I gotta
*  say that's my view on life and love in general is scarcity is what makes it valuable. People talk
*  about immortality. I would like to be immortal, but it does seem that when you let go of the
*  finiteness of life, I feel like that meals and the experiences you have get devalued significantly.
*  The longer you live, the less value there are in infinity. If you live forever, I worry that all
*  the meaning will dissipate. And the same thing with love, a quick criticism of dating culture
*  and all that kind of stuff. I haven't had a shocking revelation that I've never been on a
*  Tinder date or any of those things. I believe that scarcity in dating and interaction intensifies the
*  value of when the interactions do happen. So when love does happen. So in that sense,
*  there's something magical about scarcity in the more subjective psychological social world
*  as well. And perhaps money is just another version of that. It's all about the stories
*  and ideas we tell ourselves. I think they're actually more interconnected than you're giving
*  it credit for, right? Which is what is money? Money is time, ultimately, right? The pursuit
*  of the acquisition of money, right? Of whether it's a currency or true money is because that
*  should give you more time. And so one of my favorite movies ever is, and it's funny because
*  Justin Timberlake is in it, is this movie In Time. I lose most people at that part. In time. In time.
*  And basically the premise of the movie is that everyone has a clock that is embedded into their
*  arm. And so if you go to work, you basically put your arm underneath when you leave and there's
*  time that's deposited into your clock. And if your clock ever hits all zeros, you're dead. You die on
*  the spot. And so there's a number of scenes where people are basically running to get to you. And
*  I give you a little bit more time so that you can get to work on Monday and then you work to acquire
*  time. And so basically time becomes this currency. But what becomes very fascinating about it is
*  there are sections in society where literally there's physical places. If you only have,
*  let's say 72 hours or less, you're allowed to go to section one. Section five, though,
*  is because you have years and years and years on your clock. And in this movie, everyone at the age
*  of 25 freezes from a biological aging standpoint. So everyone stays the same, but you may have lived
*  for a thousand years. And so what becomes so fascinating about it is that rich people have
*  time, poor people do not have time. And so in it, Justin Timberlake, the main character, at one point
*  essentially acquires a bunch of time and he's able to go to one of the higher levels. And now he's
*  attending all of these galas and poker nights and all that stuff. And one of the first things that
*  he learns is that in the lower end of society, everyone is running everywhere at all times in
*  the movie because time is so finite and it is so scarce. And so therefore, why would I walk down
*  the street? I must run down the street. In the highest level of society, no one runs anywhere.
*  And in fact, if you run, you are seen as lower class because wealth is time. And so that movie
*  it's got a ton of things that you can pull out of it. But to me is the perfect epitome of
*  money is time. And so when you start to think about the acquisition of money,
*  it goes to this whole idea of time billionaire. And I know that there's probably a lot of people
*  who have heard about this already, but if you think of a million seconds, it's about 11 days,
*  a billion seconds is 31 years. And so if I said to somebody, you have to switch lives with Warren
*  Buffett, would you do it? Some people would say, sure. That'd be their initial reaction. But you
*  got to have to be, you know, 92 years old. Is the money worth the lack of time? Most people would
*  say no, right? And there's this guy, Graham Duncan, who really articulated this well. And ultimately
*  what ends up happening is you realize time is more valuable than the money, but you acquire the
*  money to gain more time. And the reason it's valuable is because of the scarcity of time.
*  We currently have the biology, the physics means that this is not just the narrative we tell
*  ourselves. Maybe it is. I don't know, but it feels like pretty sure we're mortal. And in that sense,
*  the scarcity there gives value to time. It's fascinating to think about all the thought
*  experiments here of if that could actually be on the economy, if you can actually convert time
*  in a frictionless way to money. Well, and if you start to pull on this a little bit and say, okay,
*  a young person today, let's say somebody in their twenties has about 2 billion seconds left in their
*  life, right? Kind of 60 years, give or take based on life expectancy. They usually, until they start
*  to understand this concept, think of wealth in dollar terms, but dollars are being devalued.
*  And so, you know, a million dollars doesn't get you what it used to get, right? It's kind of an
*  old adage. And so what you're doing is you're pursuing something that ends up losing value.
*  And so it's the constant rat race. It's how do I constantly try to get more? How do I get more
*  dollars? How do I get more dollars? Because even if I say to myself, you know, I'm going to retire
*  when I get $100,000. When I get the $100,000, the $100,000 five years from now doesn't buy me what I
*  thought it did. So now I need 500,000 or 200,000 or a million or whatever the number is. And so
*  ultimately what ends up occurring is that the Bitcoin community and many people in kind of this
*  idea of sound money is you want to be able to acquire an asset that not only will hold the value
*  at the store of value over time, but it will actually appreciate over time. And so when you
*  look at something like Bitcoin against the dollar, against other types of assets, all of these assets
*  are down compared to Bitcoin, right? Now, some of that's just in the early days of kind of the
*  pricing of an asset, you go from very small to something much larger. But now what you start
*  to look at is, well, if you have a finite supply of something, what ends up happening is people
*  begin to value it more. And so in a world where dollars are infinite and other fiat currencies
*  are infinite, Bitcoin becomes very, very interesting, very special, and something that is very
*  aspirational. And so I think that's where you're starting to see people say, wait a second, this is
*  something where that finite secure store of value is essential to wealth generation and preservation
*  over a long period of time. And if Sam Harris is right, that free will is an illusion. This is
*  really interesting to think about. Maybe time is a kind of blockchain because you can't change
*  anything. And then the physical space time of the universe is a ledger. So maybe it won't be Bitcoin
*  that replaces gold. Maybe it'll be time once we crack open that in fact the universe is fully
*  deterministic. So maybe that's what like Eric Weinstein is afraid of. Once you figure out the
*  theories of everything of physics, we'll be able to then start trading, create a market out of like
*  the very fabric of reality. And that way break it. Well, if you look at infinite inflationary type
*  currencies, you can't do that, right? Because it constantly is losing value. When you look at a
*  finite asset, again, that has the provability of the actual finite element to it, ultimately,
*  the wealth is that marketplace. And so, you know, I always kind of try to highlight for people,
*  the top 55% of Americans understand something that the bottom 45% don't. They invest, right?
*  The bottom 45% consume, the top 55% invest. And that's why we have a wealth inequality gap. And
*  it continues to get wider and wider and wider is because the people who are holding the devaluing
*  assets and saving are watching their wealth be devalued away. And there's arguments and controversy
*  over how fast that's happening, but it's happening. The people who are holding the assets that have
*  any level of scarcity, right? Real estate may not be finite, but it's scarce, right? Art may not be
*  finite, but it's scarce. Gold may not be finite, but it's scarce. Those assets continue to appreciate
*  against the devaluing currency. And so when you then say, no, I have complete finite supply
*  with provability and this transparency around it, where everyone knows how much is there and
*  where it's going. Now, all of a sudden, you and I can transact back and forth that value.
*  And it is a representation of time, because what I can essentially do is if I gather or acquire
*  more of that wealth, I then can apply leverage to my life. I can use machines, humans, or some
*  other resources and basically now free up my time. Yeah. And it's not fundamental the way you are
*  trading time. Maybe it's a little bit indirect, but maybe not. So just cause I brought up Eric
*  and you're on Twitter, I'd love to hear your opinions. I talked to him a lot. He seems to
*  have stepped into the beautiful dance of human communication and the social dynamics that is the
*  Bitcoin cryptocurrency community. Do you have thoughts on gauge theoretic conceptualization
*  of the world or just Eric in general? He's got a lot of love in his heart and he's got grace in
*  the way he communicates, but he's also loves to play with ideas and seems to have touched a sensitive
*  point with the Bitcoin community. Is there anything you could say that's hopeful,
*  inspiring about that whole dynamic that went down? So I don't know all of the details,
*  but what I will say is I've listened to a number of his podcasts and him, and there's a whole bunch
*  of people like him. I basically put them in the bucket of they're an independent thinker who are
*  courageous enough to speak their truth, whatever that may be. They are humble enough to revisit
*  their ideas and say, I got this right. I got this wrong. Information changed. I'll change my mind.
*  It's obviously a sign of intelligence to be able to do that type of stuff. And I actually think
*  that one of the most scarce things in our society are those independent thinkers who are able to do
*  all this. Right? Speaking of scarcity. Yeah. And so to me, I put Eric and the whole host of other
*  people kind of, if you look at like the intellectual dark web is kind of a label that's
*  been used. They're actually some of the most important people in our society because they're
*  the people who are willing to stand up against the mass kind of thought process. They're willing to
*  talk about things that others may think are taboo, right? They're willing to change their mind,
*  which all of a sudden has become a bad thing rather than a good thing. And so when I see the
*  exploration of ideas in public, I actually think that those are the people who are most open to
*  the kind of vehement blowback as well. Right? Because that's part of what they're doing is that
*  they're eliciting, Hey, I'm going to throw an idea into the arena. If it doesn't get attacked,
*  they actually may be more nervous than if there is some level of, you know, kind of war of attrition,
*  if you will. And so what I've seen with a number of the people who have done this, everyone from
*  some of the best hedge fund managers and kind of money managers in the world, all the way to what
*  I'll consider some of the most intellectual people in the world is they play with these ideas and
*  they play with the ideas and they play with them and they put them and they all arrive at the same
*  conclusion. And sometimes it takes a month. Sometimes it takes years, but they arrive at
*  this Bitcoin thesis. And what's so interesting about it is it highlights something that many
*  people view as a bug, but I think people in the Bitcoin community view as a feature, which is
*  that community. And so what ends up happening is when you have something that is as ambitious as
*  creating a global reserve currency, doesn't mean he needs to unseat any of the existing ones,
*  but become the global reserve currency of the internet, right? This digital economy,
*  you need shepherds of it. And so just like a technology company wants to find those loyal
*  fans that are willing to go out and market and word of mouth and, and kind of not only promote it,
*  but also protect it. This technology that is this decentralized thing, which uses a financial
*  incentive in order to elicit the buy-in, not from a financial perspective, but from a mental energy
*  standpoint has built one of the most rabid, powerful and engaged communities on the internet.
*  And what ends up happening is those people have thought more about these ideas and actually
*  challenged those ideas more than anyone else in the world. And so I've got a lot of folks who will
*  just say, there's this guy, Marty bent, who will talk all the time about the Bitcoin critics
*  haven't done their homework in a lot of cases. So they show up and sometimes it's super intellectual,
*  lazy arguments. Sometimes it's actually very well thought out arguments, you know, on the counter to
*  the Bitcoin thesis. But ultimately what ends up happening is you're talking to somebody who's
*  an expert. I've been thinking about this for five, seven, eight, 10 years, right? They've
*  gone through every simulation you possibly can, and they show up with data examples and responses.
*  Now they're not always right, but they've just done the work. And so what I actually
*  like about folks like Eric and others is as they're kind of going through this journey,
*  they're incredibly smart, right? And they provide or they apply a lot of intellectual rigor to some
*  of these arguments. And so what it does is what does it do? It's a marketplace. It keeps people
*  honest. So let me sort of make a few comments. It's kind of interesting. So you're exactly right.
*  Maybe the blowback is part of the mechanism that actually develops these ideas and so on.
*  I do want to kind of speak to a little bit of the toxicity that I've experienced in the Bitcoin
*  community. I kind of see it, the Bitcoin community, I think you paint a really nice picture,
*  which I kind of see it as an immune system that protects against sort of the viruses that are bad
*  ideas. That said, the immune system can destroy a body, right? And the thing you mentioned about
*  Eric and maybe about myself and in general, just people exploring ideas is there is a Dunning-Kruger
*  effect, which is when you first start exploring ideas deeply, you have an overblown level of
*  confidence about like how much you understand. And that's actually the process about learning.
*  Then you realize you don't understand much. What I've noticed with the Bitcoin community is
*  they're not as patient with the basics of the Dunning-Kruger effect. If I step in
*  and make declarative statements about Bitcoin, I read a long time ago the white paper.
*  At the cursory level, I felt that I understand the technology. This is basic intuitions. I didn't
*  think about the social dynamics. I didn't think about any financial implications and a lot of the
*  deep, actually the ongoing innovations and all that kind of stuff. But I thought I understood
*  that technology. So I step in and make declarative statements. I think those are the first time you
*  say, okay, what's the role of Bitcoin in the world? You start thinking about it deeply,
*  and then you make statements. The toxicity that you get in those first few statements is really
*  out-putting to me. I'm somebody that tries to communicate love and live that with everything I
*  do. And there is a level of disrespect that I've experienced, not directly just observing others.
*  People have been mostly kind to me and I appreciate that. But if you're going to criticize me about my
*  exploration of ideas in Bitcoin, you have to also acknowledge that I'm a human being that got like
*  a PhD in stuff. I did some hard shit. It could be in farming or it could be in whatever. I've lived
*  life and I really thought deeply and I really care. I know a lot of shit. And it's possible that I
*  actually have a lot of ideas that you can learn from. Now, if it's agriculture, fine. Or if it's
*  artificial intelligence, fine. I know what I'm talking about about certain things. And I could
*  be wrong about a lot of things. And there's an exchange of ideas that makes that mechanism that
*  you talked about more efficient. Sometimes when the blowback is too strong too early on,
*  the development of ideas is just inefficient. And I'm not sure if there's a... The way it was
*  explained to me is that for so long, that community was bombarded with just bad ideas, criticisms.
*  They're just overly sensitive now to bullshit. They're triggered by statements. They've heard it
*  all before and they're like, oh, there they go again with the same old arguments. But that doesn't
*  mean that you have to sort of, I guess, develop patience and so on. Especially when you feel,
*  in my case, that the person is coming from a good place. I don't know if there's something you could
*  say that's positive about the future of this kind of overcoming this toxicity.
*  I think there's a couple of trends that are all kind of coalescing here in these types of
*  experiences. So one is when you look at a community, there's always a spectrum in terms of
*  there's some people who over index on kindness and stupidity. And there's some people who over
*  index on intelligence and basically just being an asshole. And then you get everyone in between. And
*  so naturally, as we know, the extremist ends of any community end up being the loudest usually.
*  The second thing is there is from the outsider view, at the beginning of the exploration of
*  ideas, it's very much a learning process. I don't know if I understand this or not, but here's ideas
*  A, B, and C. From the internal perspective, there's a trillion dollars of value at stake
*  and we must protect it with our lives. The truth probably somewhere in between there.
*  Again, the world's not black and white. There's this kind of more gray area that I think actually
*  is where most people exist. The other thing that's at play here is I think the Bitcoin community
*  understands the internet and internet culture and narratives better than almost anyone. And so you
*  see this with the complete destruction of narratives with memes and just the visceral
*  reaction and the use of things like Reddit and Twitter and YouTube, podcasts, just areas where
*  I think a lot about if you are an upstart and you are going to go challenge the most well-respected
*  elite establishment institutions in the world, if you walk in in a suit and tie and you say,
*  I'm here to debate you with ideas, you're going to get your clock cleaned because they're going
*  to trot out their lawyers, their regulators, their lobbyists, all this stuff. If you instead say,
*  I'm going to meme you to death on the internet and I'm going to control the public narrative.
*  You've shifted the power, the asymmetry of power is more symmetrical now.
*  It's the ultimate insurgency. If you bring it back to the battlefield.
*  Yes. And so when you think about this, you have to lean into the advantage that you have.
*  And so what ends up happening is you and I would absolutely lose it if we saw JP Morgan
*  or Goldman Sachs with the Federal Reserve start tweeting memes. It would almost be the validation
*  that would give to the medium and the even playing field that it would provide would pull
*  these establishments down to the level of what is this upstart. But now what you're starting to see
*  is that the Bitcoin community, even though there's some level of toxicity at times, even though
*  there's this visceral reaction, sometimes there's even what I would call bullying or kind of outward
*  projection of things. Even though it may be a small percentage, it'll happen every once in a while.
*  What they do understand though is that these establishments are made up of humans.
*  And what you can actually do, one of the best ways to pick apart an institution is to recruit
*  from inside of them one by one. And so what you're starting to see now is,
*  I get the messages on Twitter and LinkedIn all the time. Hey, I'm a banker by trade,
*  but I'm a Bitcoiner at heart. Right? And so what you're doing is you're essentially infiltrating
*  the organizations, not in physical population, but with the ideas and with the philosophies.
*  Banker in the streets, Bitcoiner in the sheets. I like it. With that said, in terms of shitposting
*  and memes, I gotta say, like bring it on because I believe in terms of asymmetry of power, I believe
*  that love will save the world, not memes, or at least good vibe memes as opposed to
*  shitposting. It's an interesting battleground though. It's an interesting battleground to think about.
*  The other thing I would say too is one of the elements that's always kind of funny to me is
*  how much of the entertainment is love? Right? So when you start to think about how many of the
*  memes that are posted, for example, are for outsiders versus insiders. Laser eyes, right?
*  Which seems absolutely ridiculous, elementary, and frankly, beneath anyone in any level of
*  power or influence in the world, somehow has congressmen and senators who have done it.
*  They're not trying to convince their colleagues in elected positions to become Bitcoiners.
*  They're speaking directly internally to the Bitcoin community.
*  Yeah. There's some sense in which yes, memes is love. Even if you're hearing Bitcoin is love,
*  they're trying to convert me.
*  The one that you have to laugh at, right? Probably my favorite one out of all of it is I've seen on
*  multiple occasions, Mark Cuban a couple of years ago, Kevin O'Leary, wealthy people,
*  billionaires, et cetera. And you have people on anonymous accounts who who knows who they are,
*  telling them, have fun staying poor. It's just, again, part of a community. And I think it's a
*  feature, not a bug. There's bad aspects to it at times, but I do think it's a net positive.
*  Just like the immune system. It does a lot of crappy stuff, but overall, it's a major net
*  positive. Maybe this is a bit of a personal question for me, just out of my own curiosity.
*  But I've talked to Ray Dalio a few times. So Ray Dalio, I think, was one of those people that took
*  that journey, the Bitcoin journey. Do you have thoughts about him specifically, about that whole
*  world and about the journey maybe of others that are going through the same process? Because Ray is,
*  at least from my perspective, I'm a bit of an outsider. He's one of the most
*  insightful and deep thinkers about investment, about finance, about economics in general,
*  actually about life. So it's interesting to see him go on that journey. Do you have something
*  to comment about Ray or just those kinds of people in general? So if we look at what I'll
*  just consider the legends of Wall Street in general, there's no denying that they're incredibly
*  intelligent. There's no denying that actually, especially in the hedge fund world, they're some
*  of the most open-minded people in terms of they're willing to change their mind when they get new
*  information. There's no doubt that they are historians in the sense of having studied
*  financial markets and cycles over time. And also one of the things that I really respect about all
*  those guys is almost all of them are willing to put ideas out via various writings that they do
*  and accept the public criticism, right? Whether it's Howard Marks, Ray or others,
*  they will put this stuff out in public. And sure, there's a lot of people who
*  are supportive and kind of are part of a fan base, if you will. But there's a lot of people
*  who also think that sometimes they say stupid things. And so putting that out takes kind of
*  courage, right? I think Ray's actually the most fascinating though, out of all of these kind of
*  legends of Wall Street in that he understands debt cycles. He understands currencies. He,
*  for a while now, has been all over and famously said, you know, cash is trash,
*  investable assets, right? He just, he kind of like just knew all of it. And for a long time,
*  Bitcoiners have said, Ray, you understand the Bitcoin argument, you're just missing the last
*  part, which is Bitcoin's the solution, right? And so he was gold and some other ideas. But
*  I think that he's a perfect example of when you are part of the establishment, people view you in
*  a very static way as the leader of a part of establishment. But whether it's Bill Gates,
*  Ray Dalio or somebody else, each one of these people were innovators and challengers to a system.
*  They were upstarts at one point. And so it's kind of this idea that like, if you live long enough,
*  you eventually become the man, right? And so, you know, Gates is a good example, right? Warren
*  Buffett is a good example. Ray Dalio is a good example, et cetera. And so you have to give credit,
*  I think, to Dalio in the sense of he kept an open mind about all of this and more so than many of
*  his peers has continued to do the work and come around to this idea. And now I don't want to know
*  if I wanted to say that he's a Bitcoin proponent as much as he believes it is one of, you know,
*  a portion of assets that can be a solution. And so to me, when you start to convince those types
*  of people, when it's, you know, Paul Tudor Jones, Stanley Druckenmiller, Ray Dalio, Howard Marks,
*  now even writing about it saying, Hey, you know, I was anti Bitcoin and put a ton of intellectual
*  rigor into it. But thank God, my son bought a bunch of our family, right? And, and kind of
*  we've had exposure to it. I think what it does is more than anything, it's not going to convince
*  somebody to go and, you know, take it seriously, or go ahead and make an allocation. It reduces
*  career risk. And so if all of a sudden, when Paul Tudor Jones and Stanley Druckenmiller come out
*  and say, Hey, I own Bitcoin. And here's why every other investor on Wall Street now can say to an
*  investment committee, well, it's good enough for Paul Tudor Jones. It's good enough for Stanley
*  Druckenmiller. And so I think that it's very interesting because Ray doesn't just represent
*  Wall Street. I think Ray in some weird way represents this like macro economic investor.
*  And so some of those are in hedge funds. And some of those people would be like CIOs at
*  organizations. Some of them would be at corporations. And some of them are just
*  kind of retail investors. And so you can see this kind of inflection point throughout the adoption
*  of Bitcoin, right? There was infrastructure that got built. Okay, that kind of led to more adoption.
*  There was certain individuals, right? Usually they were kind of technology oriented,
*  entrepreneurial billionaires, they would buy it and come out and say it, okay, that led to inflection
*  points. You started to have some of these kind of Wall Street legends come out, sort of financial
*  institutions started to now you're seeing corporations start to do it, right? Eventually,
*  there's gonna be a central bank that does it. And so you kind of walk through that line. And what
*  you understand is like, it's the same thing every time. It's just somebody new, right? That path,
*  right? That Bitcoiners journey, if you will. And I think that that is almost the beauty of it is,
*  if you short circuit the journey, it's almost like somebody doesn't appreciate it, right? If you take,
*  let's say somebody who's a young kid, and you just give them a bunch of money, and they didn't have
*  to work hard for it. They don't really appreciate it. And Ray, Ray actually has a book principles,
*  right? And he talks about the hero's journey. So he's like living in some sense in terms of,
*  you know, thinking about digital currency in general, like digital finance. It's one of the
*  big transitions, transformations of our world, in some sense, it's not just about money.
*  Or you could argue that money is everything. I mean, it's like, money isn't just the narrow
*  definition of money. Money is really everything. And so where you could argue that sort of
*  cryptocurrency is like the base layer of this transformation to the digital space and everything
*  else would just be built on top of it. I use a different word that I think is kind of closer
*  to your world, which is it's ultimately automation. And what I mean by that is,
*  you know, before 1970 or 1980, all the assets were analog. And so when you have analog assets,
*  physical stock certificates, physical bonds, right physical D dual home, you have to physically
*  exchange them. When we wanted to increase transactions and increase kind of global
*  finance and access, we took those physical assets and we created electronic QCIP assets.
*  So now we have in centralized databases, kind of a file represents the asset that's sitting
*  somewhere in custody. And you and I can transact them a little bit easier, but still centralized.
*  There's still some bureaucracy and you know, maybe it takes two days to transact rather than
*  actually mailing it across the other world. Now what we're seeing is a transition from those
*  electronic QCIP to these digital assets. And so if you look at again, just let's say money or
*  currency, every currency in the world is going to be digital. You're going to have a digital dollar,
*  a digital Euro, yen, RMB, you're going to have decentralized kind of open source money like Bitcoin.
*  You're also going to have private currencies like Facebook's attempt at Diem. And there will be
*  others that will try to do this. And so when you get everything digital, right, and I think that's
*  the kind of the first step that everyone focuses on the competition at the technology layer
*  essentially goes away. You get some level of feature parity and sure there's bells and whistles
*  on each kind of implementation of a digital currency. But at the end of the day, the technology
*  is relatively the same. And ultimately what it will do is it will facilitate the adoption of
*  digital wallets. So you have to have a digital wallet regardless of what digital currency you
*  have. Same with me, same with everybody else in the world. But what it does do is when you
*  push away and reduce the friction of competition at the technology layer, it moves the competition
*  to the monetary policy layer. And so when you get to that layer, now it becomes interesting because
*  all of the currencies are the same except for this one right now. And maybe there will be others in
*  the future. But for sure Bitcoin today and people may try to replicate in a private manner or
*  something, but Bitcoin is kind of the only finite scarce digital money. And so when you then have
*  that pretty big difference in that competition at the monetary policy layer, it's actually not
*  going to matter where you get paid. And what I mean by that is you and I both live in a
*  single currency environment. I get paid in dollars. I historically have saved in dollars.
*  All of the assets in my life are denominated in dollars and I owe my debts in dollars,
*  whether it's taxes or in the private market. And I don't have to worry about foreign currencies.
*  I don't exchange anything. The only time I would ever think about another currency is if I'm going
*  to another country in their single currency environment. And in order to change or exchange
*  my currency, I go to the bank or I go get ripped off at the airport. Those are my two options.
*  So it's high friction to change between currencies. When the competition of technology is kind of
*  innovated away, now I can get paid in dollars, these digital dollars, and with a click of a
*  button, switch into any other currency in the world. And so what ultimately happens is value
*  and liquidity is going to coalesce around the best monetary policy. And so you get in this very weird
*  world where even if the United States says, hey, you're going to get paid in dollars, you have to
*  pay your taxes in dollars, you're going to start to see people operate in a multi-currency environment
*  where they say, okay, I got paid my digital dollar, click a button, I save in Bitcoin,
*  it stays there, protects or grows my purchasing power. Oh, I need to pay my taxes. Let me switch
*  back into dollars with click of a button and pay. When you go to a multi-currency world,
*  it's not just about currency. It's now multi-asset world, because not only is the currency digitized,
*  but that same technology is used to digitize stocks, bonds and commodities as well.
*  And so today we live in a very fragmented financial world where basically I have a brokerage
*  account, I have a bank account, I may have an alternative asset account, etc. When I can put
*  all those assets in a single digital wallet, and I can then go from asset to asset without having
*  to go back to a single unit of account. Very frictionless going from asset to asset.
*  Yeah. So now what you end up doing is you start to open up the possibility for machine to machine
*  transactions. So today, if you and I write software code for two machines to transact with each other,
*  they can't transact physical currency. And in many cases, they can't actually transact the
*  electronic QCIP currencies or assets either because there's too long of a settlement time.
*  So you can't get true automation. So the whole idea of the car is going to drive over a strip
*  in the road and it's going to pay the toll. Well, that can't happen right now because
*  a load of the transaction won't go through. And so I always joke that in an automated world,
*  it's like a CD-ROM, but we're trying to cassette player assets and put it in the CD-ROM. It's just
*  incompatible technology. Reference is nobody understands at this point. By the way,
*  you need to update your reference. I probably do. It's like taking a CD-ROM,
*  trying to put an MP3 player into a streaming. But I think that the reason why that becomes
*  really interesting is when you start to create these digital assets, now you open up the world
*  of possibilities. So when new technology is created, you can do two things. You can either
*  create new things the world's never seen before, or you can use it to improve the old world.
*  Most people, because it's the easiest thing to think about, want to improve the old world.
*  So an equivalent of this would be when the internet came along, a media company that had
*  newspapers would say, hey, we should take a PDF of the newspaper and we should put it on a website.
*  And now anyone in the world can go to this website and they can read the newspaper today.
*  That was valuable, but it missed out on the ability to change headlines, to test,
*  to put multimedia, to distribute it differently, to do all kinds of things that today we understand
*  the internet really empowered. And so what I think we're about to watch happen is we're going to
*  digitize the assets, we're going to put them all into these digital wallets, you're going to get
*  automated technologies where machines can now transact with each other. And we're going to do
*  simple things like, why do we pay people once every two weeks? Why don't we just pay them at
*  the end of every day? Or why don't I literally stream payments to you on an hour by hour basis
*  based on the work you do? It would solve incredible economic issues in our country and in countries
*  around the world. But historically businesses can't do this because the technology problem,
*  they can't keep track of it all. How do they pay everyone every day? How do they pay everyone
*  every hour? Like you just can't do it. Yeah. It's funny. The, the, the vision of the future
*  you're painting, it's kind of an exciting one and it's almost makes me sad looking into the future
*  when we'll look back at this time. It's like, is how incredibly inefficient financial transactions
*  were like the transaction of value of any kind, like how like what to pay each other,
*  like there has to like processes, there's like payroll and all this kind of just the,
*  the entirety of the transactions is just like painful. Well, almost all transactions are painful
*  and even, and the companies that innovate to make the transactions a little bit more
*  frictionless, like Amazon with the one click purchase button, like went out huge,
*  but even that's really painful. There's actually a really interesting, especially then you start
*  to move that into the space of data. There's a lot of people thinking about privacy and data and like,
*  can we put, can we like convert data into like money so that you can pay for how much you reveal
*  to the companies about your own private data that can then be used to assign value to you. So you
*  can use a service for free if you hand over the data, but there's like explicit transaction going
*  on. So you can empower all those kinds of things that will just like fundamentally change our world.
*  That's really, really, really exciting. One of the most interesting things to me is I invested in a
*  company called Bridget. And what they told me was they said $8 billion was paid to the top four
*  banks last year on overdraft fees. So literally they took $8 billion from people who didn't have
*  money in their bank account. Right? And so when you dig into why is that a lot of times it's not
*  that the people don't have the money, it's actually a mismatch of the payments. So what ends up
*  happening is you get paid on the 1st and the 15th, but on the 12th, your Netflix bill hits.
*  On the 13th, you went grocery shopping and on the 14th, your car payments hit you overdraft. And then
*  on the 15th, you actually get the check and then you're able to pay not only the overdraft, but for
*  the expenses that you have. And so something as simple as just getting paid at the end of every
*  day immediately would eliminate some big percentage of those $8 billion of value that flows to
*  large institutions on overdraft fees. Yeah. And also, I mean, this whole process with overdraft
*  fees and just many of the financial transactions we have to live through today forces many of us
*  to be like accountants, like to understand the different mechanism of financial movement of
*  money as opposed to you, which is what we want to do as human beings operating in a higher layers
*  of like providing services for others of like following your passions and like working for
*  others, like doing cool shit or, or, you know, basically providing value, exchanging value in
*  the world and not thinking about the money. The money takes care of itself and then you see the
*  results of it. So you're, you're able to think in terms of money, but not have to know how the,
*  like the accounting works. Automation simply frees humans up to do more creative work. Yeah. Right.
*  Like that, like that's it. Yeah. And what we use the term, which is why you use the term automation,
*  which I think is kind of brilliant reframing of all of this. Yeah. Cause ultimately digital
*  technologies are merely the conduit to usher us into that world. And I think the most fascinating
*  part of this entire industry is people who are trying to figure out now that we're going to have
*  these digital technologies, how do we usher in that automated world faster? And so there's people
*  who are building all kinds of incredible things, right? There's literally some technologies where
*  you can stream for paying for consumption of content. Yeah. Right. There's, I saw somebody
*  recently who they basically said, Hey, I have created something, but it's not going to be
*  released until everyone on almost like a go fund me type situation pays for it in combination.
*  Then it gets unlocked. And so when you start to think about this, it's not only innovation on the
*  technology front, it's innovation around the way that we form capital. It's the way that we
*  organize resources. It's the way that we build companies. It's the business models, right? It's
*  the application of those technologies. All that stuff starts to change and go back to 20, uh,
*  2007 is when the iPhone came out. Uber wasn't possible. Ramsey's going to line like all these
*  companies that weren't possible before when the digital technologies are kind of adopted on a
*  global scale. I think that we all, myself included, drastically underestimate how fast and how big
*  innovation can be. Uh, cause it's just hard, right? Like, like we like to think linearly and
*  that's not how the world works. Yeah. I do find it kind of interesting. Uh, it is NFT based, but, uh,
*  I don't think it has to be this, uh, this idea of, I think big clout it's called or whatever,
*  uh, the idea of sort of investing in individuals. It makes me immediately think about investing in
*  ideas. So even just the words you speak having value and sort of, if you have a frictionless,
*  like automated financial system, then you could do a bunch of interesting things about
*  what it means to add value to the world. I mean, I don't know if bit cloud is currently an efficient
*  representation of that. Um, but I am truly happy that however that thing works, I'm just one notch
*  above Vladimir Putin, which is one of the, that's like one of the bucket list items for me to, to
*  have a list where I'm one notch above Putin. Well, what I think you're talking about here is important
*  because there's a historical examples. You could invest in a patent in some situations. You could
*  invest in an organization that has an idea, right? So these are super inefficient given kind of the,
*  the vision that you're painting in terms of like investing directly in an idea in a super efficient
*  automated fashion. But that's how the technology evolution works, right? Is it's really hard to do
*  it first and then slowly kind of becomes easier and easier as technology, uh, is more prevalent.
*  The other thing that I think is interesting is this whole idea of investing in people.
*  If you really think about the origination of that is I would hire somebody, right? I pay
*  you money and then you're going to create production, but I take the lion's share and
*  you don't. Now there's things like, uh, these, uh, ISAs, these income sharing agreements where
*  basically I will educate you on something, train you on something. Uh, I'll put up capital, right?
*  And then over time you'll pay me back plus profits as some version. Eventually, I don't know what it
*  looks like, but being able to get upside in somebody's success for having risk capital early on
*  doesn't seem that far off. You see it in professional sports, you see it in, you know,
*  a lot of these things. And so I just think that a lot of, um, the focus right now is on the
*  technology, but ultimately these are ideas that are very old and have had lots of success and
*  traction. And we're just merely standing in the way of the evolution of these ideas with new
*  technology. And so, uh, it's easy to get caught up in the technology, but when you really zoom out
*  and look at it from the ideological standpoint and kind of the progress of humanity, it's a
*  foregone conclusion. This stuff's going to happen. It's just how I think the world is waiting. And
*  some of us are trying to create that future world, which is like, what are the applications of this
*  technology that will transform the world? And then, you know, I hate the term, but killer apps, like
*  cool ideas that are implemented effectively at scale that transform the world. And there's been,
*  um, there's been a lot of different ideas popping up, like the, there's a lot of ideas about social
*  networks that are built on top of the technology and all that kind of stuff. So, but let me actually
*  drag us back down to something basic. If a person wanted to buy Bitcoin, store Bitcoin,
*  how do they actually do it? Yeah. So there's a couple of different ways to kind of, uh, acquire
*  Bitcoin. And in every way you've got to exchange some form of value for Bitcoin, right? Which is
*  part of why it has values because you're giving up value. So, um, in one way is to exchange, uh,
*  energy and computational power for Bitcoin. So you can mine it. You can literally take, uh,
*  computer power that you have, you can rent it to the network, uh, and run that software,
*  and then it will pay you a portion of the kind of daily revenue, uh, off that system.
*  You can acquire Bitcoin in exchange for your power, uh, and your computational, um, kind of
*  contribution. And that's the fundamental principle behind Bitcoin is the proof of work. So I got a
*  hundred bucks, uh, like I use cash app, uh, the, you know, they, uh, there's Coinbase, there's all
*  these exchanges. Like how do I convert my a hundred dollars to, uh, to Bitcoin? Is there
*  something disclaimer? This is not financial advice and this is just us talking and it's just your
*  opinions. This do not use this to invest, um, or take us financial expertise. That said, uh, like,
*  is there something you recommend that's an easy entry point for somebody that's like, hmm, I wonder
*  if I can convert this a hundred dollars into whatever amount of Bitcoin, what do you recommend?
*  What are the options? So there's a lot of options. Uh, I'm heavily biased. I went out and I scoured
*  the market, looked at all of them. Uh, I've invested a lot of money in a company called BlockFi
*  that basically, um, basically has financial products for crypto investors. So you can go,
*  you can take dollars or other currency you have, you can convert it through an exchange. Uh, you
*  can leave it on, uh, these interest bearing accounts. You can earn interest just like you
*  would earn in a traditional account, but higher levels of interest. Cause it's this new thing.
*  Or you can withdraw it and you can put it into cold storage on a hardware device. You can leave
*  it in a software wallet. There's kind of all these storage options. Uh, so BlockFi is kind of the one
*  that I'm biased towards because I, so BlockFi is a, is a Bitcoin only, or is it an exchange
*  with other crypto? It's got a bunch of different ones. Yeah. They basically are agnostic to what
*  it is. Um, but they provide a kind of financial, you know, products to crypto investors.
*  Okay. So you mentioned a few interesting ideas that'd be nice for people who will not be familiar
*  with it. Uh, cold storage, hot storage. Uh, what does that mean? So like I go to a website and I
*  convert dollars to Bitcoin. That's a kind of storage. That's like online banking.
*  Right. What else is there? So there's a couple of different things that you can do, right? And
*  let's use the legacy system as kind of an example. So if I want to, um, get currency and I put in my
*  bank account, it sits there. I have to trust that the bank doesn't go under, nobody steals it, all
*  this kind of stuff. There's insurance for it, right? There's all these kinds of benefits in the legacy
*  system, uh, to make sure that as long as I don't have, you know, millions and millions of dollars
*  there, I'm going to be protected pretty much if anything happens through FDIC insurance.
*  If I want to do that, I'm taking that counterparty risk though. So it's mitigated, but there's still
*  counterparty risk. I'm, I'm counting on that bank, but it is easier to move it around, right? If all
*  of a sudden you call me up and say, Hey, send me some money. I can press a couple of buttons on my
*  computer and it'll send it to you. If I want deeper level of security, I can go and I can get the
*  physical dollars and I can go and I can, you know, put it under my mattress, right? And I can say,
*  you know what? It's not going to be as easy to send it to you immediately, but if I really want to,
*  I can go underneath my mattress pretty quickly. I can grab it. I can get it back to the bank and
*  then I can send you the money. The third thing I could do is I could basically take those physical
*  dollars out of the bank and I could go and I could go put it literally, uh, you know, in a vault
*  somewhere that I don't have control over that's behind 10 passwords, uh, and biometric scanning.
*  And like, it's really difficult to even get to it. Right. So if you can almost look at it, it's like
*  there's three stages of security that you could have in the traditional world. The same thing is
*  true in Bitcoin. So you could buy Bitcoin on any exchange. You can do it on block five,
*  but she also can do it on places like Coinbase, Gemini, Kraken, et cetera. Also cash app cash app.
*  You can do it. I think, I think there's still sponsoring this box. Yes. I'm not biased at all.
*  So once you get Bitcoin on any of these venues, uh, you can leave it there on that venue. Now
*  the trade off is you're taking counterparty risk. So somebody else is responsible for the security
*  and the protection of it. Uh, in many cases, big, well-known companies who have billions and
*  billions of dollars of assets, they have higher levels of security. That's why they're well known.
*  That's why people trust them, whatever. But you are taking counterparty risk.
*  It is easier to quickly send to somebody. So the, so the trade off of like ease of use, uh,
*  but counterparty risk is big. And in the Bitcoin community specifically, there's a huge thing of,
*  they really, really advocate for not leaving the Bitcoin there right for the obvious counterparty.
*  The second thing you can do is you can basically get it off of an exchange and you can put it in
*  some level of kind of what I'll call a second layer of storage. That second layer of storage
*  could be a hardware device that you can quickly just grab off your desk and plug into your computer
*  and immediately use. That's what they call like a hardware wallet, hardware wallet. Yep. Or you can
*  have some sort of software wallet, right? Where it's not on an exchange, but there is some level of,
*  uh, in between, between the hardware wallet and the exchange and the software wallet,
*  but the software wallet is connected to the internet. Yeah. And so, um, if you kind of
*  think of it as like the exchange software wallet, hardware wallet, and then there's something called
*  deep storage or cold storage. Um, and this is, you know, literally there was a company, uh,
*  called Zappo that, uh, would put things in deep cold storage and it was literally buried in a
*  mountain. Right? So like the odds that somebody's physically going to go there, there's armed guards,
*  there's, you know, kind of all this type of stuff. Uh, but again, you're taking some level of
*  counterparty risk because they have your Bitcoin. And so the saying or the phrase, uh, is not your
*  keys, not your coins. Uh, or as, uh, my buddy, Isaiah Jackson came up with these said, uh, uh,
*  not your keys, not your cheese, right? In terms of, uh, uh, sovereignty is important, right? And
*  ultimately this goes back to kind of the beginning of our conversation around Bitcoin's ethos,
*  sovereignty, right? Giving the power back to people. You don't have to rely on, uh, this
*  infrastructure in order to be able to participate in this monetary, uh, kind of economy, which you
*  are now able to do as you're able to use digital sound money, you're able to keep control of it.
*  You and you alone are responsible for it. So the idea of personal responsibility, um, and then also
*  you and you alone make the decisions as to whether you hold onto it or you use it without censorship,
*  right? No one can tell you what you can do with it or can't do with it. And so the purchase and
*  the storage, um, what I find is, uh, depending on who you are, there's varying, uh, degrees of, uh,
*  kind of concern, uh, or, uh, decisions that get made there. And a lot of it comes down to personal
*  preference. The Bitcoin community though, absolutely will overoptimize for, uh, sovereignty and, uh,
*  kind of hardware or cold storage. I wonder if you can sort of comment on that because you have, uh,
*  both a sort of a cash app and a block fine coin base. Like you can store it there. You can, uh,
*  purchase and trade it there and store it there and so on. But ultimately they're saying you want to,
*  you know, keep some of it there, but you want to move it to the hardware wallet and the cold
*  storage of the hardware wallet is like, you can disconnect it from the computer because ultimately
*  stuff that's connected to the internet can be compromised, can be controlled by governments
*  and other parties and so on. What are your thoughts about sort of practically speaking for maybe
*  like a regular citizen? What's, what should be the role of the hardware wallet in their lives?
*  Yeah. So at the highest level, I just think that like learning about it is important, right? So even
*  if you only have $5 equivalent of Bitcoin going and understanding, here's how it works. Here's
*  why it's important. Here's how I would actually withdraw from an exchange under the hardware
*  wallet. Like that alone, just as an intellectual exercise is a worthwhile pursuit. I think people
*  should go do that. Actually go through the process of the steps so you feel like you can, you can do
*  it. Yeah. Yeah. It's kind of like if I said to you, you know, Hey, we're going to go buy an asset and
*  you never went and you looked at it. You never went and, uh, you know, made a decision like,
*  sure, maybe I did it or I didn't do it, but like you didn't actually experience it. Right. And so
*  I think that that's an important part. The second thing is, uh, each person is different from a,
*  how they view this asset. So there are some people who are speculating, right? There's three use
*  cases for Bitcoin. There's store value, medium of exchange and speculation. And the people who are
*  speculating, they can't put it in deep cold storage because they need to be able to trade it.
*  So what ends up happening is they fall in the bucket of like high risk, high reward.
*  They're trying to trade. They're trying to do all these things and sure, maybe there are
*  profits that they can generate if they're good at it, but also they're introducing a lot of risk.
*  And so that person is very different than the person who says, Hey, you know, I bought one
*  Bitcoin and I'm going to save it for my child. Right. And I'm going to give it to them on their
*  18th birthday. Yeah. And so when you start to look at this, what you end up saying is,
*  what are you actually purchasing this for? Kind of like, why are you doing it?
*  And then what's your time horizon? And what ends up happening is more and more people in the Bitcoin
*  community have longer time horizons. One of the advantages to this community, right? If you look
*  at the on-chain metrics, 60% of Bitcoin haven't moved from the digital wallet in which they sit
*  in the last 12 months. So even though it's appreciated hundreds of percent on the upside,
*  there's been lots of volatility, a 50% drop in a single day in terms of the U S dollar price
*  still doesn't move. And so these are the kind of the long-term holders, right? These are the,
*  the iron fist or as recently has become popular, the diamond hands, right?
*  Diamond hands. They're just, they're not going anywhere. And so I think that those people are
*  much more likely to not have their Bitcoin on exchanges or in software walls. They've got it
*  in some sort of like highly secure environment. And what, and one in which they have deep sovereignty
*  or kind of a prevalent sovereignty. And the reason for that is because they have that long
*  time horizon. They don't want to be kind of convicted around Bitcoin, sound money, macro
*  environment, all stuff. And then they make a mistake because they trusted, you know, ABCD
*  company and that counterparty risk ends up actually being fatal or detrimental.
*  So again, this is not financial advice disclaimer, but let me ask. So in terms of investment advice
*  on Bitcoin, so you see Bitcoin is potentially not just the thing that you speculate over,
*  like buy and sell, buy and sell, buy and sell, but it's something that you can just buy only.
*  And I believe I've heard that you own quite a large percentage of your wealth in Bitcoin,
*  and you're basically buying only and storing long-term. So that's something that's a legitimate
*  way to approach Bitcoin in your recommendation. Go to other cultures. So if we remove ourselves
*  from the Western world culture of investing in gamification of financial markets and the
*  financialization of everything, let's say we go to the culture of India for hundreds, if not
*  thousands of years, families basically saved their wealth in gold and in jewelry and in these hard
*  assets with the expectation to pass it on to the next generation. And so it would be blasphemous
*  to sell the family's gold in that culture. Your great grandfather gave it to your grandfather,
*  your grandfather gave it to your father, your father gave it to you. And so in that culture,
*  the long-term kind of holding is the default. I think that what Bitcoin has presented again
*  is a digital application of the exact same thing, which is that while everything else in the world
*  is being devalued, that is denominated in a currency that is being inflated away,
*  whether it's quickly or not, this finite supply, this scarce asset ends up accruing more and more
*  value over time. And so I think that for me personally, I've got over 95% of my net worth
*  that's in this. Over 95% of your net worth. There's two important caveats to this. One is,
*  I didn't buy some Bitcoin in 2011 or 12, right? And then all of a sudden it appreciated a bunch
*  and it grew into that. But from a cost basis perspective, I put a hundred dollars and now
*  it's a ton of money. Instead, what I did was I basically in 2018 saw Bitcoin from a US dollar
*  price standpoint was falling and falling and falling. And in December of 2018, I said,
*  take about 50% of my net worth and convert it from dollar denominated assets into Bitcoin. So it was
*  a very kind of intentional decision with a very specific view on the world as to like why I was
*  doing it. I then essentially just let it sit there, grow whatever, until the spring of 2020.
*  And when I saw the government step in and start to say, Hey, we're going to really be aggressive
*  in terms of interest rate manipulation and quantitative easing. I then decided to go ahead
*  and take basically the remainder and start to convert it as well. And so we became very
*  aggressive in doing that. And so the way that I look at it is that's actually my savings,
*  right? And so in some weird way, if I said to you, what's the dollar worth, you'd say, well,
*  a $1 bill is worth $1, right? Bitcoin to me, I denominate my wealth in Bitcoin. So I think of
*  one Bitcoin is worth one Bitcoin, not one Bitcoin is worth 60,000 or 55,000 or 70,000, right? I
*  denominate everything in Bitcoin. When I make a purchase in my head, I'm calculating how much
*  Bitcoin am I spending right now? Right? Well, guess what happens when you have a devaluing
*  currency as the denominator. Doesn't matter, right? Like your financial incentivize to spend or
*  invest, right? To consume. When you have an appreciating currency, all of a sudden you
*  become much less consumptive in your behavior because you're actually trading off future
*  purchasing power for the consumption today. It's fascinating to think that if,
*  if when you move about this world, you think in Bitcoin, you behave differently is if you think
*  in dollars, that's really fascinating. People, but here's the thing is the last 50 years or so
*  is actually the outlier in history. Most people used to think this way. Yeah. It's only when a
*  fiat currency got introduced that one argument, the positive argument or perspective is there was
*  an explosion in growth, but really it's because there was a financial incentive to consume.
*  Yeah. Right. And there's nobody better in the world than the United States at consuming and
*  we consume anything and everything. And if you want to see a great example, look at how big the
*  Coca-Cola's are at McDonald's. You go to other places, they don't serve them that big. And so
*  the other example, there were the negative argument is we have to consume because if not,
*  you end up being the bottom 45% of Americans that held no investable assets and actually are just
*  having their wealth devalued away. So holding the dollars end up being a very bad economic decision.
*  And so when you then switch to this sound money, you say, wait a second, why would I, if today I
*  can trade one Bitcoin back in October of last year, one Bitcoin for 10,000 US dollars, why would
*  I spend that if at some point in the future, whether it's a month from now or 10 years from now,
*  I could trade it for something much, much more than that. You just become much more of a
*  anti-consumer and much more of a long-term thinker. Yeah. From the individual perspective,
*  that's pretty powerful. I wonder, I mean, I think that's an interesting debate. What's
*  better for the long-term economy? No, better for the growth of the civilization because capitalism
*  is fascinating. It seems to, it seems to work pretty well. There's this kind of like Eric
*  Weinstein says that one of the problems is for the past several decades, this whole economy,
*  society is built on the idea that we have to keep growing. It depends on that idea.
*  And it's a good question whether that's going to result in huge problems or if like a college
*  student on a deadline, the dependence on growth will mean that we'll have to grow. Like the fear
*  of death will force us to grow. But I think there's a false equivalency between,
*  we're dependent on growth and then if the world was denominated and sound money, we don't grow.
*  What I think ends up happening is we remove a lot of the society's bullshit. Because right now,
*  when the money is free or the currency is free, you can come up with all kinds of crazy stuff and
*  people will give it to you. When all of a sudden it's really, really valued by the population.
*  The decisions are better. Yeah. You have to provide real value in the goods and services
*  you provide in order to get them to give it to you. There's less room for corruption, less room
*  for manipulation. That's not actually productive. Yeah, definitely. So you said you moved a lot of
*  your investment into Bitcoin. Is there, when you look, so you're a special human being in many ways.
*  So you're like a strategic thinker, but you're also like a deep thinker about this whole thing.
*  But when you look at a regular plug like me, in terms of just investing and moving into
*  thinking about cryptocurrency, is there a strategy that you recommend? What are the different
*  options about investing into Bitcoin? Yeah. So I think that there's just kind of timeless advice
*  when it comes to investing or acquiring an asset in general. Dollar cost averaging is usually the
*  best way to think about it. And what I mean by that is most people don't just have a pile of
*  currency sitting there, right? It's not like they have a million dollars sitting in their bank.
*  It's like, what do I do with it? That situation aside, what happens is they trade their hours and
*  their effort for currency. And so as they get paid every two weeks, let's say, the best way to acquire
*  Bitcoin without having to worry about timing markets and being a professional trader is to
*  simply take whatever the percentages that you want and to buy Bitcoin when you get your paycheck.
*  So if you get paid on the first and 15th of every month, on that day, you should go take,
*  you know, let's say it's 3% of your paycheck, take 3% go buy Bitcoin. Don't worry about what the price
*  is. You should do that over time. And the reason why that's important is if in December of 2017,
*  when Bitcoin was at $20,000, it was the height of kind of this last big upwards movement,
*  you had taken all of your money and you had put it into Bitcoin.
*  You would have had to wait almost three years just to get back to quote unquote, break even in US
*  dollar terms. If at the same time, you had simply bought then, and over the next three years bought
*  every two weeks, you would have been up hundreds of percent three years later, because what ended
*  up happening was you bought a bunch of Bitcoin when it was at 15, 12, 10, nine, eight, three,
*  four, five, five, five, you know, all the way back up on the other side. And so dollar cost averaging
*  is one of these weird things that it almost sounds too easy. But what we find is in America,
*  we have a lack of financial education. And so rather than try to be smarter than markets,
*  what most people are better off doing is just saying, Hey, say you're what's called an asset
*  allocation plan. I want 30% in stocks, I want 10% real estate, I want this, this, whatever.
*  And every time you get your paycheck, just think of it as a savings account, right? Just put it in
*  based on those percentages, and don't think about it. And over a long enough period of time,
*  what we find is almost anyone in the United States, right? There's exceptions, but almost
*  anyone in the United States can become a millionaire in their lifetime, if they follow these plans and
*  have that long term view, and they allow compounding to work for them. And so don't look at the price
*  of Bitcoin and all that kind of stuff. Just pick a specific time, specific day that you just buy,
*  and you just keep buying. That's probably good investment advice across any kind of assets.
*  It's like if you don't believe in Bitcoin, and you just want to let's say you just want to do the
*  S&P 500. Yeah, you shouldn't try to time the market of the S&P 500 either, right? You should just
*  every two weeks, you should just buy some and over a 20 year period, you're gonna end up buying it
*  at all kinds of different prices, but you're gonna get kind of a blended average. And the more
*  important thing is the compounding and the time in the market, then did you buy it at, you know,
*  2% higher or lower than where you bought it doesn't really matter. And buying often makes you I guess,
*  resistant robust to the to the volatility of the market or volatility, the Bitcoin price and so on.
*  That said, you know, Bitcoin price is volatile. And, you know, again, the argument I've heard
*  is like, everything that's going to be a lot more valuable in the future. Like if you look at the
*  history, like companies like Apple, like Tesla is now, I mean, but let's look at companies that
*  have now stabilized, right? Apple is a good example, is like volatile in the beginning.
*  And so the argument for Bitcoin is like, yeah, this is the early stages, because it's going to
*  be a lot more valuable. Right now, it's volatile. And this is why you have to have these kinds of
*  strategies to ride out the volatility. Of course, everything that goes to zero is also volatile.
*  Like the early days are volatile. Do you see like this volatility is like a feature or a bug?
*  Or is this just like a way of life? So Amazon is the one that I know the numbers on in terms of
*  early volatility. Every year since it has gone public, it's had a double digit drawdown in that
*  year. The average is over 30%. And one time it drew down over 95%. Sounds a lot like Bitcoin,
*  right? Like, oh, wow, this is crazy. But it's one of the best performing stocks in the last 20 years,
*  if not the best performing stock. And so volatility is not positive or negative.
*  It's positive or negative compared to the position you're in. So if you're long, and it's volatile to
*  the upside, it's positive. If you're long holding something and it's volatile to the downside,
*  you see it as a negative. It's all about perspective. With that said, another way that I look at this is
*  every asset priced in Bitcoin is down significantly. So over the last one, three,
*  five years, the dollar priced in Bitcoin has crashed 99%. If you denominate stocks,
*  it's down like 80%, 85%. If you dominate gold, if you didn't nominate bonds, if you just go down
*  the line, real estate, etc. It's all down massively against Bitcoin. Now, you could argue that that's
*  because Bitcoin is appreciating in US dollar terms. Or you could actually argue that the world is
*  repricing this asset, it's doing price discovery on this asset. And it's essentially comparing,
*  it's saying, hey, Bitcoin versus this stock or Bitcoin versus this ounce of gold or Bitcoin versus
*  this dollar, which is more valuable. And it continues to move up in the rankings in terms
*  of the value that the world ascribes to this. Some of that is based on Lindy effect. Just the longer
*  it persists, the more likely it is to survive. Some of that's based on the underlying fundamentals
*  of how much computing power the usage transaction volume, things like that. But some of it also,
*  is that as more and more people wake up to the fact that it's a finite supply asset that has a
*  place in the world, and demand increases, people just naturally compete and ascribe more value to
*  it. And so the volatility, I think all comes back to like, what do you price your life in? For
*  majority of people, that's dollars. So you look at the US dollar price, you get all this volatility.
*  The beauty of this is that 60% that doesn't move regardless of price upward or downward
*  and movement. Those people aren't looking at the day to day price. What they've basically said is
*  I've acquired X amount of Bitcoin, and I'm just going to hold it for years. And every time somebody
*  has done that rate, if you bought Bitcoin at any point in the last 12 years, and you held it till
*  today, you are up in US dollar terms. Now, if we had this conversation 18 months ago, couldn't say
*  that. So it's all about not only the acquisition price, if you will, it's also when are you looking
*  at it? Right? Because there was a point in 2017, you could have said the same thing, but in 18,
*  you couldn't. And so I tend to think a lot about humans are really, really bad at short term
*  decision making, because we're so emotional, especially when something has a price tied to
*  it. So in terms of our strategies and decision making, we should be long term and have like a
*  regular, almost think like an algorithm in that kind of way. So I think you've tweeted that you
*  believe that Bitcoin has a chance of reaching 1 million. I don't know what it is currently. I
*  think it's 60,000, which is incredible. I think I remember when it was at least in the double digits.
*  I think I remember it was in the signal digits of a dollar. So the fact that it's crossed 50 is crazy.
*  But you're even crazier, apparently thinking that it can reach a million. So do you think it's
*  possible for it to reach a million? Is there some kind of transformative effects we'll have to see
*  first? When might it reach a million? Like, what are the signs that we would look for what's required
*  for it to reach a million? So let's just look at it from a macro perspective. Gold is a $10 trillion
*  asset. And when you compare the technology of gold to the technology of Bitcoin, Bitcoin is superior
*  in every single way, right? It's more portable, it's more divisible, it's more verifiable, it's
*  more scarce on everything. And so some people would argue it's a 10x improvement, some people
*  argue it's 100x improvement from a technology standpoint. And so we don't need Bitcoin to
*  actually kind of capture the full 10x or 100x improvement from a market cap standpoint. If
*  Bitcoin simply captures 2x the value, be a $20 trillion market cap, which would put Bitcoin at
*  about a million dollars, right? So kind of just from a macro perspective, if you have a 10x or 100x
*  improvement from a technology standpoint, and you directionally get some value capture in that
*  direction, you're hitting around a million or more dollar price point. Can I ask a quick question,
*  which is, what's the current market cap for Bitcoin? The current market cap is right around
*  a trillion, just over a trillion dollars. And you're saying gold is 10 trillion.
*  Where did you get the 20 trillion? 20 trillion would just be 2x gold market cap.
*  Got it. Right. So if it's a 10x technology improvement, let's just say it only captures
*  2x the market cap. Got it. Right. And so again, if it was to capture just gold market cap, kind of
*  the equivalent puts you around $500,000. Right. So you can kind of see there's Bitcoin. So if you
*  capture the entirety of the gold market, then it would be value of a single Bitcoin. The price of
*  a single Bitcoin would be $500,000. Okay. To reach a million, it would be double that. That's where
*  the 20 trillion comes from. Correct. Got it. So if you then say to yourself, okay, how does the
*  the pricing kind of cycles work, right? Or the boom and bust cycles.
*  Gold is a very kind of linear type supply schedule, meaning that there is a certain
*  amount of gold that comes out of the ground each year. The interyear variation in that
*  incoming supply is not much, right? Maybe there's an extra mining company that gets set up or a
*  couple of them, maybe one goes out of business, but for the most part, the kind of inflationary
*  increase to the supply of gold is pretty stagnant year over year. Bitcoin has a very unique feature,
*  which every four years, there is a programmatic supply shock, meaning that in the beginning,
*  50 Bitcoin every 10 minutes was introduced into the supply. After four years of that happening
*  every 10 minutes, it was cut in half. So in a single moment, it went from 50 to now it was 25.
*  Four years every 10 minutes, 25 got cut in half again to 12 and a half. And then recently in May,
*  2020 got cut to 6.25. When you have an asset that is determined the price based on supply and demand,
*  you normally have two inputs to the equation. What is the supply and what is the demand
*  in an asset like gold or a stock or anything else? We have to do our best guess at the supply,
*  both the existing supply and the incoming supply, and do our best guess at the demand.
*  And we're actually pretty good at this a lot of times in terms of directionally saying it's going
*  to go up or down. And here's kind of some price point milestones. Bitcoin's unique in that there's
*  100% verifiable proof of the existing supply, the total supply and the incoming daily supply.
*  So we know 100% I can show you on the actual blockchain or in the code that there's 21 million
*  Bitcoin. And that's all there will ever be. I can show you that there's 18.6 million give or take
*  Bitcoin that actually are in circulation today, right? And I can go all the way back to every
*  single transaction that's ever occurred since January through 2009. And then I can show you
*  on a daily basis that 900 Bitcoin a day are coming into the circulating supply. And so when you have
*  100% confidence because you can prove the supply side of this equation, you can hold it constant.
*  I know with 100% accuracy the supply side. So now I've reduced the mathematical equation that I need
*  to do to determine price movements to a 50% reduction. I only have to worry about demand.
*  I don't have to worry about supply. And so when I look at demand, I can do all kinds of things. I
*  can take the demand over the last 10 years and the growth and just extrapolate it out. I can increase
*  it. I can decrease it, whatever. But what you find is that the supply shocks lead to significant price
*  appreciation as the asset gets repriced because there's a supply shock to it. And so probably the
*  best thing that I've done over the last couple of years was in 2019, I started to talk about the idea
*  that we were going to have both a supply shock and the demand shock in 2021. Or I'm sorry, in 2020.
*  I didn't know when this bull market that we were in was going to end. Nobody knows, right? It's
*  impossible to time these things. But you could tell that we were kind of at late stages of a cycle.
*  There was inverted yield curves. There was rep, uh, gyrations in the repo markets, a lot of CEOs
*  leaving their jobs, you know, all this kind of stuff. And all I said was at some point when the
*  market turns over, the government's gonna have to step in. We were addicted to stimulus. They're
*  gonna have to manipulate interest rates down and they're gonna have to print money. I had no clue
*  that there was going to be a global pandemic, that they were going to have to step in in such an
*  aggressive way and move rates, not down, but down to zero. And that they not only were going to print
*  hundreds of billions, but they could print trillions of dollars. But the framework that
*  I used to think about this was when they do that, everyone is going to run to store value assets.
*  They're going to run the gold. They're going to run the Bitcoin, et cetera. And right as they do
*  that, it appears at the same time, there's going to be this supply shock. So you're going to get a
*  supply shock and a demand shock that are both positive for the price. And I call it rocket
*  fuel for Bitcoin. Well, it happened. And here we are. I now look forward and I say, okay,
*  we are likely going to see a hundred thousand Bitcoin, a hundred thousand dollar Bitcoin this
*  year, right? At some point, I don't know when it happens, but we're moving in that direction.
*  So you think in 2021, we'll see a hundred thousand.
*  That would be my most conservative view. I've said a hundred thousand dollars since 2019.
*  And people thought that was insane and crazy and all that stuff. Now I'm the conservative guy in
*  the room because I stick with a hundred thousand dollars and people are saying, you know, multiples
*  of that number. So we'll see what happens. But I think that there's still a lot of room kind of
*  to run from a U.S. dollar price standpoint. What is on the horizon is in 2024, we will have another
*  supply shock. And so that's what I think will carry us to the million dollar Bitcoin price.
*  From the 6 to 5 to whatever. 50% reduction. Yeah. Yeah. And so that's what I think
*  will basically, when we get that next supply shock, that'll carry us up over a hundred or
*  a $1 million Bitcoin price, which if historical examples persist, and again, sometimes it's hard
*  to use historical examples to look at future events. But if that happens, we would see a
*  million dollars of Bitcoin by the end of 2026. After that wave. So 2024 basically is the supply
*  shock. And within, you know, 18 to 24 months, you would see the kind of top of the next market.
*  Hopefully without a coupling to the net to another pandemic. Yes, we would like to do all of this
*  without a public health crisis. So that would take it to 20 trillion. You don't have to compare it
*  to the dollar, essentially, in some sense, that the dollar could also lose value. I mean, there's
*  a lot of kind of dynamics at play here. Now, but like fundamentally, there's going to be a huge
*  move in your prediction of value into Bitcoin. I mean, that's a fascinating world to think about.
*  I mean, but I do have to kind of ask you about the whole space of technology there,
*  because we're talking about the value of security. We're talking about the future,
*  which Bitcoin will be at the center of. But from my perspective of
*  thinking how like I and others can build technologies on top of this kind of decentralized
*  world, I'm thinking about different technologies out there, different cryptocurrencies out there,
*  Ethereum being one. But there's a lot of others. So I'd love to get your sort of ideas about some
*  of these. But so first, let me ask you about what the hell is shit coin? Is this connected to
*  to our previous discussion of the meme? Does shit coin cover basically all coins that are not
*  Bitcoin? Is it mean? Is it beautiful? Is it a mixture of both?
*  As with most things in life, depends who you ask. The most kind of enthusiastic and
*  and parts of the Bitcoin community. Shit coin is anything else, right? If you ascribe to kind
*  of a maximalistic view of the world, shit coin won't be anything. If you look at people who I
*  would say are Bitcoin proponents, yet see value in other things, shit coin may be the bottom half
*  of the other things, right? So I think again, it's really important kind of who you ask is
*  how you'll get that answer. So there's tiers and the way you divide those tiers might be different
*  depending who you ask. Ultimately, what it is, is it's a meme. Yeah. And it's used to articulate
*  the idea that whatever you want to put in that bucket has no value. So shit coin rate are coins
*  that have no value. Yeah. What is fascinating about it. And I think that again speaks to the
*  power of the Bitcoin community is there was congressional hearings a couple years ago.
*  Oh, no. And at one point, a congressman from Ohio, Warren Davidson, who was definitely
*  open-minded and excited about Bitcoin, asked an individual on the congress floor during testimony
*  to talk about these other coins. And at one point basically read into the record,
*  the terminology of shit coin. He said the word shit coin. I can't remember if he said it first,
*  or if the other person did, and then he repeated it. But he definitely, he was trying to get that
*  read into the record. Yes, for sure. And so, you can imagine one, again, the meme speaking
*  insularly to the Bitcoin community was, made him very, very well liked. But also two was,
*  it does go back to this idea almost of if you and I sat down with 10 CEOs, and we interviewed each
*  one of them, and then we went in a room and we deliberated and we said, we have to pick the
*  person who's going to be the most successful. One of the inputs, not all the inputs, but one of the
*  inputs would be who's the person who we believe has the best ability to raise capital, recruit
*  people, and tell a story to the world that will get them to follow. And so somebody like Elon would
*  probably be the best example of this. When you have decentralized products, you have no kind of
*  leader, right? In the sense of somebody who is financially ascribed to be that leader and kind
*  of the executive decision maker. So what you have to do is you have to look at these technologies
*  in these communities and say, well, which volunteer teams or which technologies have been able to
*  coalesce these groups around it, and in some way build the same level of engagement and protection
*  and things like that. And so you naturally get tribalism, but you also get things like shit coin,
*  because what it does is it's not only a kind of verbal attack towards others, it's a rallying cry
*  for internal. What's so funny is that it was started with the Bitcoin community talking about
*  everybody, but now you've seen adoption in other communities who use it, you know, basically say,
*  well, we're not a shit coin. It's the next guy. Yeah. I mean, the meaning, to be honest, it's
*  it's off. It's sometimes misused. I think like with anything, it's like people adopt memes that
*  we used to be brilliant or still brilliant, and they're just not good at using them. So they become
*  mean. But when you do with grace, it can tear down an argument and at the same time
*  have like love and respect underneath it. I mean, it's a beautiful dance. They have to be good at
*  like, you know, people just can suck at communication and even like even a powerful
*  weapon like a meme in the wrong hands just fires in a way that doesn't get anything done. But this
*  is like a war of humor and memes. It's kind of fascinating exactly like you formulated that there's
*  asymmetry of power. So you have to have guerrilla warfare in this internet game, especially when
*  there's no leader, like you said, in a distributed culture. I would say here that is,
*  is really important, I think is from a society standpoint, we've become very soft and very kind
*  of coddling and not in a way that's like, I think people take this argument like too far sometimes.
*  But what I mean by that is it's almost like if you're the person who holds somebody accountable,
*  you become the bad person. If you're the person who says, hey, you know, that's wrong,
*  you're the bad person. And so in a world where I think in this kind of influencer, all positive,
*  if you have any negative feedback or constructive criticism, like you're the bad person,
*  it's the ultimate echo chamber. And so I think that what the Bitcoin world does in some crazy,
*  crazy way to look at it is Bitcoin is ultimately about truth, not about narrative,
*  not about feelings or emotion. It's math. You look at a blockchain and you can prove something
*  or you can't. And so naturally people who are attracted to that have a very similar approach
*  in life. They say, hey, you made X claim, prove it. And as you can imagine, you know, a great
*  example is like the financial media meets Bitcoiners and it's a blood bath, right? In kind
*  of the arena of ideas because what do they do? The financial media is used to the soft, you know,
*  opinion pieces, et cetera. And Bitcoiners show up and they're like, here's data point A, B and C.
*  Here's example one, two and three, and you're wrong. And then all they yell and scream about is like,
*  I'm wrong. I'm wrong. I'm wrong. Like you can't say I'm wrong. And they're like, no, like disprove
*  what I just said. And so you get in this like very, very weird. It's fascinating. It's a
*  fascinating benefit. But I do want to say it's I've been watching this. It's kind of interesting.
*  I think that the pursuit of truth through like tearing down bad ideas can be done with grace.
*  And to do it with grace requires a lot of skill. Like what people don't realize about disagreement,
*  they think that disagreement is easy. Like they see the lies or the inaccuracies in the statement
*  and they just think they can say wrong. Yes, you can say that. But if you want to be effective,
*  it requires great skill. Like you look at, I don't know, a beautiful verbal shit poster,
*  which is Christopher Hitchens, right? It requires a lot of skill through your words to tear down an
*  argument, to criticize and to take a step towards truth. What I'm disheartened by internet culture,
*  like the negative side is people don't put a lot of effort in their tear downs. Like into your
*  shitposting, into your memes, you should put effort and see it as a skill that you want to,
*  if you want to be a part of this culture, you want to get good at it. Like any skill,
*  it's the 10,000 hours, like get improved, deliberate practice, self-criticism, all of those
*  things. Just because you're anonymous doesn't mean you won't get deep joy and actually have
*  an impact on the world if you get good at shitposting. But I think this is really,
*  really important, right? Because you're right in that it's all about intention versus action.
*  If your intention is to tell somebody that they are wrong in an effort to get them to see the
*  truth, that's very different than if your intention is to tell someone they're wrong and hurt their
*  feelings. And so when you can unpack intention and action, you really quickly can tell what somebody
*  ultimately is trying to accomplish. I also think that one of the craziest things that I've seen
*  play out is memes. When I use that term, I'm not just talking about like a static photo,
*  right? When I'm talking about these elaborate kind of edited videos and kind of all this stuff,
*  when done right, it is the most articulate way to deliver a blunt message. And it's done in such
*  a way that is humorous and entertaining, yet really hammers the point home. And so
*  it's a skill set that many people don't have. I don't make those. I'm assuming you don't make
*  them either, right? I see them. I share the ones that I like, right? But it does take practice.
*  And you can tell, look, there's people who are fantastic meme lords, right? And there are people
*  who absolutely suck at it. And it's like anything. It's just how good are you at communicating?
*  I've heard the idea a bunch of times, so I don't know who to kind of credit for it. But whether
*  it's emojis, it's GIFs, it's memes, whatever, this is the extension and evolution of just hieroglyphics.
*  We have been doing this for literally centuries. It's just that now we're doing it on the internet
*  and you can press a button and go to millions and millions of people immediately.
*  But speaking of memes, what the heck do you think is up with Elon Musk talking about Dogecoin a lot?
*  Sort of from the cryptocurrency community, I've been talking to a lot of technologists,
*  I guess, and reading papers on cryptocurrency. It's like nobody really sees Dogecoin as a
*  revolutionary crypto technology. A lot of people talk about its security issues. There's a bunch
*  of issues it has. Nevertheless, you did say that money is the kind of social construct, right?
*  Elon Musk's combination of humor and brilliant engineering in the various companies he runs
*  combines to create a kind of value and excitement behind Dogecoin. He says that the most amusing
*  outcome is the most likely kind of idea, which sounds silly, but there could be profound truth
*  to it. What do you make of Dogecoin philosophically or technically? Is it possible that Dogecoin will
*  overtake Bitcoin and run the entire world? It could happen. But if there's any serious
*  way to answer that question? Well, we have to start with Techno King of Tesla and Master of Coin
*  as they are so articulately called in the latest SEC filing. He officially changed his title,
*  Techno King. Techno King of Tesla. The CFO's new title is Master of Coin. When you have a sense of
*  humor and frankly a level of self-confidence and an appreciation for irony in the world,
*  Dogecoin is actually one of the least crazy things that you could talk about when you're willing to
*  go to Techno King of Tesla, Master of Coin and all this stuff. I think that Elon doesn't get enough
*  credit, frankly, for his understanding of internet culture, understanding of memes, and understanding
*  of frankly human psychology and marketing. In some crazy way, every time he talks about Dogecoin,
*  it's a rallying cry for an entire generation of kids. It's a rallying cry for an entire industry
*  in terms of cryptocurrencies and digital technologies. But this is the flag. And this is the thing that
*  he can yell and scream about and tweet about without worry of punishment. So he could be talking
*  about Bitcoin. He could be talking about cryptocurrency, but that's not going to be as beautifully
*  as beautifully humorous and whatever the hell internet culture is as Dogecoin. He's finding
*  the right language. He's speaking the language of the people in the digital age. If you want to
*  reach weird people, you can't be serious. And most people are weird. The masses are weird.
*  So he's speaking to the masses, the Techno King. And even further than that, I think, is he
*  essentially is he's using Dogecoin as a way to say, I'm doing this because I can. He couldn't do it
*  with securities. He couldn't do it with certain types of other assets. I almost look at it as a
*  Venn diagram. What's the thing that a bunch of people know about, care about, thinkers funny,
*  whatever, and also overlay that with the things that he could actually talk about that he won't
*  get in trouble for. That's a big F you to the SEC. I could see the people just freaking out.
*  I love it. But I don't know if I would have the guts to do it myself, but I think he's an inspiration
*  to a lot of us to be like, well, maybe you should grow the guts. When you're the Techno King, you can
*  do whatever you want. Right. And I mean, that's something to aspire to is to be the Techno King
*  in your own little world. If you also think about it in the sense of when you're somebody on a
*  mission to create interplanetary life, when you're trying to solve a, or put a dent in
*  the climate crisis or create electric vehicles and be the first American company in however long,
*  frankly, the SEC or other things in your life that just don't, you don't ascribe that much
*  importance to compared to those things. They're almost a nuisances. And that's scary. I think for
*  shareholders of a company, when the person that you're trusting to lead you to the promised land
*  and create shareholder value doesn't put value on certain things. But at the same time, I always look
*  at it as a tug of war. How much of the actions of what he's doing and calling attention to actually
*  change the way that regulators, lawmakers, politicians, countries, whatever act, he may
*  not be able to say, do acts on the Techno King and they go do it. But with every step he makes,
*  he changes some of their behavior. And so I think that it's a really kind of game of like 3d chess
*  that frankly, I'm not privy to, right. And I'm kind of watching from the sidelines and figuring out
*  alongside everybody else. But I also don't think that it's just Elon bought a bunch of Dogecoin and
*  tweets about it because things is going to a dollar and he's gonna make money. I don't think
*  it's an economic argument as to why he's so interested in it. I think it's much more,
*  it's almost like meta message for a lot of other stuff. Yeah, he's kind of trying to break apart
*  internet communication from first principles like it does so many other problems. It's kind of
*  fascinating to watch. I know he's been, he's taught me quite a bit about communication.
*  And at least for me, it's been liberating to not give a fuck about the old school way of things.
*  I've been always bothered by a place I deeply admire, which is MIT. But there's problems,
*  bureaucracies and hierarchies that hold back innovation, brilliant minds. And in that sense,
*  Doge is a kind of FU to the system that's kind of positive, but also kind of, but it was also an
*  FU. So in that sense, I think Elon has a perspective on the world that's similar to Bitcoin folks,
*  which I really like, which is like thinking long-term. It's how visionaries think. It's like,
*  if I take these ideas and the ideas hold true, what will the world look like in 20, 30, 50 years?
*  And think about everything in that way. Yeah, I like Bezos' view, which is essentially,
*  how do you minimize regret? How do you accelerate your life mentally and go to 80, 90, 100, 150
*  years, whatever we end up being fortunate enough to live to, and then look backwards and say,
*  this decision that I'm going to make, I have two options. Which one is going to be the one that I
*  least regret? And if you continue to make decisions that way, one, you have that long-term view kind
*  of built in because you're working backwards. Two, you are ultimately going to optimize for
*  minimal regret. But also three is, even if you only look for 10 years, that's much, much further
*  than most people do. And so it gives you a significant advantage. And I think that Bitcoin
*  has kind of this like, you know, proxy for time, as we talked about, interplanetary travel, where
*  there's multiple steps from creating a reusable rocket to landing it to, you know, all this stuff,
*  all the way to simple things, just like, if you're simply trying to figure out where the world's
*  going to be 30 years from now, you know, Bill Gates says that we overestimate what we can do in one
*  year, underestimate what we can do in 10. Well, to me, it's a kind of degree of mistake, if you
*  will. 10 years, maybe you're off by 10%. Well, if that line of progress continues 20 years, you may
*  be off by 100%. And 30 years, you may be off by 1000%. Right? Like, almost the further you go out,
*  the more inaccurate you become. And so I think that people who want to iterate their way to success
*  as a common thing in like the startup world, end up actually following kind of the breadcrumbs to
*  where the world is taking them. But people like an Elon Musk, a Jeff Bezos, a Jack Dorsey, all the
*  way down the line, all these innovators, they actually say to themselves, there is a point in
*  time in the future, where there's a world I want to construct. And then they go and they construct it,
*  regardless of the short term iterations and incentives, it is just they're driving towards
*  that point. And I think that it's this whole idea of having this like, you know, kind of set vision
*  and this refusal to kind of move or budge off of that. It's what makes them special.
*  One of the things that garnered a lot of excitement in the crypto community is NFTs. I have no idea,
*  really, the depths, the fundamental technological philosophical depths of this technology,
*  whether this is just like a little bit of a fad or if there's some deep lessons to learn,
*  whether it's Bitcoin or cryptocurrency in general about it. Do you have thoughts about like the long
*  lasting fundamental aspects of NFTs? I think there's probably both things happening, fad
*  and things to learn. Right. And if we just start with like, what is an NFT? It's a non-fungible
*  token, meaning that there's no fungibility and fungibility is a fancy word. I always describe
*  it as if I took a hundred dollar bill and I put it on the table with a bunch of other hundred
*  dollar bills and we mixed them up and I just grabbed a hundred dollar bill and left. I'm no
*  worse as long as they're all, you know, official hundred dollar bills, because as long as I have
*  a hundred dollars, I have hundred dollars. I don't need that exact same bill back. So that means that
*  those hundred dollar bills are fungible. Non-fungible would be like art. If I took a
*  Picasso and I put it down on the table and you brought three artists that no one's ever heard
*  of before and we mixed them up and I just took any random piece of art and it wasn't the Picasso,
*  I lose because the Picasso is really important there. Right. So non-fungibility is important in
*  art. What these non-fungible tokens essentially are doing is they are creating scarcity and
*  originality in a digital environment. And what I mean by that is take a music file. If I had a music
*  file and you wanted it, you said, send it to me. I press send. It essentially creates a copy and
*  you get one music file. I get another. We don't care. You can listen to music. I can listen to
*  the music. We're super happy. If I instead though have a digital file that entire premise is based
*  on scarcity and I hit send and you get a copy and I keep the original or you get the original. I get
*  a copy. There's a problem. And so ultimately what I think is playing out with NFTs is it's a
*  technology regardless of where it plays out from blockchains or what in communities or environments
*  that just brings true digital scarcity to the internet. And so naturally what do people do?
*  They look at the legacy world and they say, well, what's scarce there that has value. How do we
*  bring that to the digital world? So art is a perfect example. Right. And, you know, frankly,
*  last year I started to look at this because it felt like this was going to be really, really big.
*  And the conclusion I came to was just as Bitcoin is going to be bigger than gold, right? The digital
*  application of something is going to be bigger than the analog application. The same thing is
*  going to be true in art. The digital art world is going to be bigger than the traditional art world.
*  People think that sounds crazy at first until you start to realize it's very, very similar.
*  The art is more portable. It can be divisible, right? It's got a larger demand market in terms
*  of the internet rather than an auction, right? All this kind of stuff. When you display it,
*  it can have motion and music and all of these aspects to it that are better than the traditional
*  art. What the traditional art market has that the digital art market has not had is the narrative,
*  narrative based world, scarcity kind of in a digital sense. And so what I think the entire
*  world is going through right now is an exploration of how do we use this technology to create new
*  things? Frankly, we're not going to be good at it for a while. And so the only place I've really
*  focused on is digital art itself. And I've always been interested in art, but I wasn't going to go
*  buy a painting and hang it on the wall, right? In the sense of that's how I was going to store value.
*  What I find fascinating though is that I now can take that concept, which most of the wealthiest
*  people in the world have a significant portion. Some people have 20% in terms of number of
*  billionaires, 20% of their wealth is in art. And you can bring to this digital realm, which is much
*  more kind of natural to a digital native. And so the best way to describe the importance is imagine
*  a serial number being placed on something. Take the Eiffel Tower. The only Eiffel Tower that has
*  value is the first one. Every replica of it, regardless of size, location, you know, who made
*  it, where they sent it, they have no value. Eiffel Tower 001 is the most important. And so I think
*  that's ultimately what we're starting to see here. And what we're looking at is probably 1% of what
*  it's going to grow into. Who the players are. You're bullish on it. You're saying it could grow into
*  something for 1%. It could grow to something significant, like all kinds of different
*  applications. Strip away all of the applications right now and just think about is digital
*  scarcity going to be important on the internet? Moving all the things that are scarce in the
*  physical world into digital space, us trying to figure out which things can be moved and not.
*  And also there's things in the digital space, just like you're saying that don't exist in the
*  physical world that might also benefit from gaining scarcity. Like, you know, people are,
*  I guess, creating NFTs out of like tweets or whatever. So like you're, you have, you have a
*  fun Twitter account. You know, you could say like, you could put value to a single tweet and then be
*  able to invest in it and trade it and buy parts of it and all those kinds of things. You know,
*  you can invest in people, you can invest in, you know, art can be defined broadly as any kind of
*  creation, right? And in some sense, this whole idea of scarcity can overtake the entirety
*  of the digital world. It can like consume the, all of the markets we see as financial markets
*  and just turn everything into a market. Well, so if I take you on like a 10 year fast forward,
*  yeah. And I paint a picture of something today that seems absolutely insane, but there's early
*  signs that people are building this and let's just give them the benefit of the doubt that some of
*  the early iterations will work and some of, or most of them won't. There's a world where you and
*  I are participating in a digital economy, in a virtual world where, whether it is a piece of art,
*  it is a digital sculpture, it is a digital skin from a video game, it is a digital good that we
*  purchased somewhere online and we bring it and we display it in a digital museum or a virtual museum.
*  And so now all of a sudden you can charge people for entry. You can consign digital goods. It's the
*  replication of what happens in the analog world, now just in digital. And when you do that,
*  what you do is you take the addressable markets of these assets or these mechanisms and they
*  explode in the digital realm. And so now all of a sudden, how fast does the human race accelerate
*  when it comes to human production, intelligence, learning, all in the digital output?
*  Let's just, if I said to you 20 years ago, I'm going to give you a global education,
*  it means I'm going to take you and I'm going to physically move you to geography after geography
*  after geography. It's going to take time. It's going to take resources and ultimately it's going
*  to take lots of effort. If I now said to you, Hey, I'm going to transport you in this virtual world
*  to multiple geographies, but you're going to experience it in this virtual world and you're
*  going to have digital goods that you can take from economy to economy or from location to location.
*  All of a sudden you may get, maybe you get 90% of the value, you don't get a hundred percent
*  of the same value, we get 90% of the value, but you can do it at a much faster pace. And so in
*  six month period, you've actually made three times the progress than you would have if you
*  had to do the physical world. So that's where I think we're heading. So there's digital art
*  being displayed in the digital museum and people are being charged for access. And perhaps we plug
*  in our senses, which means we start to operate more and more in a virtual reality, augmented
*  reality, virtual reality way with this digital world, increasingly go into this world, basically
*  lived most of our productive and social lives in this digital world. And increasingly essentially
*  create a simulation where the biological basis is just there to sustain the brain that's used to
*  operate in a virtual world. Taking us back to the original, when we started talking about war,
*  I wonder what conflict looks like in that world that the people who are born today,
*  maybe will be fighting wars in the space in that museum world, in that digital world.
*  Remember what I said, we're moving from a world of conflict surrounded and determined by bombs,
*  bullets, and soldiers to a battlefield that is determined by war of information and cyber
*  capabilities. And so in that virtual world, is it about death and destruction of human life and
*  physical analog world, or will it become more important to attack or defend virtual property
*  and virtual life and some level of virtual sovereignty? In my opinion, the latter is more
*  likely. And so what you start to understand is, well, what do you truly value in your life?
*  Is it the physical analog, materialistic consumptive goods? Or is it virtual?
*  And in many cases, something as simple as the ability to connect with somebody,
*  it's really important. And so one of the most disruptive, combative, violent things that a
*  country may do to another country in the future, simply take down the internet
*  and put people in isolation. Yeah. I don't need to physically harm you if I can psychologically
*  harm you. I don't need to actually convince you through a monopoly on violence, on physical violence.
*  What if I can psychologically change the way you see the world through misinformation, through all
*  sorts of nefarious activities? And I think that the United States has been struggling with this
*  idea over the last couple of years in the political arena. But what happens when it starts to come to
*  other aspects of our life? And I think it's very likely it's almost obviously likely that we're
*  moving into the digital world. The one of the features of the digital world is that artificial
*  intelligence systems can operate with much more power in a frictionless way in that world.
*  Currently, as we understand it, it's hard to build robots that operate at scale and do like
*  arbitrary large amount of impact, damage or positive in the physical world. It's much easier
*  to do in the digital world. Do you ever think about AI systems just swimming about doing
*  extraordinarily powerful, destructive things in the digital world? Is that something of a concern to
*  you or is this something into a very distant future? I think a lot of artificial intelligence
*  is in the name. It's simply the replication of human intelligence at scale, automated,
*  and programmatic. Meaning that in the analog world, you could go hire a thousand employees,
*  or in an Amazon case, hire millions of employees and set a mission or a goal and push them to go
*  do that. That requires recruiting, retention, training, resources, all that stuff.
*  In the virtual world or in this digital economy, what if you can just program the resources and
*  gain the same leverage and do it at scale and do it in a very programmatic way and then have them
*  actually make decisions in a way that doesn't require you to have thought of every single
*  potential scenario or edge case? That's ultimately what we're talking about when we
*  talk about artificial intelligence. When technology is created, everyone uses it for good or bad,
*  but both get used. Whether we're talking about cell phones, beepers, the internet, guns, whatever,
*  it's always used for good and bad. The big question is, and I think that yourself and many other
*  people have rightfully said this, is the question really becomes, is the negative and nefarious
*  uses of this inadvertent potentially? Or does it actually come from a malicious person,
*  the intention malicious? To me, that's what I don't know enough. You know much more about this,
*  and there's plenty of other people who do as well, but I do think that there will be nefarious actors
*  and malicious people, but we're going to treat them the same way we've always treated people who
*  use technology poorly. We're going to understand it, we're going to identify it, we're going to
*  control it, and then we're going to end up reversing it or preventing that from doing that. It's the
*  inadvertent things that I think are actually the most dangerous because when you have something
*  that can think for itself and there is no way to leverage a monopoly on violence for control,
*  it's a very scary thing. The thing that's scary to me is that it can scale arbitrarily, so it can
*  outnumber humans very quickly even if it's dumber than humans. I don't know if we're able to reason
*  about a world, like let's look at the physical analog, where all of a sudden, let's talk about
*  something kind of like humans but dumber than humans, like chimps. Imagine that all of a
*  sudden chimps could multiply arbitrarily quickly and you could have like a trillion chimps the next
*  day when you only had maybe a million the day before. How does that world look different?
*  Where the fuck do all these chimps come from?
*  And then we can pretend to be like, well, let's hope the chimps don't get violent because they
*  don't seem to get violent when the resources aren't constrained, but we don't know. The problem is it
*  all starts by building that first chimp multiplier device and everyone's like, okay, yeah, there's a
*  lot of good applications. You can make all kinds of arguments for why you have more chimps.
*  Maybe they can help you out around the house or something like that in the physical space,
*  but ultimately, it's the unintended consequences that you're referring to. You don't know what's
*  going to happen. I'm really worried about dumb AI agents having impact when they're multiplied
*  to a million to a billion and are allowed to operate in the digital space, especially as we
*  clearly are moving more and more of our lives into the digital space. It's kind of terrifying
*  because a lot of people are terrified or concerned about superintelligence systems.
*  I think I'm definitely much more concerned about super dumb systems at scale. That's terrifying.
*  I always think about the inadvertent, but as you were talking, what it made me think of is
*  also the irreversible. It's one thing if there's inadvertent negative impact, but we have
*  reversibility built into a system and we can fix our mistakes. I think the really scary part is
*  when you overlay inadvertent mistakes with the irreversible aspect of it and therefore,
*  humans have no control. Yeah. If you have the trillion chimps,
*  they're not going to like it when you try to start killing them off.
*  All right, but back to Bitcoin. Those chimps in the Bitcoin community.
*  Anytime you bring up chimps, some people say Joe Rogan entered the chat. Can I ask you about
*  learning about Bitcoin books and resources? You have an amazing podcast. That's not just about
*  Bitcoin or cryptocurrency. It's about everything, including life, but you do have a lot of really
*  amazing conversations about this whole digital world. Obviously, you also have a newsletter
*  that's incredible on Substack. Do you have recommendations? Maybe it would be great if
*  you could talk about, first of all, your podcast and the newsletter, but also other resources that
*  you recommend people should check out in order to learn about Bitcoin. Yeah. The podcast and
*  email are the two most selfish things I do because the podcast is a way for me to learn from other
*  people. I get them to come on and tell me all the things they're thinking about. I could ask
*  some questions. What's it called, by the way? Just the Pomp Podcast. In doing that, it really
*  is informative for me. I think that my whole goal is just like, if I'm learning, other people will
*  be learning. Then the email, I read it every morning because it forces me to collect my
*  thoughts and actually articulate them in somewhat of a coherent way. It's just something that
*  is a practice that I probably would do even if no one read it. Then by being able to publish it,
*  what does it do? It elicits both the good and bad responses. People will let me know if they think
*  I'm an idiot and they'll usually not respond if they think that it's something smart. Those two
*  things are really educational for me and I think force me to be able to articulate a lot of ideas.
*  But a lot of what I share or learn on those things come from these other resources.
*  I'm definitely subscribing. People should subscribe. But what are Bitcoin resources,
*  books that you recommend? I think you got to start with Bitcoin Standard. That one to me feels like
*  it really lays out the picture nicely. There is Bitcoin, Money You Can't Fuck With. It's written
*  by our friend Jason Williams. As you can imagine, it's basically what it talks about. There's another
*  book, Layered Money. It's written by Nick who's done a great job laying it out. There's a book
*  called Bitcoin in Black America written by a guy, Isaiah Jackson. He basically lays out the argument
*  for why the black community can benefit in an asymmetric way from something like Bitcoin.
*  There's a whole bunch more. I'm going to forget them all. I think it's called The Cost of Tomorrow.
*  A guy, Jeff Booth wrote it. If you get on Twitter, basically, you're going to see all
*  these books flying around. But I do have to say that from a psychological concept or philosophical
*  concept, the number one book that I've ever read that aligns with Bitcoin ethos but doesn't say a
*  word about Bitcoin is a book called The Dow of Capital by Mark Spitznagle. What he essentially
*  does is he just reiterates over and over and over again, long-term thinking, outliers, disruption,
*  all this stuff. He's a guy who runs a fund that essentially they just do tail risk hedging.
*  In March or February of 2020, they're up like 4,000%. By the way, they pretty much lose money
*  for eight, nine years, then that happens. But they're still one of the best performing funds
*  if you look at it over years and years. It's just this mindset of everyone is so short-term
*  focused. I think it's just a great reminder to long-term thinking.
*  I've gotten quite a bit of value just reading the papers. That's perhaps more for technical folks.
*  There's quite an active research community. Also, going back to the original white paper and
*  just original documents, old school. Old school is still like what a few years ago,
*  still really interesting to think about, to look at what people were thinking about
*  because the principles are carried through with other cryptocurrencies as well. It's all there,
*  even in the early documents. That's fascinating to see that whole history if you're more tech-savvy.
*  Like you said, Twitter is actually an interesting place. If you can look past all the shit coin
*  talk, it's a fascinating place for news and resources. Is there books outside of all of
*  this cryptocurrency, technical, fiction, philosophical that impact on your life?
*  Because you have interests that are all over the place. Is there something that
*  you would recommend to others? Dow with Capital is definitely probably my favorite book.
*  Books that have been impactful. I read when I was 20, actually sitting in the desert of Iraq,
*  Rich Dad Poor Dad, Thinking Girl Rich, and The Richest Man in Babylon.
*  I don't think I took a single thing and implemented it from an execution standpoint,
*  but it was a complete shift in mentality and understanding a relationship with money and
*  what I wanted to do with my life and stuff like that. I think those three books,
*  I read them in succession, were really impactful. Then I think one of the best books probably ever
*  written is, I think it's called When Breath Becomes Air, or Air Becomes Breath, I can't remember.
*  It's basically a doctor or medical professional who's dying. He essentially writes about the
*  experience and thoughts and all the stuff. I think that it's just one of these things where,
*  if you said to me, what's the number one thing I took out of my experience in Iraq,
*  that a book like that also gives you is we're all going to die.
*  And you and I want to be as immortal as we want, but at some point we're going to die.
*  It really does focus you on time being that scarce asset and use it for enjoyment and happiness
*  more so than anything else. I think that's part of your message and it's a great one.
*  Do you think you literally meditate on your own mortality?
*  I necessarily think I meditate on it as much as-
*  Are you afraid of death? Are you afraid of death when you're in Iraq?
*  Are you afraid of death when you're coming face to face with it? Are you afraid of death today?
*  No, I think that it was just one of these things where if you fixate on something and you worry
*  about it, then at least to me, you become uneasy about it. And so after an experience like going
*  to war, I think that everything is just so not important compared to that. When I came back,
*  the college environment and things people worried about, I was like,
*  listen, let me explain to you what the real world's like. But I think even today,
*  if you talk to people who know me really well, I don't get worked up about a lot of stuff. I don't
*  get in either direction, good or bad, anything because ultimately it just comes down to,
*  if that's the final result, let's enjoy it. It's fascinating to ask you because this
*  reformulation of money, essentially buying time and there's the old question of does money
*  buy happiness? Do you think money can buy happiness in the context of money being able to buy time?
*  Or is happiness something else that is beyond all of this?
*  When people talk about this question, I think that they really focus on money as a means to
*  getting materialistic things. So they want a big house, they want a boat, they want a fast car,
*  they want, you know, whatever they think that's the stuff that will make them happy. What I think
*  about it is if you have resources, you can have time. And if you have time and you spend it the
*  way that you want to spend it, then that's ultimately happiness. So I always say to people,
*  if you think that money doesn't buy you happiness, what if I told you that if you had more money,
*  you could spend more time with your family? It reframes it. And now it's all about, I want to do
*  certain things in life, but there's a lot of people who spend their life not doing those things
*  because they feel the need to pursue economic means as a way to provide a living or whatever.
*  And so I explained that I said, listen, in my opinion, again, it's my opinion, it's what makes
*  me happy. If I can leverage financial resources to create more time to do the things I like,
*  I'm happier. It might not work for everybody, but like that's what works for me. And so there's
*  this element of like, I don't care what other people think if they like that or not, because
*  they're not me, right? Like, like there's almost this element of like, you got to figure out what
*  works for you. And if it works for me, then like,
*  No, I think that will resonate with a lot of people. I think that's a brilliant reframing of it.
*  That said, you kind of imply there's a reason behind this whole existence of ours,
*  there's a meaning to it. So let me ask, what is the meaning of life, Anthony? Do you think about
*  these ridiculous big questions that have no answer every once in a while, or do you just enjoy the
*  shit out of every day? I answered in a way that isn't meant to be accurate. It's meant to
*  be the right answer for me, which is ultimately, you know, and I talked to a lot of people who
*  always ask like, what's the what are you doing? Why are you doing this? I say, it's to be happy.
*  And the reason why I think of it that way is I've got a friend Jonathan Geller who talks about,
*  uh, you know, enough being enough. And recently he talked about it in the context of Bitcoin.
*  And so Bitcoiners are have two things, any Bitcoiner, if you talk to them,
*  they believe the same two things. One, they don't want the US dollar price to go up
*  because they actually want to acquire more Bitcoin, right? And then then like,
*  once they feel like they've got enough, but two is no matter how much they only think that they
*  don't own enough and they want to acquire more. And so at some point you say yourself, what is
*  enough? And I think that the whole meaning of life is to understand kind of what your level
*  of satisfaction is. And for some people that's a monetary thing. Some people that's a freedom of
*  time thing. For some people it's an impact thing, whatever, but just understanding that's important
*  and then going and accomplishing it. And what I've found is that the people who I know who
*  have done this and been intentional about it, they accomplish it on a much shorter timeline than people
*  who don't. There's some people who start thinking about it when they're 60. Naturally, you're not
*  going to accomplish it before you're 60 if you just start thinking about it at 60. People who
*  start thinking about it earlier can do it. And so I think that's really it for me. It's just like
*  the meaning of life is to enjoy it. The way I think about it, that's cause it's a really
*  nice formulation. I almost like to sort of oscillate back and forth. So majority of the time
*  is spent in the mode of enough is enough of gratitude, of basically being content with
*  where you're at, like deeply appreciative of every moment and all the Bitcoin, whatever Bitcoin
*  you have being deeply appreciative of it. And that being enough. And then some fraction of time,
*  perhaps it shrinks as you get older. That's maybe there's an optimal trajectory there,
*  but some fraction of time is spent to being like deeply self-critical and nothing is enough.
*  Nothing you've ever done is worth anything. It's the Marvin Minsky said like the secret to success
*  is hating everything you've ever done. So like that mode of just hating everything you've ever
*  done and just like trying to improve, trying to make stuff better. It's nothing is enough.
*  It's never enough, that kind of stuff. And then oscillating back and forth. Like you don't have
*  to have the same algorithm operating throughout the day. You could just like oscillate back and
*  forth and maybe reserve that gratitude part, the chill part to when you're hanging out with family
*  and friends and loved ones. And then when you're like alone or maybe at work,
*  the madman comes out kind of thing. I also think it's kind of purpose driven in the sense of,
*  there's a lot of people who have the, I need to do more, but in a somewhat altruistic way.
*  So they're, you know, take Elon as an example, the idea of colonizing Mars,
*  sure, if he is successful, he will be very rich. I don't think you or I, or many people
*  believe he's doing it for the money, right? There's a lot of other things he could do.
*  That'd be much easier. That would make him tons of money. And so in some weird way, he has enough
*  because he's able to free himself from the constraints of, I need to acquire more resources
*  and he can focus on what is the thing that I want to work on regardless of money.
*  And so in that pursuit that is non-economic, you can be as selfish as you want because ultimately
*  you're not tied back to this like measurement tool. And so it's this again, like altruistic,
*  non-monetary purpose. And I think that there's a lot of people who spend their whole life looking
*  for that and they don't know what it is. And so again, some people may not think of it that way,
*  but if you can find something to do that, you win. I don't think there's a better way to end it,
*  Anthony. I'm a huge fan. It's a huge honor that you waste all this time with me today.
*  I thank you for just educating the world for teaching me, inspiring me to learn more about
*  this new set of technologies that look like they have a potential to change, transform all of human
*  civilization. So thank you for coming today and thank you for being who you are.
*  Absolutely. Thank you so much for having me.
*  Thanks for listening to this conversation with Anthony Pampliano. And thank you to our sponsors,
*  Theragun Muscle Recovery Device, Sun Basket Meal Delivery Service, ExpressVPN, and Indeed Hiring
*  website. Click their links to support this podcast. And now let me leave you with some words from
*  Mahatma Gandhi. Freedom is not worth having if it doesn't include the freedom to make mistakes.
*  Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
*  Thank you.
