---
Date Generated: April 13, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 10985s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence', 'artificial intelligence podcast', 'cal newport', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex podcast', 'mit ai']
Video Views: 1195422
Video Rating: None
---

# Cal Newport: Deep Work, Focus, Productivity, Email, and Social Media | Lex Fridman Podcast #166
**Lex Fridman:** [March 04, 2021](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y3Umo_jd5AA)
*  The following is a conversation with cal newport he's a friend and someone who's writing like his book deep work for example has guided how i start to approach productivity and life in general.
*  He doesn't use social media and in his book digital minimalism he encourages people to find the right amount of social media usage that provides value enjoy.
*  He has a new book out called the world without email where he argues brilliantly i would say that email is destroying productivity companies and in our lives and.
*  Very importantly he offers solutions he is a computer scientist at georgetown university who practices what he preaches to do theoretical computer science at the level that he does it you really have to live a focus life that minimizes distractions and maximizes hours of deep work.
*  Lastly he's a host of an amazing podcast called deep questions that i highly recommend for anyone who wants to improve their productive life.
*  Quick mention of our sponsors express vpn lenoid linux virtual machines sun basket meal delivery service and simply safe home security click the sponsor links to get a discount and to support this podcast.
*  As a side note let me say that deep work or long periods of deep focused thinking have been something i've been chasing more and more over the past few years.
*  Deep work is hard but is ultimately the thing that makes life so damn amazing the ability to create things you're passionate about in a flow state where the distraction of the world just fade away.
*  Social media yes reading the comments yes i still read the comments is a source of joy for me in strict moderation too much takes away the focus mind and too little at least i think takes away all of the fun.
*  We need both focus and the fun if you enjoy this thing subscribe on youtube review it on apple podcast follow on spotify support on patreon connect with me on twitter at lex friedman if you can only figure out how to spell that and now here's my conversation with cal newport.
*  What is deep work i start with a big question.
*  So i mean it's my term for when you're focusing without distraction on a cognitive demanding task.
*  Which is something we've all done but we had never really given it a name necessarily that was separate from other type of work and so i gave it a name.
*  And so let's compare that to other types of efforts you might do while you're working and see that the deep work efforts actually have a huge benefit that we might be underestimating.
*  What does it mean to work deeply on something i you know i've been calling it hard focus in my writing before that well so the context you would understand i was in the theory group.
*  And see sale at mit right so i was surrounded at the time when i was coming up with these ideas by these professional theoreticians and that's like a murderers row.
*  Of thinkers there right i mean it's like turn award turn award mccarthur turn award i mean.
*  You know the crew right theoretical computer science theoretical computer science yeah yeah so so i'm in the theory group right theoretical computer science.
*  And i publish a book so you know so i was in this milieu where i was being exposed to people.
*  Where focus was their tier one skill like that's what you would talk about right like how how intensely i can focus that was the key skill it's like your 440 time or something if you were an athlete right so.
*  So this is something that people are actually the the theory folks are thinking about oh yeah really like they're openly discussing like how do you focus.
*  I mean i don't know if they would you know quantify it but but focus was the tier one skill so you you would come in here'd be a typical day you'd come in.
*  And eric domain would be sitting in front of a whiteboard yeah right with a whole group of visitors who had come to work with them and maybe that projected like a grid on there because they're working on some graph theory problem.
*  You go to lunch you go to the gym you come back they're sitting there staring at the same same whiteboard right like that's the tier one skill.
*  This is the difference between different disciplines like I.
*  I often feel for many reasons like a fraud but I definitely feel like a fraud when I hang out with like either mathematicians or physicists it's like it feels like they're doing.
*  The legit work because when you talk with closer in computer science you get to programming or like machine learning like the the.
*  The experimental machine learning or like just the engineering version of it it's it feels like you're gone so far away from what's required to.
*  solve something fundamental about this universe it feels like you're just like cheating your way into like some kind of trick to figure out how to solve a problem in this one particular case yeah that's how it feels right.
*  It is I'd be interested to hear what you think about that because.
*  Programming doesn't always feel like you need to think deeply to work deeply but sometimes it does so it's a weird dance for sure code does right I mean.
*  Especially if you're coming up with original algorithmic designs I think it's a great example of deep work I mean yeah the the the hardcore theoreticians they push it to an extreme I mean I think it's like.
*  Knowing that athletic endeavor is good and then hanging out with a Olympic athlete like oh I see that's what it is now for the grad students like me we're not anywhere near that level, but the faculty.
*  The faculty in that group, these were the cognitive Olympic athletes but coding, I think, is a classic example of deep work because.
*  I got this problem I want to solve I have all of these tools and I have to combine them somehow creatively and on the fly but but so basically I had been exposed to that.
*  So I was used to this notion when I was in grad school and I was writing my blog I'd write about hard focus you know those the term I used.
*  Then I published this book so good they can't ignore you which came out in 2012 so like right as I began as a professor.
*  And that book had this notion of skill being really important for career satisfaction that it's not just following your passion.
*  You have to actually really get good at something and then you use that skills as leverage and there's this big follow up question to that book of Okay, well, how do I get really good at this yeah and then I look back to my grad school experience I was like huh.
*  There's this focus thing that we used to do I wonder how generally applicable that is into the knowledge sector and so, as I started thinking about it.
*  It became clear there's this interesting storyline that emerged that okay actually undistracted concentration is not just important for esoteric.
*  Theoreticians is important here and support here and support here and that involved into the the deep work hypothesis, which is across the whole knowledge work sector.
*  Focus is very important and we've accidentally created circumstances where we just don't do a lot of it so focus is the sort of prerequisite for basically you say knowledge work but basically any kind of skill acquisition any kind of major effort in this world can break that apart a little bit.
*  Yeah, so a key key aspect of focus is not just that you're you're concentrating hard on something, but you do it without distraction.
*  So a big theme of my work is that context shifting kills the human capacity to think so if I if I change what i'm paying attention to to something different.
*  Really, even if it's brief and then try to bring it back to the main thing i'm doing that causes a huge cognitive pile up that makes it very hard to think clearly.
*  So, even if you think okay look i'm writing this code or i'm writing this essay and i'm not multitasking and all my windows are closed and i've no notifications on.
*  But every five or six minutes you quickly check like an inbox or your phone that initiates a contact shift in your brain right we're going to start to suppress some neural networks we're going to try to amplify some others it's a pretty complicated process actually there's a sort of neurological cascade that happens.
*  You rip yourself away from that halfway through and go back to what you're doing and now it's trying to switch back to the original thing, even though it's also your brains in the process of switching to these emails and trying to understand those contexts.
*  And as a result, your ability to think clearly just goes really down and it's fatiguing too I mean you do this long enough as you're you get midday and you're like okay I can't I can't think anymore you've exhausted yourself.
*  Is there some kind of perfect number of minutes would you say so we're talking about focusing on a particular task for.
*  You know, one minute five minutes 10 minutes 30 minutes is it possible to kind of context switch while maintaining deep focus.
*  You know every 20 minutes or so so if you're thinking of like this again maybe it's a selfish kind of perspective, but if you think about programming.
*  You know you're focused on a particular design of a little bit maybe a small scale on a particular function or large scale on a on a system.
*  And then the shift of focus happens like this, which is like wait a minute is there a library that can achieve this little task or something like that, and then you have to look it up.
*  This is the danger zone you go to the internets yeah and and so you have to now you, it is a kind of context switch because, as opposed to thinking about the particular problem you don't have switch thinking about.
*  Like consuming and integrating knowledge that's out there, they can plug into your solution to a particular problem it definitely feels like a context switch.
*  But is that is that a really bad thing to do so, should you be setting it aside always and really trying to as much as possible go deep and stay there for like a really long period of time.
*  Well, I mean, I think if you're looking up a library that's relevant to what you're doing that's probably okay and I don't know that I would count that as a full context shift because.
*  The semantic networks involved are relatively similar right you're thinking about this type of solution you're thinking about coding you're thinking about this type of functions.
*  Where you're really going to get hit is if you switch your context to something that's different.
*  And if there's unresolved obligation so really the worst possible thing you could do would be to look at like an email inbox right because here's 20 emails.
*  I can't answer most of these right now they're completely different like the context of these emails like okay there's a grant funding issue or something like this is very different than the coding i'm doing.
*  And i'm leaving it unresolved like someone needs something from me and i'm going to try to pull my attention back the second worst would be something that's emotionally arousing.
*  So if you're like let me just glance over at twitter i'm sure it's nice and calm and peaceful over there right that can be devastating because you're going to expose yourself to something that's emotionally arousing.
*  that's going to completely mess up the cognitive plateau there and then, when you come back to okay let me try to code again it's really difficult so both the information and the emotion.
*  Both both can be killers if what you're trying to do so I would recommend at least an hour at a time.
*  Because it could take up to 20 minutes to completely clear out the residue from whatever it was you were thinking about before.
*  So if you're coding for 30 minutes you might only be getting 10 or 15 minutes of actual sort of peak lex going on there right so an hour at least you get a good 40 45 minutes plus i'm partial to 90 minutes as a really good.
*  A really good chunk we can get a lot done, but just before you get exhausted, you can sort of pull back a little bit.
*  pull back a little bit.
*  yeah and one of the beautiful and you know people can read about in your book deep work, but, and I know this has been out for a long time and people are probably familiar with many of the concepts, but it's still pretty profound it has stayed with me for a long time.
*  there's something about adding the terms to it that actually solidifies the concepts like words matter it's pretty cool and just for me sort of as a comment.
*  there's.
*  it's a struggle and it's very difficult to maintain focus for a long period of time, but the days on which i'm able to accomplish several hours of that kind of work.
*  i'm happy so forget being productive and all that yeah i'm just satisfied with my life i'm I feel I feel fulfilled it's like joyful and then I can be i'm less of a dick to other people in my life afterwards.
*  it's a it's a beautiful thing and there there I find the opposite when I don't do that kind of thing i'm much more irritable.
*  Like I feel like I didn't accomplish anything and there's the stress that then the negative emotion builds up to where you're no longer able to sort of.
*  enjoy the hell out of this amazing life so so in that sense deep work has been a source of a lot of happiness i'd love to ask you how do you again you cover this in the book, but how do you integrate.
*  Deep work into your life what are different scheduling strategies that you would recommend just at a high level yeah what are different ideas there well, I mean i'm a big fan of time blocking.
*  Right so if you're facing your workday don't allow like your inbox or to do list to sort of drive you don't just come into your day and think what do I want to do next yes i'm a big plan is saying here's the time here's the time available.
*  Let me make a plan for it right so I have a meeting here of an appointment here here's what's left what I actually want to do with it so in this half hour i'm going to work on this.
*  For this 90 minute block i'm going to work on that and during this hour i'm going to try to fit this in and then actually this half hour gap between two meetings so why don't I take advantage of that to go run five errands I can kind of batch those together.
*  But blocking out in advance this is what I want to do with the time available.
*  I mean I find that's much more effective now once you're doing this once you're in a discipline of time blocking it's much easier to actually see this is where I want, for example, the deep work.
*  And I can get a handle on the other things that need to happen and find better places to fit them so I can prioritize this and you're going to get a lot more of that done than if it's just going through your day and saying what's next.
*  I schedule every single day kind of thing so as I could try to in the morning to try to have a plan.
*  Yes, so you know I do a quarterly weekly daily planning so at the semester or quarterly level I have a big picture.
*  Vision for what i'm trying to get done you know during the fall let's say or during the winter like I want these are there's a deadline coming up for academic papers at the end of the season here's what i'm working on I want to have this many chapters done of a book something like this like you have the.
*  The big picture vision of what you want to get done then weekly you look at that and then you look at your week.
*  Can you put together a plan for like okay what am I going to what's my week going to look like what do I need to do or how am I going to make progress on these things maybe.
*  Maybe I need to do an hour every morning or I see that Monday is my only really empty day so that's going to be the day that I really need to nail on writing or something like this and then every day.
*  You look at your weekly plan and see only block off the actual hours so you do that that three scales the the quarterly down the weekly down to daily.
*  And we're talking about actual times of day versus so the alternative is what I end up doing a lot and i'm not sure it's the best way to do it is.
*  scheduling the duration of time, this is the, this is called the luxury when you don't have any meetings i'm like religiously don't do meetings.
*  All other academics are jealous of you, by the way, yeah I know no zoom meetings, I find those are that's one of the worst tragedies tragedies of the pandemic.
*  Is both the opportunity to what the positive thing is to have more time with your family, you know sort of reconnect in many ways and that that's really interesting.
*  Be able to remotely sort of not waste time on travel and all those kinds of things, the negative is.
*  Actually, both those things are also sources of the negative, but the negative is like it seems like people have multiplied the number of meetings because they're so easy to schedule.
*  And there's nothing more draining to me intellectually philosophically just my spirit is destroyed by even a 10 minute zoom meeting like what are we doing here.
*  what's the meaning of life.
*  Every zoom meeting is I have an existential crisis so.
*  Your regard with.
*  Internet connection.
*  So.
*  So.
*  What the hell are we talking about oh so when you don't have meetings there's a luxury to really.
*  allow for certain things if they need to like the important things like deep work sessions to last way longer than.
*  You may be planned for I mean that's my goal is to try to schedule the goals to schedule to sit and focus for particular tasks for an hour and hope I can keep going.
*  yeah.
*  And hope I can get lost in it and do you find that this is at all an OK way to go and the time blocking is just something you have to do to actually be an adult and operate in this real world or is there some magic to the time blocking.
*  Well I mean there's magic to the intention there's magic to it if you have varied responsibilities right so i'm often juggling.
*  Multiple jobs essentially there's there's academic stuff there's teaching stuff there's book stuff there's the the business surrounding you know surrounding my my book stuff but.
*  I'm of your same mindset if a deep work session is going well yes rock and roll and let it let it go on so like one of the big keys of time block at least the way I do it so I even you know sell this planner to help people time block.
*  It has many columns because the discipline is oh if your initial schedule changes you just move over one next time you get a chance to move over one column and then you just fix it for the time that's remaining.
*  So in other words there's not there's no bonus for I made a schedule and I stuck with it like there's actually like you get a prize for it right like for me the prize is I have an intentional plan for my time.
*  And if I have to change that plan that's fine like the state I want to be is basically at any point in the day I've thought about what time remains and.
*  And gave it some thought for what to do because I'll do the same thing even though I have a lot more.
*  Meetings and other types of things I have to do in my various jobs and I basically prioritize the deep work and they get yelled at a lot.
*  That's kind of my strategy is like just be okay just be okay getting yelled at a lot because I feel you if you're rolling.
*  Yeah well that's that's what it is for me like with writing I think it's writing so hard in a certain way that it's you don't really get on a roll in some sense like it's just difficult.
*  But working on proofs it's very hard to pull yourself away from a proof if you start to get some traction just you've been at it for a couple hours and you feel the.
*  The pins and tumblers starting to click together and progress is being made it's really hard to call pull away from that so so i'm willing to get yelled at by almost everyone.
*  Of course there is also a positive effect to.
*  Pulling yourself out of it when things are going great because then you're kind of excited to resume.
*  Yeah.
*  Supposed to stopping in a dead end that's true that there's an yeah there's a.
*  There's an extra force of procrastination that comes with if you stop on a dead end to return to the task yeah or or a cold start.
*  Whenever I feel like i'm going to stage now I submitted a few papers recently so now we're sort of starting something up from cold and it takes way too long to get going because it's very hard to.
*  It's very hard to get the motivation to schedule a time when it's not yeah we're in it like here's where we are we feel like something's about to give here when in the very early stages where it's just.
*  I don't know i'm going to read hard papers and it's gonna be hard to understand them i'm gonna have no idea how to make progress is not is not motivated what about deadlines can we okay so this is like a therapy session.
*  Okay, so this is like a therapy session.
*  Is why it seems like I don't I only get stuff done that has deadlines and so the one of the implied powerful things about time blocking is there's a kind of deadline or there's a artificial a real sense of urgency do you think it's possible to get anything done in this world without deadlines why why deadlines work so well.
*  Well it's a clear motivational signal but in the in the short term you do get an effect like that in time blocking i think the strong effect you get by saying this is the exact time i'm gonna work on this.
*  Is that you don't have to debate with yourself every three minutes about should i take a break now right this is the big issue with the same i'm gonna go right.
*  I'm gonna write for a while that's it because your mind is saying well obviously we're gonna take some breaks.
*  We're not just gonna write forever and so why not right now.
*  Like well not right now let's go a little bit longer five minutes or one always take a break now like we should probably look at the Internet now you have to constantly have this battle on the other hand if you're in a time block schedule.
*  Like I got these two hours put aside for writing that's what i'm supposed to be doing I have a break scheduled over here.
*  I don't have to fight with myself right and maybe at a larger scale deadlines give you a similar sort of a fact is I know this is what i'm supposed to be working on because it's it's do.
*  Perhaps but we are describing as much healthier sort of giving yourself over you talk about this in the new email book is the process I mean in general you talk about it all over is is creating a process and then giving yourself over to the process the.
*  But then you have to be strict with yourself yeah but what are the deadlines you're talking about like with papers like what's the main type of deadline work.
*  What's the papers definitely but you know publications like say this this podcast I have to publish this podcast next early next week one because your book is coming out i'd love to.
*  To support this amazing book but the other is I have to fly to Vegas on Thursday to run 40 miles of David Goggins and so I want this podcast that this conversation we're doing now to be out of my life.
*  Like I don't want to be in a hotel in Vegas like editing the like freaking out while David Goggins is yelling on our on our forty three.
*  Your territory thing but actually it's possible that they still will be doing that you know because it's that's not a hard that's a softer deadline right but those are sort of life imposes these kinds of deadlines.
*  I'm not so yeah papers are nice because there's an actual deadline but I am almost referring to like the pressure that people put on you hey man you said you're going to get this done two months ago why haven't you gotten it done.
*  I don't see I don't like that pressure yeah so maybe now first I think we can I hate it too we can agree by the way having David Goggins yell at you is probably the top productivity technique.
*  I think we'd all get a lot more done if he was yelling but see I don't like that so I will try to get things done early I like I like having flex I also don't like the idea of.
*  This has to get done today right like it's due at midnight we've got a lot to do as the night before because then I get in my head about what if I get sick.
*  Or like what if you know what if I don't get a bad night's sleep and I can't think clearly so I like to have the flex so I'm all process.
*  And that's like the philosophical aspect of that book deep work is that there's something very human and deep.
*  About just wrangling with the world of ideas I mean Aristotle talked about this if you go back and read the ethics he's trying to understand the meaning of life and he eventually ends up ultimately at the human capacity.
*  To contemplate deeply it's kind of a teleological argument is the things that only humans can do and therefore it must be somehow connected to our ends and he said ultimately that's where that's where he found his meaning, but you know he's touching on some sort of information there that's correct.
*  And so what I try to build my life around is regularly thinking hard about stuff that's interesting just like if you get a fitness habit going you feel.
*  Off when you don't do it I try to get that cognitive habit so it's like I got it I mean look I have my bag here somewhere I have my notebook in it because I was thinking.
*  On the uber ride over I was like you know I could get some i'm working on this new proof and it just see train yourself you train yourself to appreciate certain things and then over time the hope is that it creates.
*  Well the stock was some demons because I wonder there's like deep work which and the world without email books that to me symbolize the life I want to live.
*  Okay and then there is I'm like despite appearances and adult at this point and there's a life I actually live.
*  And I it's I'm in constant chaos you said you don't like that anxiety I hate it too, but it seems like I'm always in it it's a giant mess it's like.
*  It's almost like whenever I establish whenever I have successful processes for doing deep work out add stuff on top of it just to introduce the chaos yeah and like I don't want to but.
*  But you know it's so you have to look in the mirror at certain point and you have to say like who the hell am I like I keep doing this is this something that's fundamental to who I am or do I really need to fix this what's the chaos right now like i've seen your video about like your routine it seemed very.
*  Structured and deep and in fact I was really envious of it so like what's the chaos now that's not in that video.
*  Many of those sessions go way longer I don't get enough sleep yeah and then I the main introduction of chaos is it's taken on too many things on the to do list.
*  It's I mean I suppose it's a problem that everybody deals with was just saying not saying no but it's not like I have trouble saying no.
*  It's that there's so much cool shit in my life yeah okay listen I've there's nothing I love more in this world than the Boston Dynamics robots.
*  And they're giving me spot so there's an it to do what am I gonna say no yeah so they're getting me spot and I want to do some computer vision stuff for the hell of it okay so that's not what to do item and then you go to Texas for a while and there's Texas and everything's happening that all the interesting people down there and then there's surprises right there power outage in.
*  In Texas there's constant changes to plans and all those kinds of things and you sleep less and then there's personal stuff like just you know people in your life sources of stress all those kinds of things and.
*  But it does feel like if i'm just being introspective that I bring it onto myself I suppose a lot of people do this kind of thing yes is they they flourish under pressure yeah and I wonder if that.
*  If that's just the hack I've developed as a habit early on in life that needs you need to let go of you need to yes but it's all interesting things yeah that's that's that's interesting yeah because these are all interesting things well,
*  One of the things you talked about in deep work which is like really important is like having an end to the day yeah like putting it down yeah that I don't think i've ever done in my life yeah well see I started doing that early because I got married early.
*  So you know I didn't have a real job as a grad student but my wife had a real job and so I just figured I should do my work when she's at work.
*  Because you know hey when works over she'll be home I don't want I don't want to be you know on campus or whatever and so real early on I just got in that habit of.
*  This is when you know this is when you in work and then when I was a postdoc which is kind of an easy job right I put artificial I was like I want to train.
*  I was like when I'm a professor is going to be busier because there's demands that professors have beyond research and so as a postdoc I added artificial large time consuming things into the middle of my day I basically exercise for two hours in the middle of the day and do all this.
*  Productive meditation and stuff like this while still maintaining the nine to five so it's like okay I want to get really good at putting artificial constraints on so that I stay I didn't want to get flabby when my job was easy so that when I became a professor.
*  And now all that's paying off because I have a ton of kids so so now I don't really have a choice that's what's probably keeping me away from cool things is I just don't have time to do them and then after a while people you know stop bothering.
*  Well but that you know but that's how you have a successful life otherwise you're going to it's too easy to then go into the full hunter as Thompson.
*  Yeah like to where no nobody wants nobody functional wants to be in your vicinity like you're driving your track to the people.
*  That have a similar behavior pattern is you yeah so if you if you live in chaos you go to try chaotic people and then it becomes like this self fulfilling prophecy and it feels like.
*  I'm not bothered by it but I guess this is all coming around to exactly what you're saying which is like I think one of the big hacks for productive people that I've met is to get married.
*  And have kids honestly it's very perhaps counterintuitive yeah but it gets it's like the ultimate timetable enforcer.
*  Yeah enforces a lot of timetables though it has a huge kids have a huge productivity hit those you gotta wait but you're okay here's the complicated thing though.
*  Like you can think about in your own life starting the podcast is one of these just.
*  Cool opportunities that you put on yourself right yeah like you know I could have been talking to an MIT four years ago and like don't do that like your research is going well right.
*  But then everyone who watches you is like okay this podcast is the direction that's taking you is like a couple years from now it's gonna it'll be something really monumental that you're probably going to probably lead to right there'll be some really it just feels like your life is going somewhere.
*  It's going somewhere it's interesting yeah unexpected yeah yeah so how do you balance those two things and so what I try to throw at it is this this motto of do less do better know why right so.
*  Do let's do less do better know why it used to be the motto of my website years ago.
*  So do a few things but like an interesting array right so I was doing MIT stuff but I was also writing.
*  You know so a couple things are you know they're interesting like have a couple bets placed on a couple different numbers on the roulette table.
*  But not too many things and then really try to do those things really well and see where it goes like with my writing I just spent years and years and years just train I want to be a better writer want to be a better writer.
*  I started writing student books when I was a student I really wanted to write hardcover idea books I started training I would I would use like New Yorker articles to train myself I break them down and then I'd get commissions with much smaller magazines and practice the skills and.
*  And it took forever until you know but now today like actually get a right for the New Yorker but it took like a decade so a small number of things try doing really well and then the know why is have a connection to some sort of value like in general I think this is worth doing and then seeing where it leads.
*  And so the choice of the few things is grounded in what like a little like a like a little flame of passion like a love for the thing like a sense that you say you wanted to write get good at writing you had that kind of introspective moment of thinking this actually brings me a lot of joy and fulfillment.
*  Yeah I mean it gets complicated because I wrote a whole book about following your passion being bad advice which is like the first thing I kind of got infamous for I wrote that back in 2012 but but the argument there is like passion cultivates right so what I was pushing back on.
*  Was the myth that the passion for what you do exist full intensity before you start and then that's what propels you were actually the reality is as you get better at something.
*  As again more autonomy more skill and more impact of passion grows along with it so that when people look back later.
*  And say oh follow your passion what they really mean is I'm very passionate about what I do and that's a worthy goal but how you actually cultivate that is much more complicated than just introspection is going to identify.
*  Like for sure you should be a writer or something like this so I was actually quoting you as a social network last night in a clubhouse and heard of it I was way after after ask you about this because I was invited I'm invited to do a clubhouse I don't know what that means.
*  Tech reporter has invited me to do a clubhouse about my new book.
*  That's awesome well let me know when because I'll show up but yeah but what is it okay so first of all let me just mention that I was in a clubhouse.
*  Room last night and I kept plugging your exactly exactly you said about passion so talk about it it was a room that was focused on burnout.
*  Okay but first clubhouse is a kind of fascinating place in terms of your mind would be very interesting to analyze this place because you know we talk about email about social networks.
*  But clubhouse is something very different and I've encountered in other places discord and so on that's voice only communication so it's a bunch of people in a room they're just eyes closed all you hear their voices real time real time live it only happens live you're technically not allowed to record.
*  But some people still do and you know especially one of the big big conversations but the whole point is this they're live and there's different structures like a discord.
*  It was so fascinating I have this discord server that would have hundreds of people in a room together right we're all just little icons that commute and unmute our mics.
*  Okay and so you're sitting there not so it's just voices and you're able with hundreds of people to not interrupt each other first of all like as a dynamic system yeah like.
*  You see icons just like mics muted or not muted basically yeah well so everyone's muted and they unmute and they start it starts flashing yeah and I was like okay let me get precedence.
*  Yeah so it's the digital equivalent of when you're in a conversation like a faculty meeting and you sort of like kind of make some noises like all the other person's finishing and so people realize like okay this person wants to talk next but now it's purely digital you see a flashing.
*  But in a faculty meeting which is very interesting like even as we're talking now there's a visual element that seems to increase the probability of interruption.
*  Yeah when it's just darkness you actually listen better and you don't interrupt so like if you create a culture there's there's always gonna be assholes but they're they're actually exceptions everybody adjust they kind of evolved to the.
*  The beat of the room okay that's one fascinating aspects like okay that's weird because it's different than like a zoom call with there's video yeah.
*  It's just audio you think video ads but actually seems like it's subtracts the second aspect of it that's fascinating is when it's no video just audio.
*  There's an intimacy it's feel is weird because with strangers it you you connect you know in a much more real way it's very similar to podcasts yeah but.
*  With a lot of people with a lot of people and new people huh and then you and they they bring okay first of all different voices like low voices and like high voices and and.
*  It's more difficult to judge in discord you couldn't even see the people it was a culture where you do funny profile pictures as opposed to your actual face in clubhouse it's your actual face.
*  So you can tell like as an older person younger person in discord you couldn't you just have to judge based on the voice but there's a.
*  There's something about the listening and the intimacy of being surprised by different strangers that feels almost like.
*  A party with friends and friends of friends you haven't met yet but you really like.
*  Now clubhouse also has an interesting innovation where there's a large crowd that just listens and there's a stage and you can bring people up on stage so only people on stage or talking.
*  And you can have like 5678 sometimes 2030 people on stage and then you can also have thousands of people just listening I see so there's a I don't know a lot of people are being surprised by this why is it called a social network.
*  It seems like it doesn't have there's not social links there's not a feed that's trying to harvest attention it feels like a communication.
*  So the social network aspect is you follow people and the people you follow now this is like the first social network that's actually correct use of follow I think.
*  You're more likely to see the rooms there in so there's a your feed is a bunch of rooms that are going on right now and the people you follow.
*  Are the ones that will increase the likelihood that you'll see the room there in and so the final result is like there's a list of really interesting rooms like.
*  I have all these i've been speaking Russian quite a bit there's practicing but also just like talking politics and philosophy in Russian.
*  I've never done that before but it allows me to connect with that community and then there's a community of people like.
*  It's funny but like i'll go in a community of all African American people talking about race and i'll be welcomed yeah i've never had like i've literally never been in a difficult conversation about race.
*  Like with people from all over the place it's like fascinating and then I musicians jazz musicians I don't know you could say that a lot of other places could have created that culture, I suppose.
*  Twitter and Facebook a lot for that culture but there's something about this network as it stands now because it and no Android users.
*  Is probably just because it's iPhone people.
*  iPhone people.
*  Is there.
*  Inspiratorial or something.
*  Well, like less listen i'm an Android person, so I got an iPhone just for this network.
*  Yeah.
*  It's funny.
*  Yeah.
*  Is for now it's all like there's very few trolls.
*  Yeah.
*  There's very few people that are trying to manipulate the system and so on so I don't know it's it's interesting now the downside the reason you're going to hate it.
*  Is because it's so intimate because it pulls you in and pulls in very successful people like you just like really successful productive very busy people.
*  It it it's a huge time sink it's very difficult to pull yourself out.
*  Interesting you mean once you're in a room.
*  Well, no, the leaving the room is actually easy the beautiful thing about a stage with multiple people there's a little button that says leave quietly.
*  Okay.
*  So culture no etiquette wise it's okay to just leave.
*  Yeah.
*  So you and I in a room when it's just you and I it's a little awkward to leave if you're asking questions on this.
*  Yeah.
*  Yeah.
*  But and actually if you're being interviewed for the book that's weird because you're now in the event and you're supposed to but usually the person interviewing would be like okay it's time for you to go it's more normal but the normal way to use the room was like you're just opening the app.
*  And they'll be like I don't know Sam Harris Eric Weinstein I think Joe Rogan showed up today Bill Gates these people on stage just like randomly just plugged in and then you step up on stage.
*  Listen maybe you won't contribute at all maybe you'll say something funny and then you'll just leave and there's the the addicting aspect to it the reason it's a time sink is you don't want to leave.
*  What I've noticed about exceptionally busy people that they love this this is the there I think might have to do with the pandemic.
*  Might be a little bit yeah.
*  There's a loneliness.
*  Yeah.
*  They're all starved.
*  Yeah.
*  But also it's really cool people.
*  Yeah.
*  Like when was when was the last time you talked to Sam Harris or whoever like think of anybody Tyler like any any faculty.
*  This is like what universities strive to create but it's taken because you don't have to cultural evolution try to get a lot of interesting smart people together that run into each other.
*  We have really strong faculty in a room together with no scheduling this is the power of it is like you just show up there's no none of that baggage of scheduling and so on and there's no pressure to leave.
*  Sorry no pressure to stay it's very easy for you to leave you realize that there's a lot of constraints on meetings and like faculty.
*  There's like even stopping by you know before the pandemic a friend or faculty or colleague and so on you know there's a weirdness about leaving.
*  Yeah.
*  But here there's not a weirdness about leaving so they've discovered something interesting.
*  The but the final result when you observe it is it's very fulfilling I think it's very beneficial but it's very addicting so you have to make sure you moderate.
*  Yeah that's interesting and OK well so maybe I'll try it I mean look there's no the things that make me suspicious about other platforms aren't here.
*  So the feed is not full of user generated content that is going through some sort of algorithmic rating process with all the weird incentives and nudging that does.
*  And you're you're not producing content that's being harvested to be monetized by another company I mean it seems like it's more ephemeral right you're here you're talking the feed is just actually just showing you.
*  Here's interesting things happening right you're not jockeying in the feed for look I'm being clever or something and I'm going to get a like count that goes up and that's going to influence and.
*  Right.
*  And there's more friction there's more cognitive friction I guess involved in listening to smart people versus scrolling through yeah there's something there.
*  So there's no.
*  Why are people so I see all there's all these articles that seem I haven't really read them but why are reporters negative about this.
*  Competition the New York Times wrote this article called unfettered conversations happening on clubhouse.
*  Is.
*  So I'm right in picking up a tone from even from the headlines that there's some like negative vibes from the press.
*  No so I can say let's say well I'll tell you what the article was saying which is.
*  They're having cancelable conversations like the biggest people in the world almost trolling the press right and the press is definitely for Channing the press yeah.
*  The press but by saying that you just you guys are looking for click bait from our genuine human conversations and so.
*  The I think the honestly the press is just like what do we do with this we can't.
*  First of all it's a lot of work for that okay it's what Navarro says which is like this is skipping the journalist.
*  Like the interview you if you go on clubhouse the interview you might do for the book will be with somebody who's like a journalist and interviewing you yeah that's more traditional yeah it'd be a good introduction for you to try it.
*  But the like the way to use clubhouse is you just show up.
*  It's like again like me like I keep mentioning Sam Harris as if it's like the only person I know but like a lot of these major faculty I don't know Max Tegmark just major faculty just sitting there and then you show up.
*  And then I'll ask like oh don't you have a book coming out or something and then you'll talk about the book and then you leave five minutes later because you have to go get coffee and interesting.
*  Like that's the yeah it's not the journalistic you're not going to actually enjoy the interview as much because it'll be like the normal thing yeah like you're there 40 minutes or an hour and there'll be questions from the audience right.
*  Like I'm doing an event next week for the book launch where it's like Jason Fried and I are talking about email but it's using some more like a thousand people who are there to watch virtually but using some sort of traditional webinar.
*  Clubhouse would be a situation where that could just happen informally like I jump in like Jason's there and someone else jumps in and yeah that's interesting.
*  But for now it's still closed so even though there's a lot of excitement and there'll be quite famous people just sitting there listening to you.
*  Yeah.
*  But the numbers aren't exactly high so you're talking about rooms like even the huge rooms are like just a few thousand.
*  And this is this is probably so ho in the 50s or something to just because of the exponential growth give it seven more months and if you let one invite be gets two invites be gets four invites because pretty soon it'll be everyone and then the rooms in your feet are going to be whatever marketing performance enhancing drugs or something like that.
*  Yeah but then and a bunch of competitors there's already like 30 plus competitors sprung up Twitter spaces so Twitter is creating a competitor that's going to likely destroy clubhouse because they just have a much larger user base and they already have a social network.
*  So I would be very cautious of course with the addictive element but it doesn't just like you said this particular implementation in its early stages doesn't have the like.
*  The the it doesn't have the context switching problem.
*  Yeah you'll just switch to it and you'll be stuck.
*  Yeah the keep a context is great.
*  Yeah yeah.
*  And but then I think the best way I've found to use it is to acknowledge that these things pull you in.
*  Yeah.
*  So I've used it in the past like almost you know I'll go get a coffee and I'll tune into a conversation as if that's how I use podcasts sometimes I'll just like play a little bit of a podcast and then you know I can just turn it off.
*  The problem with these is it pulls you in it's really interesting and then the other problem that you'll experience is like somebody will recognize you.
*  And then they'll be like oh Lex come on up come on.
*  Oh hey I had a question for you and then it takes a lot for you to go like to ignore that.
*  Yeah yeah.
*  So yeah and then you pulled in and it's fascinating and it's really cool people so it's like a source of a lot of joy but it is you have to be very very very careful.
*  The reason I brought it up is we there's a room there's an entire club actually on burnout and I brought you up and I brought David Goggins is the process I go through which is you know my passion goes up and down it dips and I don't think I trust my own mind to.
*  To tell me whether I'm getting close to burnout or exhaustion or not I kind of go with the David Goggins model of me he's probably more applying it to running but.
*  When it feels like your mind can't take any more that you're just 40% at your capacity I mean it's just like an arbitrary level.
*  The Navy SEAL thing right.
*  The Navy SEAL thing I mean you could put that at any percent but it is remarkable that if you just take it one step at a time just keep going is it's similar to this idea of a process if you just trust the process and you just keep following even if the passion goes up and down and so on.
*  Then ultimately.
*  If you look in aggregate the passion will increase.
*  Yeah.
*  Your self satisfaction will increase.
*  Yeah I think and if you have two things this has been a big strategy of mine so that you can what you hope for is off phase off phase alignment like that sometimes is in phase and that's a problem.
*  But off phase alignments good so okay my research I'm struggling out of my book stuff is going well right and so when you when you add those two waves together like oh we're doing pretty well and then.
*  In other periods like on my writing you know I feel like I'm just not getting anywhere but I've had some good papers I'm feeling good over there so having two things that.
*  They can counteract each other now sometimes they fall into sync and then it gets rough then when you know when everything because everything for me is cyclical you know good periods bad periods with all this stuff so.
*  Typically they don't coincide so it helps compensate when they do coincide you get really high highs like where everything is clicking and then you get these really low lows where like your research is not working your programs not clicking you feel like you're nowhere with your writing.
*  And then it's a little rougher.
*  Is do you do you think about the concept of burnout because I personally never experienced burnout in the way that folks talk about which is.
*  Like it's not just the up and down it's like you don't want to do anything ever again yeah it like it's for some people it's like physical like to the hospital kind of thing yeah yeah so I do worry about it so when I used to do.
*  Student writing like writing about students a student advice there's it came up a lot with students at elite schools and I used to call it deep procrastination but it's a real.
*  Really vivid very replicable syndrome where they stop being able to do schoolwork yeah like this is due and the professor gives you an extension and the professor gives an incomplete and says you got it you were going to fail the course you have to hand this in.
*  They can't do it right it's like it's a complete stop on the ability to actually do work so I used to counsel students who had that issue and often it was a combination of this is my.
*  Best analysis is you have just the physical and cognitive difficulties of their usual under a very hard load rather than doing too many majors to an extracurriculars just really pushing themselves.
*  And the motivation is not sufficiently intrinsic right so if you have a motivational center that's not completely on board a lot of these kids like I'm dealing with MIT kids they would be you know their whole town was.
*  Shooting off fireworks that they got in there everyone's hope that they were going there.
*  And that there are three majors they don't want to let people down but they're not really interested in being a doctor whatever.
*  So your motivation is not in the right place the motivational psychologist was the the locus of control was more towards the extrinsic end of the spectrum and you have hardship.
*  And you could just fritz out the whole system and so I would always be very worried about that so I think about that a lot I do a lot of multi phase or multi scale seasonality.
*  So i'll go hard on something for a while and then for a few weeks go easy i'll have semesters that are hard and semesters that are easier i'll take the summer really low so on multiple scales and in the day i'll go really hard on something but then have a hard cut off at five so like every scale.
*  It's all about rest and recovery because I really want to avoid that and I do burn out I burnt out pretty recently I get minor burnt out so I got a.
*  Paper a couple papers that was trying to work through for a deadline a few weeks ago and I wasn't sleeping well and there's some other things going on.
*  And it just it knocks out and I get sick usually is how I know push myself too far and so I kind of pulled it back now i'm doing this book launch then after this book launch i'm pulling it back again.
*  So I like seasonality for rest and recovery I think it's crucial and at every scale daily monthly you know and at the annual scale an easy summer, for example, I think it's like a great idea if that's possible.
*  Okay you just made me realize that exactly what I do because I I feel like i'm not even close to burn out anything even though I i'm in chaos yeah.
*  I feel the right exact ways of seasonality is the not even the seasonality but like.
*  You always have multiple seasons operating it's like you said like because when you have a lot of cool shit going on yeah you there's always at least one thing that's a source of joy.
*  At that there's always a reason I suppose the fundamental thing and i've known people that suffer from depression to the fundamental problem with the experience of depression and burnout is like why do like life is meaningless yeah and I always have an answer of like why why today could be cool yeah.
*  And yeah and you have to contrive it right if you don't have it you have to contrive it yeah I think it's really important like okay well, this is going bad so now is the time to start thinking about.
*  I mean look I started a podcast during the pandemic it's like this is going pretty bad, but you know what this could be something really interesting.
*  Deep questions with Kyle Newport.
*  I do it all in that voice.
*  I love the podcast by the way, but yeah I think David Foster Wallace said the key to life is to be unborable I've always kind of taken that to heart, which is like.
*  You should be able to maybe artificially generate anything like.
*  Find something in your environment in your surroundings that's a source of joy like everything is fun yeah.
*  Did you read the pale king.
*  It means it's like uncomfortable it's like an uncomfortable meditation on boredom like the characters in that are just driven to the extremes of I just bought three books on boredom the other day.
*  So now I'm really interested in this topic because I was anxious about my book launch happening this week so I was like okay I need something else so I have this idea for I might do as an article first but as a book like okay I need something cool.
*  To be thinking about because I was worried about like I don't know if it's the launch going to work the pandemic what's going to happen I don't know if it's going to get there so I this is exactly what we're talking about so I went out and I bought a bunch of books.
*  And I'm beginning like a whole sort of intellectual exploration well I think that's one of the profound ideas and deep work that you don't expand on too much is boredom yeah well so.
*  Deep work had a superficial idea about boredom which which was I had this chapter called embrace boredom and a very functionalist idea was basically.
*  You have to have some boredom in your regular schedule or your mind is going to form a Pavlovian connection between as soon as I feel boredom I get stimuli.
*  And once it forms that connection is never going to tolerate deep work so there's this very pragmatic treatment of boredom of.
*  Because otherwise you can't write for three hours like it's just not going to tolerate it but more and more recently what i'm really interested in boredom is it as a fundamental human drive.
*  Right because it's incredibly uncomfortable and think about the other things that are incredibly uncomfortable like hunger or thirst they serve a really important.
*  Right because it's incredibly uncomfortable and think about the other things that are incredibly uncomfortable like hunger or thirst they serve a really important.
*  Purpose for a species right like if something is really distressing there's a reason pain is really uncomfortable because we need to worry about getting injured.
*  Thirst is really uncomfortable because we need water to survive so what's boredom why is that uncomfortable and and i've been interested in this notion that boredom is about driving us towards.
*  Productive action like as a species, I mean think about it like what what got us to actually take advantage of these brains what got us to actually work with fire what got us to start shaping.
*  stones in the hand axes and figuring out if we could actually sharpen a stick sharp enough that we could throw it as a melee weapon or a distance weapon for hunting mammoth right.
*  Boredom drives us towards action so now i'm fascinated by this fundamental action instinct because I have this theory that i'm working on that.
*  we're out of sync with it just like we got we have this drive for hunger, but then we introduced junk food and got out of sync with hunger and it makes us really unhealthy.
*  We have this drive towards action, but then we overload ourselves and we have all of these distractions and then that causes.
*  it's like a cognitive action obesity type things because it's short circuits this system that wants us to do things, but we put more things in our plate and we can possibly do and then we're really frustrated we can't do them.
*  And we're short circuiting all of our wires so it all comes back to this question well, what would be the ideal.
*  The ideal sort of amount of stuff to do and type of things to do like if we wanted to look back at our ancestral environment and say, if I could just build from scratch.
*  What type how much work I do and what I work on to be as in touch with that as like paleo people are trying to get their diets in touch with that and so now i'm just.
*  let's see this is i'm just it's something I made up yeah but now i'm going deep on it and one of my podcast listeners I was talking about on the show, and I was like well, I get trying to learn about animals and boredom and she sent me this cool article from an animal behaviorist journal about what we know about.
*  Human boredom versus animal boredom so trying to figure out that puzzle is the wave that's high, so I can get through the wave that's low of like I don't know about this pandemic book launch and yeah.
*  And my research on my research is stumbling a little bit because of the pandemic, and so I needed a nice you know high so there we go there's a case study.
*  Well, the is both a case study and a very interesting set of concepts because I didn't even realize that it's so simple i'm one of the people that.
*  has a interesting push and pull dynamic with hunger trying to understand the hunger with myself like I probably have a healthy relationship with food I don't know.
*  But there's probably probably a perfect that's a nice way to think about diet as action there's probably an optimal risk diet response to the.
*  The experience that our bodies telling us the signal that a body's sending which is hunger and that same way boredom is sending a signal.
*  And most of our intellectual activities in this world are creative activities are essentially a response.
*  To that signal yeah and think about this analogy that we have this hunger instinct that junk food short circuits yes right it's like oh well we'll satisfy that hyperpalliably and it doesn't end up well.
*  Now think about modern attention engineered digitally mediated entertainment we have this board of instinct oh we can we can take care of that with a hyperpalliable alternative.
*  Is that going to lead to a similar problem.
*  So i've been fasting a lot lately like i'm doing eating once a day i've been doing that for over a month just eating one meal a day and primarily meat.
*  But it's very fasting has been incredible for me for focus for well being for few I don't I don't know just for feeling good okay we'll put on a chart what makes you feel good.
*  And that fasting and eating primarily a meat based diet makes me feel really good and so but that ultimately what fasting did.
*  I haven't fasted super long yet like a seven day diet which I really like to do but even just fasting for a day for 24 hours gets you in touch with your with the signal.
*  It's fascinating like you get to listen to your learn to listen to your body that like.
*  You know it's okay to be hungry it's like a little signal that sends you stuff and then and then I get to listen to how it responds when I put food in my body.
*  Like and I get to like okay cool so like food is a thing that pacifies the signal like it sounds ridiculous okay you could do that with do different types of food.
*  It feels different so you learn about what your body yeah for some reason fasting it's similar to the deep or embrace boredom.
*  Fasting allowed me to go into mode of listening of trying to understand the signal that I could say I have an unhealthy appreciation of fruit okay.
*  I love apples and cherries like I don't know how to moderate them so if you take just same amount of calories I don't know calories matter but they say calories 2000 calories of cherries versus 2000 calories of steak.
*  2000 calories of steak maybe just a little bit of like green beans or cauliflower i'm going to feel really good fulfilled focused and happy.
*  Yeah cherries i'm going to be i'm going to wake up behind a dumpster crying with like naked and like it's just all around with everything face yeah and just like bloated just not and unhappy and also the mood swings up and down.
*  I don't know and i'll be much hungrier the next day.
*  I go into this roller coaster as opposed to a calm boat ride along the river in the amazon or something like that yeah so fasting was the mechanism of for me to start listening to the body.
*  I wonder if you can do that same kind of I guess that's what meditation a little bit is a little bit but yeah listen to boredom but so two years ago I had a book out called digital minimalism and one of the things that I did was I did a meditation.
*  I was recommending that people do is basically a 30 day fast but from digital personal entertainment social media online videos anything that captures your attention and dispels boredom.
*  And people were thinking like oh this is a detox like I just want to teach your body not to need the distraction this or that but it really wasn't what I was interested in I wanted there to be space for me to be able to do that.
*  I wanted there to be space that you could listen to your boredom like okay I can't just dispel it I can't just look at the screen and revel in it a little bit and start to listen to it and say what is this really pushing me towards.
*  And you take the new stuff the new technology off the table and sort of ask what is this what am I craving like what's the activity equivalent of.
*  2000 calories of meat with a little bit of green beans on the side and I had 1700 people go through this experiment like spend 30 days doing this.
*  And it's hard at first but then they get used to listening to themselves and sort of seeking out what is this really pushing me towards.
*  And it was pushing people towards connection was pushing people towards I just want to go be around other people it was pushing people towards high quality leisure activities like I want to go do something that's complicated and it took weeks sometimes for them to get in touch with their boredom.
*  But then it completely rewired how they thought about what do I want to do with my time outside of work and then the idea is when you're done with that then it was much easier to go back and completely change your digital life because.
*  You have alternatives right you're not just trying to abstain from things you don't like but that's basically a listening to boredom experiment like just be there with the boredom.
*  And see where it drives you when you don't have you know the digital cheese it's okay so if I can't do that.
*  Where is it going to drive me well I guess I kind of want to go to the library which came up a lot by the way a lot of people rediscovered the library.
*  You know with physical books physical books like you can just go borrow them and like it there's like low pressure and you can explore and you bring them home and then you read them and you can like sit by the window and read them and it's nice weather outside and I used to do that 20 years ago.
*  They're listening to boredom so can you maybe elaborate a little bit on the different experiences that people had when they quit social media for 30 days like is that if you were to recommend that process what is ultimately the goal yeah.
*  Digital minimalism that's that's my philosophy for all this tech and it's working backwards from what's important.
*  So it's you figure out what you're actually all about like what you want to do which one spend your time doing.
*  And then you can ask okay is there a place to tech and amplifier support some of these things and that's how you decide what tech to use.
*  And so the the process is let's actually get away from everything let's be bored for a while let's let's really spend a month getting really figuring out what do I actually want to do what I want to spend my time doing what's important to me you know.
*  What makes me feel good and then when you're done you can bring back in tech very strategically to help those things right.
*  That was the goal that turns out to be much more successful than when people take a abstention only approach so if you come out your tech life and say.
*  You know whatever I look at instagram too much like I don't like how much on my instagram that's a bad thing I want to reduce this bad thing so so here's my new thing i'm going to spend less time looking at instagram much less likely to succeed in the long term.
*  So we're much less likely at trying to reduce this sort of amorphous negative because you know in the moment you're like yeah but it's not that bad and would be kind of interesting look at it now.
*  When you're instead controlling behavior because you have a positive that you're aiming towards is very powerful for people like I want my life to be like this here's the role that tech plays in that life.
*  The connection to wanting your life to be like that is very, very strong and then much, much easier so yeah like using instagram is not part of my plan for how I have that life and I really want to have that life so of course i'm not going to use instagram so it turns out to be a much.
*  More sustainable way to tame what's going on so if you quit social media for 30 days you kind of have to.
*  Do the work you have to do the work of thinking like what am I actually what makes me happy in terms of these tools that I've previously used and.
*  When you try to integrate them back how can I integrate them to maximize the thing that actually yeah or what makes me happy unrelated to technology.
*  Like what do I actually what do I want my life to be like well maybe what I want to do is be outside in nature two hours a day and spend a lot more time like helping my community and sacrifice on behalf of my connections and then have some sort of intellectually engaging.
*  Leisure activity like i'm reading or trying to read the great books and have you more calm and seeing the sun set you create this picture.
*  And then you go back and say well I still need my Facebook group because that's how I keep up with my cycling group but Twitter is just you know toxic not helping any of these things and well i'm an artist so.
*  I kind of need Instagram to get inspiration but if I know that's why i'm using Instagram I don't need it on my phone it's just on my computer and I just follow 10 artists and check it once a week like you really.
*  Can start to play it was the number one thing that differentiated in that experiment the people who ended up.
*  Sustainably making changes and getting through the 30 days and those who didn't.
*  What's the people who did the experimentation and the reflection like let me try to figure out what's positive.
*  They were much more successful than the people that just said i'm sick of using my phone so much so i'm just going to white knuckle it just 30 days will be good for me I just gotta.
*  gotta get away from it or something that doesn't last so you don't use social media currently yeah of do you find that a lot of people go into this process will.
*  Will seek to basically arrive at a similar place to not use social media primary about half right so so about half when they went through this exercise and these aren't.
*  Quantified numbers you know this is just they sent me reports and yeah that's pretty good though so 1700 yeah yeah so so so roughly half.
*  Probably got rid of social media altogether once they did this exercise they realized these things I care about I don't social media is not the tools that's really helping.
*  The other half kept some there are some things in their life or some social media was useful, but the key thing is if they knew why they were deploying social media.
*  They could put fences around it so, for example, of those half that kept some social media almost none of them kept it on their phone.
*  Oh interesting yeah I can't optimize if you if you don't know what the function you're trying to optimize so it's like this huge hack like once you know this is why i'm using twitter.
*  Then you can have a lot of rules about how you use twitter and and suddenly you take this cost benefit ratio and it goes like way from the company's advantage and way over towards your advantage it's kind of fascinating because i've been.
*  Torn with social media, but I did this kind of process I haven't actually done it for 30 days, which I probably should i'll do it for like a week at a time and regularly and thinking what what kind of approach to twitter works for me.
*  What i'm distinctly aware of the fact that I really enjoy posting once or twice a day and at that time checking from the previous post.
*  It like it makes me feel even when there's like negative comments they go right past me and when there's positive comments makes you smile I feel like love and connection with people, especially if people I know, but even just in general.
*  It's like makes me feel like the world is full of awesome people okay when you increase that from checking from two to like I don't know what the threshold is for me, but probably like five or six per day it starts going to anxiety world like where negative comments will actually stick to me mentally.
*  And and positive comments will feel more shallow yeah yeah it's it's kind of fascinating so I.
*  I've been trying to there's been long stretches of time.
*  I think December and January where I did just post and check post and check that was that makes me really happy most of 2020 I did that.
*  Maybe really happy recently I started like I'll go you know you go right back in like a drug addict will you check it like I don't know what that number is but that number is high.
*  You don't come out happy and that you don't know one comes out of a day full of twitter celebrating humanity.
*  And it's not even because i'm very fortunate to have a lot of just like positivity in my the twitter but I there's just a general anxiety I wouldn't even say.
*  I wouldn't even say it's a it's probably the thing that you're talking about with the context switching it's almost like an exhaustion.
*  I wouldn't even say it's like a negative feeling it's almost just an exhaustion to where i'm not creating anything beautiful in my life just exhausted like an existential exhaustion existential exhaustion, but I wonder do you think it's possible to use from the people you've seen.
*  From yourself to to use social media in the way i'm describing moderation or is it always going to become.
*  I when people do this exercise you get lots of.
*  Lots of configurations so for people that have a public presence, for example, like what you're doing is not that not that unusual.
*  Okay, I post one thing a day and my audience likes it and and that's kind of it which but you thought through like okay this support something I value which is like having a sort of informal connection with my audience and being exposed to some sort of.
*  A positive randomness yes okay that's what I think if that's my goal what's the right way to do it well I don't need to be on Twitter on my phone all day maybe what I do is every day at five I do my post and check on the day.
*  So I have a writer friend Ryan holiday who writes about the stoics a lot and he has this similar strategy he post one quote.
*  Every day from usually from a famous stoic and sometimes from a contemporary figure and that's just what he does he just.
*  Post it and it's a very positive thing like his readers really love it because it's just like a dose of inspiration he doesn't spend time.
*  he's never interacting with anyone on social media right but that's an example of I figured out what's important to me what's the best way to use tools to amplify it.
*  And then you get advantages out of the tools so I like what you're doing I looked you up if I looked up your Twitter feed before I came came over here I was curious you're not on there a lot.
*  No I don't see yelling at people now do you think social media as a medium.
*  Change the cultural standards and I mean it in a have you read Neil postman at all have you read like a amusing ourselves to death he was a social critic technology critic.
*  And wrote a lot about sort of technological determinism so the ways which is a really influential idea to a lot of my work which is actually a little out of fashion right now in academia but.
*  The ways that the properties and presence of technologies change things about humans in a way that's not really intended or planned by the humans themselves and he is that the book is all about how.
*  Different communication medium like fundamentally just changed the way the human brain.
*  Understands and operates and so he sort of gets into the what happened when the printed word was widespread and how television changed it and this was all pre social media.
*  But this one of these ideas i'm having is like what's the degree to which I get into it sometimes on my show again to a little bit like the degree to which like Twitter in particular.
*  Just changed the way that people conceptualized what, for example, debate and discussion was like it introduced a rhetorical dump culture or sort of more about tribes not giving ground to other tribes and.
*  And it's like it's a complete there's different places and times when that type of discussion with thought of differently right.
*  Well yeah absolutely but I tend to believe I don't know what you think that there's the technological solutions like there's literally different.
*  Features and Twitter that could completely reverse that there's so much power in the different choices yeah that are made, and it could still be highly engaging and have very different effects perhaps more negative but or hopefully more positive yeah.
*  Yes i'm trying to pull these two things apart so there's these two ways social media let's say could change the experience of reading a major newspaper today.
*  One could be a little bit more economic right so so the internet made it cheaper to get news the newspapers had to retreat to a paywall model because it was the only way they're going to survive but once you're in a paywall model then then.
*  What you really want to do is make your tribe which is within the paywall very very happy with you so you want to work to them but then there's the sort of the terminus point of view which is the properties of Twitter which were arbitrary.
*  Jack and Evan just whatever let's just do it this way influence the very way that people now understand and think about the world.
*  So the one influence the other I think yeah they they kind of started adjusting together I did this thing I mean I'm trying to understand this part of the part of the.
*  I've been playing with the entrepreneurial idea that's a very particular dream I've had of a startup.
*  That this is a longer term thing with has to do with artificial intelligence but more and more it seems like there's a some trajectory through creating social media type of technologies very different than what people are thinking I'm doing but.
*  It's a kind of challenge to the way the Twitter is done but it's not obvious what the best mechanisms are to still make an exceptionally engaging platform my clubhouse is very engaging and not have any other negative effects.
*  I for example there's chrome extensions that allow you to turn off.
*  All likes and dislikes and all of that from Twitter so you all you're seeing is just the content yeah on Twitter that to me is creates that's not a compelling experience at all because I still need.
*  I would argue I still need the likes to know what's a tweet worth reading yeah because I only have a limited amount of time so I need to know what's valuable it's a great yelp reviews on tweets exactly but I've turned off on.
*  For example on my account on YouTube I've turned I wrote a chrome extension that turns off all likes dislikes and just views yeah I don't know how many views the video gets so yeah unless it's on my phone but you take off the recommendations.
*  The no no I YouTube some people that distraction free tube is a big one right yeah no I'm not worried about the distraction because I'm able to control myself on YouTube you don't rabbit hole.
*  No I don't rabbit hole so you have to know your demons or your addictions whatever I knew to bomb okay I don't have I don't keep clicking the negative feelings come from seeing the views on on stuff you've created have created so you don't want to see your views.
*  Yeah so like I'm just like speaking to the things that I'm aware of myself that are helpful and things that are not helpful emotionally and I feel like there should be.
*  We need to create actually tooling for ourselves that's not me with javascript but anybody is able to create sort of control the experience that they have yeah well so my my big unified theory on social media is I'm very I'm very bearish yes on the big platforms having a long future.
*  Your I think the moment I think the moment of three or four major platforms is not going to last right so I don't know okay this is just perspective right so you can start shorting these stocks on my don't know financial yeah don't do it Robin hood.
*  So here's here's I think the the big mistake the major platforms made as when they they took out the network effect advantage.
*  Right so the original pitch especially something like Facebook or Instagram was the people you know are on here.
*  Right so like what you use this for you can connect to people that you already know this is what makes the network useful we so therefore the value of our network grows.
*  Quadratically with the number of users and therefore it's such a head start that there's no way that someone else can catch up.
*  But when they shifted and when Facebook took the lead of say we're going to shift towards a newsfeed model they basically said we're going to try to in the moment.
*  Get more data and get more likes like what we're going to go towards is actually just seen interesting stuff.
*  Accident of information so people took this social internet impulse to connect to people digitally to other tools.
*  Group text messages and whatsapp and stuff like this right so you don't think about these tools as others is where I connect with people once it's just a feed that's kind of interesting.
*  Now you're competing with everything else that can produce interesting content that's diverting.
*  I think that is a much fiercer competition because now for example you're going up against podcast right I mean like okay I guess you know the Twitter feed is interesting right now.
*  But also a podcast is interesting or something else could be interesting too I think it's a much fiercer competition when there's no there's no more network effects right.
*  And so my sense is we're going to see a fragmentation into what I call long tail social media where if I don't need everyone I know to be on a platform then why not have.
*  Three or four bespoke platforms I use where it's a thousand people and it's all we're all interested in you know whatever.
*  I or comedy and we've we've perfected this interface and maybe it's like clubhouse this audio or something and we all pay two dollars so we don't have to worry about attention harvesting.
*  And that's going to be wildly more entertaining I mean I'm thinking about comedians on Twitter.
*  it's not the best internet possible format for them expressing themselves and being interesting that you have all these comedians that are trying to like well I can do like little clips and little whatever like I don't know if there was a.
*  Long tail social media and it's really this is where the comedians are in this podcast and the comedians run podcast now so this is my thought is that there's really no.
*  there's really no strong advantage to having one large platform this everyone is on if all you're getting from it is I now have different options for diversion and like uplifting aspirational or whatever types entertainment.
*  That whole thing could fragment and I think the glue that was holding together was network effects and I don't think they realized when network effects have been destabilized they don't have the centrifugal force anymore.
*  And the spinning faster and faster but is a Twitter feed really that much more interesting than all these streaming services is it really that much more interesting than clubhouse is it that much more interesting than podcast I feel like they don't realize how unstable their ground actually is.
*  yeah that's fascinating but.
*  The thing that makes Twitter and Facebook work, I mean the news feed you're exactly right like that you can just duplicate the news like if it's if it's not the social network.
*  And it's the news feed then why not have multiple different feeds that are more that are better at satisfying there's a dopamine gamification that they've figured out yeah the end.
*  You see you have to whatever you create you have to at least provide some pleasure in that same gamification kind of way it doesn't have to have to do with scale of large social networks, but I mean I guess you're implying that you should be able to design that kind of.
*  Yeah mechanism in other forms or people are turning on the deck in the vacation I mean so people are getting wise to it and are getting uncomfortable about it right so if i'm offering something there these exist sugar yeah realize sugar is bad.
*  Yeah yeah drinking a lot is great too but it also after a while you realize there's there's problems so some of the long tail social media networks that are out there that i've looked at.
*  They offer usually like a deeper sense of connection like it's usually interesting people that you share some affinity and you have these carefully cultivated.
*  I wrote this new yorker piece a couple years ago about the indie social media movement that really got into some of these different.
*  Technologies but I think the technologies are a distraction we focus too much on you know mastodon versus you know whatever like forget or discord like actually let's forget the protocols right now it's the idea.
*  Of okay and there's all the a lot of these long tail social media groups what people are getting out of it which I think can outweigh.
*  The dopamine gamification is strong connection and motivation like you're in a group with other guys that are all trying to be you know better dads or something like this and.
*  And you talk to him on a regular basis and you're sharing your stories and there's interesting talks and that's a powerful thing too.
*  One interesting thing about scale of twitter is you have these viral spread of information.
*  So sort of twitter has become a newsmaker in itself yeah I think it's a problem well yes but I wonder what replaces that because because then you immediately.
*  Reporting.
*  One of the.
*  To do some work again I don't know the problem with reporters and journalism is that they're they're intermediary they have control I mean this is the problem in Russia currently is that you have.
*  It creates a shield between the people and news the the interesting thing and the powerful thing about twitter is that the news originates from the individual that's creating the news like.
*  You have the president that is the former president of the United States on twitter creating news you have Elon Musk creating news you have people announcing stuff on twitter as opposed to talking to a journalist and that feels much more genuine and.
*  If it feels very powerful but actually coming to realize it doesn't need the social network you can just put that announcement on the YouTube type thing this is what I'm thinking right so this is my point about that because that's right.
*  The democratizing power of the internet is fantastic I'm an old school internet nerd a guy that was you know.
*  Tell me adding in the servers and gopher in before the world wide web was around right so I'm a huge internet booster and that's that's one of its big power but when you put everything on twitter.
*  I think the fact that you've taken you homogenized everything right so everything looks the same moves with the same low friction is very difficult you have no what I call distributed curation right.
*  The only curation that really happens I was a little bit with likes and also the algorithm but if you look back to pre web 2.0 or early web 2.0 when a lot of this was happening let's say on blogs.
*  Where people own their own servers and you had your different blogs there was this distributed curation that happened where in order for your blog to.
*  Get on people's radar and this had nothing to do with any gatekeepers or legacy media it was.
*  Over time you got more links and people respected you and you would hear about this blog over here and there's this whole distributed curation and filtering going on so if you think like the 2004 presidential election most of the information people are getting from the internet from the first big internet.
*  News driven elections was from you know you had like the daily costs and drudge but there's like blogs that were out there and this is back as recline was just running a blog out of his you know dorm room at this point right.
*  And you would in a distributed fashion gain credibility because okay I people have paid it's very hard to pay attention blog or paying attention I get linked to this kid Ezra or whatever it seems to be really sharp and now people are noticing it and now you have a distributed curation.
*  That solves a lot of the problems we see when you have a completely homogenized low friction environment like friction where I mean twitter where any random conspiracy theory or whatever that people like can just.
*  Shoot through and spread whereas if you're starting a blog to try to push Q and on or something like that it's probably going to be a really weird looking blog and you're gonna have a hard time like it's just never going to show up on people's radar right.
*  So everything you've said up until the very last statement I would I would agree with.
*  This is a topic I don't know a ton about I guess so there's a I think I forget Q and on.
*  Yeah no but you're not on this Q and on it could be that I also don't know I should know more apologize I don't know more I mean that's a power and the downside you can have I mean.
*  Hitler could have a blog today and you would have potentially a very large following if he's charismatic if he's has you know is good with words is able to express the ideas whatever maybe is able to channel the frustration the anger that people have about a certain thing.
*  So I think that's the power of blogs but it's also the limitation but that doesn't we're not trying to solve that you can't solve that fundamental problem you're saying is not the problem.
*  Your your thesis is that there's nothing special about large scale social networks that guarantees that they will keep existing.
*  And it's important to remember for a lot of the older generation of internet activists are the people who are very pro internet in the early days.
*  They were completely flabbergasted by the rise of these platforms say what why would you take the internet and then build your own version of the internet.
*  Where you own all the servers and we built this whole distribute the whole thing with open protocols everyone anywhere in the world to use the same protocols your machine can talk to any other machine is the most democratic.
*  Communication system that's ever been built and then these companies came along and said we're going to build our own just own all the servers and put them in buildings that we own.
*  And the internet will just be the first mile this gets you into our private internet where we own the whole thing it would completely against the entire.
*  Motivation of the internet was like yes we it's not going to be one person owns all the servers and you pay to access them it's anyone server that they own can talk to anyone else's server because we all agree on a standard set of.
*  Protocols and so the the old guard of pro internet people never understood this move towards let's build private versions of the internet.
*  Will build three or four private internets and that's what we'll all use it was the opposite basically well it's funny enough I don't know if you follow but jack Dorsey is also.
*  Is a proponent and is helping to fund create fully distributed versions of twitter essentially if they would potentially destroy twitter yeah but I think they're you know there might be financial.
*  Are like business cases to be made there i'm not sure but that seems to be another alternative is as opposed to creating a bunch of.
*  Like the long tail is creating like the ultimate long tail of like fully distributed yeah which is what the internet is but that's that's sort of line long when I'm thinking about long tail social media i'm thinking it's.
*  Like the text not so important like there's groups out there right I know where the tech they use to actually implement their digital only social group whatever they might use slack they might use some combination of zoom or it doesn't matter I think in the tech world.
*  We want to build a beautiful protocol that okay everyone's going to use as the federated server protocol in which we've worked out x y and z and no one understands it because then the engineers need it all to make I get it because i'm a nerd like this like okay every standard has to fit with everything else and no one understands what's going on.
*  Meanwhile you know you have this group of bike enthusiasts they're like yeah we'll just jump on a zoom and have some slack and put up a blog if the tech doesn't really matter like we built a world with our own curation our own rules.
*  Our own sort of social ecosystem that's generating a lot of value I mean I don't know if it'll happen there's a lot of money at stake with obviously these large but I just think they're more.
*  there's so I mean look how quickly Americans left Facebook right I mean Facebook was savvy to buy other properties and the diversify right but how quick did that take for.
*  Just standard Facebook news for everyone under the age of something we're using it and no one under a certain age is using it now it took like four years I mean this stuff is.
*  I see Lee I believe you people can leave Facebook overnight yeah I I think Facebook hasn't actually messed up for like enough to.
*  There's two things they haven't messed up enough for people to really leave aggressively and there's no good alternative for them to leave I think of good alternatives pop up.
*  It was just immediately happened the stuff is a lot more culturally fragile I think I mean Twitter's having a moment because it was feeding a certain type of them there's a lot of anxieties that was in the sort of political sphere anyways that Twitter was working with.
*  But it's moment could go to as well, I mean it's a really arbitrary thing short little things and I read a Wired article about this earlier in the pandemic like this is crazy.
*  That the way that we're trying to communicate information about the pandemic is all these weird arbitrary rules where people are screenshotting pictures of articles that are part of a tweet thread where you say one slash in under it like we have the technology.
*  To like really clearly convey in for long form information to people like it why are we why do we have these and I know it's because it's the gamified dopamine hits but.
*  What a weird medium there's no reason for us to have to have these threads that you have to find and pin with your screenshot I mean we have technology to communicate better using the Internet, I mean why are epidemiologists having to do tweet threads.
*  Because there's mechanisms of publishing that make it easier on Twitter I mean we're evolving as a species and the Internet is a very fresh thing yeah and so.
*  It's kind of interesting to think that as opposed to Twitter is this is what Jack also complains about it is Twitter is not innovating fast enough yeah and so it's almost like the people are innovating and thinking about their productive life.
*  Faster than the platforms on which they operate can catch up yeah and so the point you the gap grows sufficiently they'll jump a few people few innovative folks will just create an alternative.
*  And perhaps distributed perhaps just many little silos and then people will jump and then we'll just continue this kind of way I think like sub stack for example what they're going to pull out of Twitter among other things is the audience that was.
*  Let's say like slightly left of center but.
*  The slightly left of center don't like Trump uncomfortable with like postmodern critical theories made into political action right.
*  And they're like yeah Twitter there was a people on there talking about this and it made me feel sort of heard because I was feeling a little bit like a nerd about it but honestly I'd probably rather subscribe the force of young berries and Andrew Sullivan's love like a Jesse signals like I'll have a few sub stacks I can subscribe to and honestly that's.
*  I'm a knowledge worker who's 32 anyways probably that's an email all day and and so like there's an innovation that's going to that group you know it's going to suck them off which is actually a very large group yeah that's a lot of that's a lot of energy and then once Trump's gone I guess that's probably going to drive that drove a lot of.
*  A lot of more like Trump people off Twitter like this stuff is fragile so I but the fascinating thing to me because I've hung out on parlor for a short amount enough to know that the interface matters it's so fascinating like that that it's not just about ideas yeah it's about creating like sub stack to.
*  Creating a pleasant experience addicting experience you're right you're right about that and it's hard.
*  And it's by the end this is one of the conclusions from that in the social media article is it's just the ugliness matters and I don't mean even just aesthetically but just the clunkiness of the interface is the.
*  And I don't know it's the some degree the social media companies have spent a lot of money on this and to some degree it's a survivorship bias yeah right I think Twitter every time I hear Jack talks about this it seems like.
*  He's a surprise as anyone else the way Twitter is being used it's basically the way you know they had it.
*  Years ago and then it was a great it'll be statuses right yeah this is what I'm doing you know and my friends can follow me and see it and without really changing anything just happened to hit everything right.
*  Yeah support this other type of interaction well there's also the javascript model which Brendan Ike talked about he just implemented javascript like the crappy version of javascript in 10 days throughout there and just.
*  Changed it really quickly yeah evolved it really quickly and now has become according to stack exchange the most popular programming language in the world yeah it drives like most of the Internet and even the back end and now mobile.
*  Yeah and so that that's an argument for the kind of thing you're talking about where like like the bike club people yeah could literally create the thing that would.
*  You know run most of the Internet yeah 10 years from now yeah it's so there's something to that like as opposed to trying to get lucky or trying to think through stuff is just to.
*  To solve a particular problem do stuff yeah and do stuff do something like keep tinkering till you love it yeah yeah and then and of course the sad thing is timing and luck matter.
*  And that you can't really control the problem yeah but you can't go back to 2007 yeah that's like the number one thing you could do to have a lot of success with a new platform is go back in time yeah 14 years so the thing you have to kind of think about is what is the like what's the totally new thing.
*  That.
*  10 years from now would seem obvious I mean some people saying club houses that there's been a lot of stuff like clubhouse before yeah but it it hit the right kind of thing.
*  And then the the other effect is like it's invite only so like oh all the smart like famous people are on there I wonder what's the FOMO like fear that you're missing something really profound as exciting happening there so those social effects and then once they actually show up.
*  I'm a huge fan of this it's the javascript model is like clubhouse is so dumb like so simple in its interface like you literally can't do anything except mute unmute as a mute button yeah and there's a leave quietly button yeah that's it yeah and it's it's kind of.
*  I love single use technology that that sense yeah there's no like there's no it's just like.
*  Yeah and you know Twitter kind of started like that Facebook started like that yeah but they've evolved quickly to add all these features and so on and you know I do hope clubhouse stays that way yeah be interesting or there's alternatives I mean I mean even if you're a clubhouse you still have the
*  So one of the issues with a lot of these platforms I think is that bits are cheap enough now that we don't really need a unicorn investor model I mean the investors need that model there's really not really an imperative of we need something that can scale.
*  To 100 million plus a year revenue so because it was going to require this much seed and angel investment and you're not going to get this much seed angel investment unless you can have a potential exit this this wide because you have to be part of a portfolio that depends on one out of ten exiting here.
*  If you don't actually need that and you don't need to satisfy that investor model which I think is basically the case I mean bits are so cheap everything is so cheap you don't necessarily even like with clubhouse it's it's investor backed right this notion of like this needs to be a major platform.
*  But the bike club doesn't necessarily need a major platform that's where I'm interested I mean I don't know there's so much money that's the only problem that bets against me is that you can concentrate a lot of capital if you do these things right I mean so Facebook was like a fantastic capital concentration machine it's crazy how much.
*  Where it even found that capital in the world that it could concentrate and ossify in the stock price that a very small number of people have you know access to right that's that's incredibly powerful so when there when there is a possibility to to consolidate and gather a huge amount of capital that's a huge imperative that's very hard for the bike club to go up again so.
*  But there's a lot of money in the bike club if you see what the wall street bets yeah and then when a bunch of people get together I mean it doesn't have to be a bike it could be a bunch of different bike clubs just kind of team up yeah and to overtake is what we're doing now yeah or we're going to repurpose off the shelf stuff.
*  Yes that's not you were going to yeah we're going to repurpose whatever it was for office productivity or something and that like the clubs using slack just to build out these you know yeah.
*  Let's talk about email yeah that's right I wrote a book you're you're out yet another amazing book world without email maybe one way to enter this discussion is to ask what is the hyperactive hive mind which is the concept you open the book with yeah and the devil.
*  It's discourage of hundreds of millions so I think so I called this book a world without email the real title should be a world without the hyperactive hive mind workflow but my publisher didn't like that so we had to get a little bit more pithy.
*  I was trying to answer the question after deep work why is it so hard to do this if this is so valuable if we can produce much higher people are much happier.
*  Why do we check email a day why are we on slack all day you know and so I started working on this book immediately after deep work.
*  And so my initial interviews were done in 2016 so it took five years to pull the threads together I was trying to understand why is it so hard for.
*  Most people to actually find any time to do this stuff and actually move to Neil and the story was and I thought this was I hadn't heard this report anywhere else that's why it took me so long to pull together.
*  Is email arrives on the scene email spreads I trace it it really picks up steam in the early 1990s between 1990 and 1995 it makes its move right.
*  And it does so for very pragmatic reasons it was replacing existing communication technologies that it was better than it was mainly the fax machine voicemail and memos right, so this was just better right, so it was a killer app because it was useful.
*  In its wake came a new way of collaborating and that's the hyperactive hive mind so it's the like the virus that follows the the rats that.
*  Went through Western Europe for the black page as email spread through organizations in its wake came the hyperactive hive mind workflow which says okay guys here's the way we're going to collaborate.
*  we'll just work things out on the fly with unscheduled back and forth messages just boom boom boom let's go back and forth hey what about this you see this what about that client let's see what's going on over here.
*  That followed email it completely took over office work and the the need to keep up with all of these asynchronous back and forth unscheduled messages.
*  As those got more and more and more we had more of those to service the need to service those required us to check more and more and more and more right, and so, by the time and I go through the numbers, but by the time you get that today.
*  Now the average knowledge worker has to check one of these channels once every six minutes.
*  Because every single thing you do in your organization how you talk to your colleagues how you talk to your vendors how you talk to your clients how you talk to the HR department it's all this asynchronous unscheduled back and forth messaging.
*  And you have to service the conversations and it spiraled out of control and it has sort of devolved a lot of work in the office now to all I do is constantly tend communication channels.
*  So it's fascinating what you're describing is nobody ever paused in this whole evolution to try to create a system that actually works that it was.
*  Kind of like huge fan of cellular automata so it's just kind of started yeah very very simple mechanism just like cellular automata just kind of grew to overtake all the fundamental communication of how do business and also personal life yeah.
*  That's one of the big ideas is that the unintentionality yeah right so this goes back to technological determinism and this is a weird business book because I go deep on.
*  Philosophy I go deep on for some reason we get in the paleo anthropology for a while we do a lot of neuroscience it's kind of a weird book.
*  But I got real into this technological determinism right this notion that just the presence of a technology can change how people act.
*  That's my big argument about what happened with the hive mind and I can document specific examples right so I document this example in IBM.
*  1987 maybe 85 but isn't like the mid to late 80s IBM our monk headquarters we're going to put an internal email right because it's convenient.
*  And so they ran a whole study and so I talked to the engineer.
*  Iran the study Adrian something we're going to run the study to figure out how much do we communicate because it was still an era where it's expensive right.
*  So you have to provision a mainframe so you can't over provision like we want to know how much communication actually happened so they went and figured it out how many memos how many calls how many notes.
*  Great will provision a mainframe to handle email that can handle all of that so if all of our communication moves to email.
*  The mainframe will still be fine in three days they had melted it down people were communicating six times more than that estimate so just in three days the presence of a low friction digital communication tool.
*  Drastically changed how everyone collaborated so that's not enough time for you know an all hands meeting guys we figured it out you know this is what we need to communicate a lot more is what's going to make us more productive we need more emails it's emergent.
*  Isn't that just on a positive end amazing to you like isn't email amazing like in those early days like just a frictionless communication.
*  Email is awesome like people say that there's a lot of problems with emails just like people say a lot of problems with twitter and so on it's kind of cool that you can just send a little note.
*  It was a miracle right this was so I wrote a there's originally was a new yorker piece from a year or two ago called was email a mistake and then it's in the book too.
*  But I go into the history of email like why did it come along and it solved a huge problem so it was it was the problem of fast asynchronous communication.
*  And it was a problem that not exist until we got large offices we got large offices synchronous communication like let's get on the phone at the same time there's too much overhead to it there's too many people you might have to talk to.
*  Asynchronous communication like let me send you a memo when i'm ready and you can read it when you're ready took too long.
*  It was like a huge problem so one of the things I talked about is the way that when they built the CIA headquarters there's such a need for fast asynchronous communication.
*  That they built a pneumatic powered email system they had these pneumatic tubes all throughout the headquarters with electromagnetic routers so you would put your message.
*  And a plexiglass tube and you would turn these brass dials about the location you would stick it in these things and pneumatic tubes and it would shoot and sort.
*  And work its way through these tubes to show up in just a minute or something at the floor and at the general office suite where you wanted to go.
*  At my point is the fact that they spent so much money to make that work show how important fast asynchronous communication was large offices so when email came along.
*  It was a productivity silver bullet it was a miracle I talked to the researchers who were working on.
*  Computer supported collaboration delayed 80s trying to figure out how are we going to use computer networks to be more productive and they were building all these systems and tools.
*  Email showed up it just wiped all that research off the map there's no need to build these custom intranet applications there's no need to build these these communication platforms email could just do everything right so it was a.
*  Miracle application which is why it spread everywhere that's one of these things where okay unintended consequences ready at this miracle productivity silver bullet it spread everywhere but it was so effective it just you know I don't know like a drug i'm sure there's some pandemic.
*  metaphor here analogy here of a drug that like it's so effective at treating this that it also blows up your whole immune system and then everyone gets sick but.
*  Ultimately it probably significantly increased the productivity of the world but there is a kind of hump that it now is plateaued and then we're the fundamental question you're asking is like okay how do we take the next how do we keep increasing the product.
*  Now I think it brought it down so my my my contention and.
*  So I again there's a little bit of book I have a more recent wired article that put some newer numbers to this I subscribe to the hypothesis that the hyperactive hive mind was so detrimental.
*  So yeah it helped productivity at first right when you could do fast async communication but very quickly there was a sort of exponential rise in communication amounts.
*  Once we got to the point where the hive mind meant you had to constantly check your email I think that made us so unproductive.
*  That it actually was pulling down non industrial productivity and I think the only reason why so it certainly has not been going up that metrics been stagnating for a long time now while all this was going on.
*  I think the only reason why it hasn't fallen is that we added these extra shifts off the books.
*  I'm going to work for three hours in the morning i'm going to work for three hours at night and only that I think has allowed us to basically.
*  Maintain a stagnated non industrial growth it we should have been shooting up the charts I mean this is.
*  Miraculous innovations and computer networks and then we built out these hundred billion dollar ubiquitous worldwide high speed wireless internet infrastructure with supercomputers in our pockets where we could talk to anyone at any time like.
*  Why did our productivity not shoot off the charts because our brain can't context which once every six minutes so it's fundamentally back to the context switching is the poison in context switching is poisonous the.
*  What is it about email that forces context switching is it both our psychology that drags us in expectation of yeah right right because it's not I think we've seen this through a personal personal will or failure.
*  Lens recently like oh my addicted to email yes I have bad etiquette about my email no it's the underlying workflow.
*  So the tool itself, I will exonerate right I think I would rather use pop three than a fax protocol right and it gets easier.
*  The issue is the hyperactive hive mind workflow so if I am now collaborating with 20 or 30 different people.
*  With back and forth unscheduled messaging I have to tend those conversations right it's like you have 30 metaphorical ping pong tables and when the balls come back across you have to pretty soon hit it back or stuff actually grinds to a halt.
*  So it's the workflow that's the problem it's not the tools the fact that we use it to do all of our collaboration let's just send messages back and forth, which means you can't be far from checking that.
*  Because if you take a break if you batch if you try to have better habits it's going to slow things down so my whole villain is this hyperactive hive mind workflow.
*  The tool is fine I don't want the tool to go away, but I want to replace the hyperactive hive my workflow I think this is going to be one of the biggest value generating productivity revolutions.
*  Of the 21st century I quote an anonymous CEO is pretty well known who says this is going to be the moon shot of the 21st century is going to be of that importance there's so much latent productivity.
*  that's being suppressed because we just figure things out on the fly and email that as we figure that out, I think it's going to be.
*  Hundreds of billions of dollars.
*  You're so absolutely right the question is what is the world without email look like how do we fix email.
*  So what happens is, at least in my vision you identify well actually there's these different processes that make up my workday like these are things that I do repeatedly.
*  Often in collaboration with other people that do useful things for my company or whatever right now most of these processes are implicitly implemented with the hyperactive hive mind.
*  How do we do this thing like answering client questions to shoot messages back and forth you know how do we do this thing posting podcast episodes will just figure it out on the fly.
*  My main argument is we actually have to do like they did in the industrial sector take each of these processes and say is there a better way to do this.
*  And by better I mean a way that's going to minimize the need to have unscheduled back and forth messaging so we actually have to do process engineering.
*  This created a massive growth and productivity in the industrial sector during the 20th century, we have to do it in knowledge work we can't just rock and roll an inbox is we actually have to say.
*  How do we deal with client questions well let's put in place a process that doesn't require us to send messages back and forth how do we post podcast episodes let's automate this to a degree where I don't have to just send you a message on the fly and you do this.
*  Process by process and the pressure on that inbox is released and now you don't have to check it every six minutes you still have email I mean like I need to send you a file sure i'll use email.
*  But we're not coordinating or collaborating over email or slack which is just a faster way of doing the hive mind I mean it is slack doesn't solve anything there.
*  You have better structured bespoke processes I think that's what's going to unleash this massive productivity bespoke so the interesting thing is like, for example, you and I actually have some emails so obviously I for let's just say my particular case I schedule podcast there's a bunch of different tasks.
*  Fascinating enough that I do that can be converted into processes yeah is it up to me to create that process or do you think we also need to build tools just like email was a protocol for helping us create proxy for the different tasks I mean I think ultimately.
*  The whole organization whole team has to be involved I think ultimately there's certainly a lot of investor money being spent right now to try to figure out those tools.
*  Right so I think silicon valley has figured this out in the past couple of years this is the difference between when I was talking to people after deep work and now five years later.
*  Is this sentence in the air right because there's so much late in productivity so yes there are going to be new tools which I think could help there are already tools that exist I mean.
*  The different groups I profile use things like Trello or base camp or a sauna or flow and you know our schedule wants an acuity like there's there's a lot of tools out there.
*  The key is not to think about it in terms of what tool do I replace email with instead you think about it with.
*  I have a problem with a process that reduces back and forth messages oh what tool might help us.
*  Help us do that yeah and I would push it's not about necessarily efficiency in fact some of these things are going to take more time so writing a letter to someone is like a.
*  High value activity is probably worth doing the thing that's killer is the back and forth because now I have to keep checking right so.
*  We scheduled this together because I knew you from before but like most of the interviews I was scheduling for this actually I have a process with my publicist where we use a shared document.
*  And she put stuffs in there and then I check it twice a week and there's scheduling options I say here's what I want to do this one or this will work for this one or whatever and it takes more time in the moment.
*  Then just but it means that we have almost no back and forth messaging for podcast scheduling which without this so like with my UK publisher.
*  I didn't put this process in the place because we're not doing as many interviews but it's all the time and I'm like oh I could really feel the difference right it's the back and forth that's killer.
*  I suppose it is up to the individual people involved like you said.
*  Knowledge workers like they have to carry the responsibility of creating processes like how always asking the first principles question how can this be converted into a process.
*  Yeah so you can start by doing this yourself like just with what you can control I think ultimately once the teams are doing that I think that's probably the right scale if you try to do that the organizational scale you're going to get bureaucracy right.
*  So if that's all right if if if Elon Musk is going to dictate down to everyone at Tesla or something like this that's too much remove you get bureaucracy but if it's we're a team of six.
*  That's working together on you know whatever power train software then we can figure out on our own what are our processes how do we want to do this.
*  So it's ultimately also creating a culture we're saying like an email sending an email just for the hell of it it should be taboo like yeah so you are being.
*  You're being destructive to the productivity of the team by sending this email yeah as opposed to helping develop a process and so on that that will ultimately automate this.
*  That's why i'm trying to spread this message of the context switches as poison I get so much into the science of it I think we underestimate how much it kills us.
*  That the wrench away our context look at a message and come back and so once you have the mindset of it's a huge thing to ask of someone.
*  To have to take their attention on something and look back at this and if they have to do that for three or four times like we're just going to figure this out on the fly.
*  And every message is going to require five checks of the inbox while you wait for it what you've now you've created whatever it is at this point 25 or 30.
*  Contact shifts like you've just done a huge disservice to someone say this would be like if I had a professional athlete like hey do me a favor.
*  I need you to go do this press interview but to get there you're going to have to carry the sandbag.
*  And sprint up this hill like completely exhaust your muscles and then you have to go play a game like of course i'm not going to ask an athlete to do like an incredibly physically demanding thing right before a game.
*  But something as easy as thoughts question mark or like hey do you want to jump on a call and it's going to be six back and forth messages to figure it out it's kind of the cognitive equivalent right you're taking the wind out of someone.
*  yeah and by the way for people who are listening because I recently posted a few job openings for us so I have to help with this thing and one of the things that people are surprised when they work with me is how many spreadsheets and processes are involved.
*  It's like Claude Shannon right I talked about communication theory or information theory it takes time to come up with a clever code up front you spend more time up front figuring out those spreadsheets and trying to get people on board with it but then.
*  Your communication going forward is all much more efficient so over time you're using much less bandwidth right so you do pain up front.
*  Yes it's quicker just right now to send an email but if I spend a half day to do this over the next six months i've saved myself 600 emails.
*  Now here's a tough question for you know from the computer science perspective we often over optimize so you create processes and you okay just like you're saying it's so pleasurable to increase.
*  In the long term productivity that sometimes you just enjoyed that process in itself yeah but just creating processes and you actually never.
*  I like it has a negative effect on productivity long term because you're too obsessed with the processes is that is that a nice problem to have essentially.
*  I mean it's a problem and because let's look at the one sector that does do this, which is developers yeah right so agile methodologies like scrum or con bon are basically workflow methodologies that are much better than the hyperactive hive mind.
*  But man some of those programmers get pretty obsessive I don't know if you've ever talked to a whatever level three scrum master they get really obsessive about like it has to happen exactly this way and it's probably seven times more complex than it needs to be.
*  I'm hoping that's just because nerds like me you know like to do that but it's it's a a broadly probably an issue right we have to be careful because you can just go down that.
*  That fiddling path like so it needs to be here's how we do it let's reduce the messages and let's roll you know you can't save yourself.
*  Through if you can get the process just right right so I wrote this article kind of recently called the rise and fall of getting things done.
*  And I profiled this productivity guru named Merlin man and I talked about this movement called productivity prawn.
*  As like elite speak term in the early 2000s where people just became convinced that if they could combine their productivity systems with software.
*  And they could find just the right software just the right configuration where they can offload most of the difficulty of work what happened with the machine so we kind of figure out for and then they could just sort of crank widgets and it'd be.
*  And the whole thing fell apart because it's work is hard and it's hard to do and making decisions about what the work on is hard and no system can really do that for you, so you have to have this.
*  The sort of balance between I context which is our poison so we got to get rid of the context which is once like something's working good enough to get rid of the context which is then get after it.
*  Yeah there's a psychological process there for me and the OCD nature like I've literally embarrassing enough have lost my shit before when.
*  So in in many of the processes that involve python scripts the rule is to not use spaces underscores all there's like rules for like how you format stuff okay.
*  And like I should not lose my shit when somebody had a space and maybe capital letters like it's okay to have a space I think because there's this feeling like something is not perfect yeah.
*  And as opposed to in the python script allowing some flexibility around that you create this programmatic way that's flawless and whenever things working perfectly perfect but actually.
*  If you strive for perfection it has the same stress like has a lot of the stress that you were seeking to escape with the context switching yeah because you're almost.
*  Stressing about errors like when the process is functioning your there's always this anxiety of like I wonder if it's going to succeed yeah I wonder if it's going to succeed yeah no no I think some of that's just you and I probably I mean it's just our mindset right we're in we do computer science.
*  So chicken and egg yeah yes and a lot of the processes in of working here much rougher it's like okay instead of letting clients just email me all the time.
*  We have a weekly call and then we send them a breakdown of everything we committed to right that's a process that works okay I get asked a lot of questions because i'm the javascript guy in the company.
*  As subject by email I have office hours this is what base camp does all right so you come to my office hours that cuts down a lot of back and forth all right we're going to set an email in about this project will have a.
*  Trello board and we'll do a weekly really structure status meeting real quick what's going on who needs what let's go and now everything's on there and on our inboxes we don't have to send as many messages so like that rough level of granularity that gets you most of the way there.
*  So the parts that you can't automate and turn into a process.
*  So how many parts like that do you think should remain in a perfect world and.
*  For those parts where email is still useful what do you recommend those emails look like how how should you write the emails when should you send them.
*  Yeah I think email email is good for delivering information right so I think about like a fax machine or something you know it's a really good fax machine so if I need to.
*  Send you something and you just send you a file any of the broadcast a new policy or something like emails a great way to do it it's bad for collaboration.
*  So you're having a conversation like we're trying to reach a decision on something i'm trying to learn about something i'm trying to clarify what something what what this is that that's more than just like a one answer type question.
*  Then I think that you shouldn't be doing an email.
*  But see here's the thing like you and I don't talk often, and so we have a kind of new interaction it's not.
*  So sure yeah you have a book coming out there's a process and so on, but say there don't you think there's a lot of novel interactive experiences.
*  Yes, fine.
*  So you could just for every novel experience it's okay to have.
*  A little bit of exchange fine like I think it's fine if stuff comes in over the transom or it's you hear from someone you haven't heard from in a while I think all that's fine.
*  I mean that's that's email at its best where it starts to kill us is where all of our collaboration is happening with the back and forth so when you've moved the bulk of that out of your inbox now you're back in that.
*  Meg Ryan movie like you got mail or it's like all right load this up and you wait for the boat i'm like oh we got a message yeah and there's a lex at me a message this is interesting right back to the a well days.
*  So you're talking about the bulk of the the business world where like email has replaced the actual communication all the communication protocols required to accomplish anything everything is just happening with messages if you now get most stuff done repeatable collaborations with.
*  With other processes that don't require you to check these inboxes then the inbox can serve like an inbox which includes hearing from interesting people.
*  Right or sending something hey I don't know if you saw this I thought you might like it like it's great for that.
*  So there's there's probably a bunch of people listening to this they're like.
*  Yeah but I work on a team and they're all they use is email how do you start the revolution from like the ground up.
*  Yeah well do it do a symmetric optimization first so identify all your processes and then change what you can change and be socially very careful about it.
*  So don't necessarily say like okay this is a new process we all have to do you're just you know hey.
*  We got to get this report ready here's what I think we should do like i'll get a draft into our dropbox folder by like noon on Monday grab it.
*  I won't touch it again until Tuesday morning and then I'll look at your changes I have this office hours always scheduled Tuesday afternoon so if there's anything that catches your attention grab me then.
*  But I told the designer who CC on this that by C.O.B Tuesday the final version will be ready for them to take and polish or whatever like the person either is like great i'm glad you know Cal has a plan so I just what I need to do I need to edit this tomorrow whatever right.
*  But you've actually pulled them into a process that means we're going to get this report together without having to just go back and forth you just asymmetrically optimize these things.
*  And then you can begin the conversation and maybe that's where my book comes in place you just sort of.
*  Yeah slide it slide it across the by the book just leave it leave it and give it to everybody on your team okay so we solved the bulk of the email problem with this is there a case to be made that even for like communication between you and I.
*  We should move away from from email and, for example, there's a guy I recently I don't know if you know comedians but there's a guy named Joey Diaz.
*  Yeah that I've had an interaction with recently and that guy first of all the sweetest human despite what his comedy sounds like is the sweetest human being.
*  And he's a big proponent of just pick up the phone and call yeah and it makes me so uncomfortable people call me yeah it's like I don't know what to do with this thing.
*  But it kind of gets everything done quicker I think if I if I remove the anxiety from that is there a case to be made for that or email could still be the most efficient way to do this.
*  No look if you if you have to interact with someone there's a lot of efficiency and synchrony right and this is something from the distributed system theory where you know if you go from synchronous to asynchronous networks.
*  There's a huge amount of overhead to the asynchronous so actually the protocols required to solve things in asynchronous networks are significantly more complicated and fragile than synchronous protocols so if we can just do real time.
*  It's usually better than also from an interaction like social connection standpoint there's a lot more information in the human voice in the back and forth.
*  Yeah if you just call so very generational right like our generation will be comfortable talking on the phone in a way that like a younger generation isn't but an older generations more comfortable with well.
*  You just call people whereas we so there's a happy medium but most of my good friends we just talk we have regular phone calls.
*  Okay yeah it's not that I don't just call them we schedule it we schedule it yeah just on text like yeah you want to talk sometime soon.
*  Do you do you ever have a process around friends.
*  Not really no I feel like I should I feel like when you have like a lot of interesting friend possibilities is you have like an interesting problem right like really interesting people you can talk to.
*  Well that's that's one problem and the other one is the introversion where I'm just afraid of people get really stressed like I freak out and so.
*  You picked a good line of work.
*  Yeah now perhaps this is a Goggins thing it's like facing your fears or whatever but but it's almost like.
*  There's a it has to do with the timetables thing and the deep work that the nice thing about the processes is it not only automates sort of.
*  Automates away the context switching it ensures you do the important things to yeah it's like prioritize the thing is with email.
*  Because everything is done over email.
*  You can be lazy in the same way with like social networks and do the easy things first yeah they're not that important so the process also enforces that you do the important things and for me the important things is like.
*  It sounds weird but like social connection no that's one of the most important things in all of human existence yeah and doing it the paradoxical thing I got into this for digital minimalism.
*  The more you sacrifice on behalf of the connection the stronger the connection feels right so sacrificing non trivial time and attention on behalf of someone is what tells your brain that this is a serious.
*  Relationship which is why social media had this paradoxical effect making people feel less social because it took the friction out of it and so the brain just doesn't like yeah you've been commenting on this person's whatever you've been retweeting them or.
*  Sending them some text you haven't it's not hard enough and then then there's the perceived strength of that social connection diminishes where if you talk to them or go spend time with them or whatever.
*  You're going to feel better about it so that the friction is good I have a thing with some of my friends where at the end of each call we take a couple minutes to schedule the next.
*  Then you never have to it's like I do with haircuts or something right like if I don't schedule it then yeah i'm never going to get my haircut right and so we it's like okay when you want to talk next you know.
*  Yeah that's really that's a really good idea I just don't call friends and like every 10 years I do something dramatic for them so that we maintain the French like I'd murder somebody that they really don't like I just.
*  Careful man Joey's Joey might ask you.
*  That's why I always want my favorite.
*  Lex come out of New Jersey.
*  What's exactly we're going to do that robot dog of yours.
*  We're going to go down to Jersey there's a special human I love the comedian world they've been shaking up I don't know if you listen to Joe Rogan all those folks they kind of.
*  Are doing something interesting for MIT and and academia they're shaking up this world a little bit like podcasting because comedians are paving the way for podcasting yeah and so you have like Andrew Huberman who's in your scientist.
*  And for my now yeah no he he's like into podcasting now and you're into podcasting of course you're not necessarily podcast my computer science currently right yeah but.
*  That it feels like you could have a lot of the free spirit of the comedians implemented by the people who are academically trained.
*  Who actually have a nice specialty.
*  Yeah and then and then that results I mean who knows what the experiment looks like yeah but that results me being able to talk about robotics with Joey Diaz yeah when he says you know drops bombs every other sentence and.
*  I the world is like I've seen actually a shift within colleagues and friends within MIT where they're becoming much more accepting of that kind of thing it's very interesting.
*  That's interesting so you're seeing exactly okay.
*  Because they're seeing how popular it is they're like.
*  Well you're really popular I don't know how they think about it at Georgetown for example.
*  I don't know it's interesting but I think what what happens is the popularity of it combined with just good conversations with people they respect it's like oh okay wait this is the thing yeah and this is more fun to listen to than a shitty zoom.
*  Lecture yeah about their work yeah it's like there's something here there's something interesting and we don't.
*  Nobody actually knows what that is just like with like clubhouse or something nobody's figured out like where is this medium take is this a legitimate medium of education yeah or is this just like a fun.
*  Well that's your innovation I think was we can bring on professors yeah and I know Joe Rogan did some of that too but but you know but.
*  Your professors in your field yeah all these MIT guys who I remember you know.
*  Well that's been the big challenge for me is I don't is I feel.
*  I would I would ask big like philosophical questions of people like yourself they're like really well public like this is so for example you have a lot of excellent papers on.
*  The you know that has a lot of theory in it right and there is some temptation to just go through papers.
*  And I think it's possible to actually do that I haven't done that much but I think it's possible it just requires a lot of preparation.
*  I can probably only do that with things that I'm actually like in the field I'm aware of.
*  But there's a dance that I would love to be able to try to hit right where it's actually getting to the core of some interesting ideas as opposed to just talking about philosophy at the same time.
*  There's a large audience of people that just want to be inspired by like by disciplines where they don't necessarily know the details yeah but there's a lot of people that are like hmm I'm really curious.
*  I've been thinking about pivoting careers into software engineering they would love to hear from people like you about computer science even if it's like theory.
*  Yeah but just like the idea that you can have big ideas you push them through and it's interesting you fight for it yeah.
*  But there's some there's what is the computer file and number file these YouTube channels there's channels I watch I'm like chess exceptionally popular.
*  Where I don't I don't understand maybe 80 percent of the time what the hell they're talking about because they're talking about like why this move is better than this move but I love the passion and the genius of those people and just overhearing it.
*  Yeah.
*  I don't know why that's so exciting.
*  Do you look at like Scott Aronson's blog at all the yeah settled optimized yeah it's like the hardcore complexity theory but it's just an enthusiasm or like Terry Tao's blog.
*  A little bit of humor.
*  There's always a blog.
*  He used to yeah he would he and would just be I'm going all in on you know here's the new affine group with which you can do whatever whatever it was just equations.
*  Well in the case of Scott Aronson he's good he's able to turn on like the inner troll and comedian and so on he keeps the fun which is the best of philosophical guy.
*  He wrote that yeah yeah.
*  Yeah so you know we're exploring these different ways of communicating science and exciting the world.
*  Speaking of which I got to ask you about computer science.
*  That's right I do some of that.
*  So I mean a lot of it a lot of your work is what inspired this deep thinking about productivity from all the different angles because some of the most rigorous work is mathematical work and computer science that theoretical computer science.
*  Let me ask the Scott Aronson question of like is there something to you that stands out in particular that's beautiful or inspiring or just really insightful about computer science or the or maybe mathematics.
*  I mean I like theory and in particular what I've always liked in theory is the notion of impossibilities.
*  That's kind of my specialty.
*  So within the within the context of distributed algorithms my specialty is impossibility results the idea that you can argue nothing exists that solves this or nothing exists that can solve this faster than this.
*  And that's I think that's really interesting and that goes all the way back to Turing.
*  There's his original paper on computable numbers with their connection to the German problem but basically the German name that Hilbert called the decision problem.
*  This was pre computers but he was you know he's English so it's written in English so it's very accessible paper and it's it lays the foundation for all of theoretical computer science.
*  He just has this insight.
*  He's like well if we think about like an algorithm he figures out like all effective procedures are Turing machines are basically algorithms.
*  We could really describe a Turing machine with a number which we can now imagine with like computer code you could just take a source file and just treat the binary version of the file is like a really long number.
*  Right.
*  But it's like every program is just a finite number.
*  It's a natural number.
*  And then he realized like one way to think about a problem is you have this is like kind of the Mike Sipser approach but you have a sort of it's a language.
*  So infinite number of strings some of them are in the language and some of them aren't but basically you can imagine a problem is represented as an infinite binary string.
*  Or in every position like a one means that string is in the language and a zero means it isn't.
*  And then he applied Cantor from the 19th century and said OK the natural numbers are countable.
*  So it's countably infinite and infinite binary strings you can use a diagonalization argument and show their their their uncountable.
*  So there's just vastly more problems than there are algorithms.
*  So basically anything you can come up with for the most part almost certainly is not solvable by a computer.
*  You know and then and then he was like let me give a particular example and he figured out the very first computability proof.
*  Let's just walk through with a little bit of simple logic the halting problem can't be solved by an algorithm.
*  And that kicked off the whole enterprise of some things can't be solved by algorithms some things can't be solved by computers.
*  And we've just been doing theory on that since the those the 30s he wrote that.
*  So proving that something is impossible is sort of a more strict a version of that is it like proving bounds on the performance of different algorithms.
*  Yes the bounds are upper bounds right.
*  So you say this algorithm does at least this well and no worse than this but you're looking at a particular algorithm and possibility proof say no algorithm ever could ever solve this problem.
*  So no algorithm could ever solve the halting problem.
*  So it's problem centric.
*  It's making something different making a conclusion statement about the problem.
*  Yes.
*  And that's somehow satisfying because it's just philosophically interesting.
*  Yeah.
*  I mean it all goes back to you get back to Plato it's all reducto ad absurdum.
*  So all these arguments have to start the only way to do it is there's an infinite number of solutions you can't go through them as you say let's assume for the sake of contradiction that there existed something that solves this problem.
*  And then you turn to crank a logic until you blow up the universe.
*  And then you go back and say OK original assumption that this solution exists can't be true.
*  I just think philosophically it's like a really exciting kind of beautiful thing is what I specialize in within distributed algorithms is more like time bound and possibility results like no no algorithm can solve this problem faster than this in this setting of all the infinite number of ways you might ever do it.
*  So you have many papers but the one caught my eye smooth analysis of dynamic networks in which you write a problem with the worst case perspective is that it often leads to extremely strong lower bounds.
*  These strong results motivated key question is this bond robust in the sense that it captures the fundamental difficulty introduced by dynamism or is the bond fragile in the sense that the poor performance it describes depends on an exact sequence of adversarial changes.
*  Fragile lower bounds leave open the possibility of algorithms that might still perform well and practice that's a in the sense of the impossible and the bounds discussion.
*  Presents the interesting question I just like the idea of robust and fragile bounds but.
*  What do you make about this kind of tension between what's provably like what the bonds you can prove there are like robust and something that's a bit more fragile and also by way of answering that for this particular paper.
*  Can you say what the hell are dynamic networks.
*  What a distributed.
*  You don't know this come on now.
*  And I have no idea and what is smooth analysis.
*  Yeah well okay so so smooth analysis it's so wasn't my idea so Speelman and Tang came up with this in the context of sequential algorithms just like.
*  The normal world of an algorithm that runs on a computer and they were they were looking at there's a well known algorithm called the simplex algorithm but basically you're trying to whatever find a.
*  Whole around a group of points and there was an algorithm that worked really well in practice but when you analyze it you would say you know I can't guarantee it's going to work well in practice because you have just the right.
*  Inputs this thing could run really long right but in practice it seemed to be really fast so smooth analysis is they came in and they said let's assume that.
*  A bad guy chooses the inputs that could be anything like really bad ones and all we're going to do it because in simplex their numbers.
*  We're going to just randomly put a little bit of noise on each of the numbers and they said, if you put a little bit of noise on the numbers suddenly simplex algorithm.
*  Goes really fast like oh that explains this this lower bound this this idea that it could sometimes run really long was a fragile bound because it could only run a really long time if you had exactly the worst pathological input.
*  So then my collaborators and I brought this over to the world of distributed algorithms we brought them over the general lower bounds right so so in the world of dynamic networks.
*  So distributed algorithm is a bunch of algorithms on different machines talking to each other trying to solve a problem and sometimes during a network.
*  So you imagine them connected with network links and a dynamic network those can change right, so I was talking to you, but now I can't talk to you anymore now i'm connected to a person over here.
*  it's a really hard environment mathematically speaking and there's a lot of really strong lower bounds, but you can imagine if the network can change all the time and a bad guy is doing it it's like hard to do things well.
*  So there's an algorithm running on every single node in the network yeah and then you're trying to say something of any kind that makes any kind of definitive sense about performance that algorithm yeah so like a we're sorry I just submitted a new paper on this a couple weeks ago and we were looking at a very simple problem there's there's a some messages in the network we want everyone to get them.
*  If the network doesn't change you can do this pretty well you can pipeline them there's some algorithms that work basic algorithms that work really well.
*  Network can change every round there's these lower bounds that says it takes a really long time there's a way that like no matter what algorithm you come up with there's a way that network can change in such a way that just.
*  Really slows down your progress basically right so smooth analysis there says yeah but that seems like a really you know really bad luck if your network was changing like exactly.
*  In the right way that you needed to screw your algorithm so we said what if we randomly just add or remove a couple edges and every round so the adversaries trying to choose the worst possible network we're just tweaking it a little bit and in that case this is a new paper I mean it's a blinded submission so maybe I shouldn't it's not whatever we basically showed.
*  An anonymous friend of yours submitted a paper anonymous friend of mine yeah yeah whose paper should be accepted so that even just adding like one random edge per round.
*  You the here's the cool thing about the simplest possible solution to this problem blows away that lower bound it does really well so that's like a very fragile lower bound because we're like it's it's almost impossible to actually.
*  Keep things slow wonder how many lower bounds you can smash open with this kind of analysis and show that they're fragile this is my interest yeah because in distributed algorithms.
*  There's a ton of really famous strong lower bounds but things have to go wrong really really wrong for these lower bound arguments to work.
*  And so I like this approach so this this whole notion of fragile versus robust I was like well let's go in and just throw a little noise in there and if it becomes solvable.
*  Maybe that lower bound wasn't really something we should worry about you know that's going to embarrass that's really uncomfortable that's really embarrassing to a lot of people is OK this is the OCD thing with the with the spaces.
*  Is it feels really good when you can prove a nice bound and if you say that that bond is fragile that that's that's like there's going to be a sad kid that walks.
*  Like with their lunch box back home like yeah my my lower bond doesn't matter I don't think they care it's all in I don't know it feels like to me a lot of this theory is just math much easier.
*  Yeah like whatever this was a hard bound to prove what do you think about that like so if you show that something is fragile that's more important that's really important for in practice right.
*  So do you think kind of theoretical computer science is living its own world just like mathematics and their main effort which I think is very valuable is to develop ideas it's not necessarily interesting whether it's applicable in the real world we don't care about the applicability.
*  Yeah I think we kind of do but not really and we're terrible with computers you can't do anything useful computers and we don't know how to code and you know we're not we're not productive members of like technological society but I do think.
*  Things percolate exactly you percolate from the the world of theory into the world of algorithm design where it will pull on the theory and now suddenly it's useful.
*  And then the algorithm design gets pulled into the world of practice where they say well actually we can make this algorithm a lot better because in practice really these servers do X Y Z and now we can make this super efficient.
*  And so I do think I mean I tell my I teach theory to the PhD students at Georgetown I show them the sort of funnel of like okay we're over here doing theory but it eventually some of this stuff will percolate down in effect at the very end you know a phone but it's a long it's a long tunnel.
*  But the very question you're asking at the highest philosophical level is fascinating like if you take a system a distributed system or network and introduce the little bit of noise into it like how many problems of that nature are fundamentally changed by that little introduction of noise.
*  Yeah because it's all of it especially distributed algorithms the model is everything like the way we work is we're incredibly precise about here's exactly it's mathematical here's exactly how the network works and it's a state machine algorithms are state machines there's rounds and schedulers were super precise we can prove lower bounds.
*  Yeah often those lower those impossibility results really get at the hard edges of exactly how that model works so we'll see if this guy so we published a paper on this that paper you mentioned.
*  The kind of introduced the idea to distribute algorithms world and I think that's got some traction and there's been some follow up so we've just submitted our.
*  Our next honestly the issue with the next is that like the result fell out so easily and this shows the mathematical machismo problem in these in these fields is there's a good chance the paper won't be accepted because there wasn't enough mathematical self-flagellation.
*  This is a nice finding so even showing that very few just very little bit of noise yeah can have a dramatic make a dramatic statement about the.
*  surprise to us but once we figure out how to show it it's not too hard.
*  And these are these are venues that for theoretical yeah the theoretical okay so the the fascinating tension that exists in other disciplines like one of them is machine learning.
*  Now which it despite the the power of machine learning and deep learning and all like the impact of it.
*  In the real world the main conferences on machine learning are still resistant to application papers and i'm not sort of.
*  And application papers broadly defined meaning like.
*  Finding almost like you would like Darwin did by like.
*  Going around collecting some information say huh isn't this interesting yeah like those are some of the most popular blogs and yet as a paper it's not really accepted I wonder what you think about this whole world of deep learning from a perspective of theory.
*  What do you make of this whole discipline of the success of neural networks of how to do science on them are you excited by the possibilities.
*  Of what we might discover about neural networks do you think it's fundamental engineering discipline or is there something theoretical that we might crack open.
*  One of these days and understanding something deep about how system optimization when how systems learn.
*  I am convinced by is it taken mark at MIT who's.
*  Tag mark yeah tag mark right so his notion has always been convincing to me.
*  That the fact that some of these models are inscrutable is not fundamental to them.
*  And that we can we're gonna get better and better because in the end you know the reason why practicing computer scientists often who are doing AI.
*  Practicing computer scientists often who are doing AI or working at AI industry aren't like worried about so much existential threats is because they see the reality is they're.
*  Multiplying matrices with numpy or something like that's right yeah and tweaking constants and hoping that the classifier fitness yeah for God's sakes before the submission deadline actually like gets above some like it feels like it's it's linear algebra and and TDM right.
*  But anyways I'm really convinced with his idea that once we understand better and better what's going on from a theory perspective it's going to make it into an engineering discipline.
*  So my mind where we're going to end up is okay forget these metaphors of neurons and these things are going to be.
*  Put down into these mathematical kind of elegant equations differentiable equations that just kind of work well and then it's going to be when I need a little bit of AI in this thing.
*  Plumbing like let's get a little bit of a pattern recognizer with a noise module and let's connect you know this feel better than me so I don't know if this is like a reasonable.
*  A reasonable prediction but that we're going to it's going to become less inscrutable and then it's going to become more engineerable and then we're going to have AI and more things because we're going to have a little bit more control over how we piece together these different classification.
*  Black box so one of the problems and there might be some interesting parallels that you might provide intuition on is you know neural networks are very large and they have a lot of it, you know we were talking about.
*  You know dynamic networks and distributed algorithms, one of the problems with the analysis of neural networks is you know you have a lot of nodes.
*  And you love a lot of edges to be able to interpret and to control different things is very difficult there's a.
*  there's fields and trying to figure out like mathematically how you form.
*  A clean representations that are like like one node contains all the information about a particular thing and no other nodes is correlated to it so like.
*  It has unique knowledge and like but that ultimately boils down to trying to simplify this thing into that goes against its very nature, which is like deeply connected and.
*  Like dynamic and just you know hundreds of millions billions of nodes yeah and in a distributed sense like when you zoom out the thing has a representation and understanding of something.
*  But the individual nodes are just doing their little exchange thing and it's the same thing with Stephen Wolfram when you talk about cellular automata it's very difficult to do math.
*  When you have a huge collection of distributed things each acting on their own and it's almost like.
*  It's it feels like it's almost impossible to do any kind of theoretical work in the traditional sense it almost becomes completely like like a biology you become a biologist as opposed to a theoretician you just study it experimentally.
*  Yeah, I think that's the big question I guess right yeah is so so is the large size and interconnectedness of the like a deep learning network.
*  Fundamental to that task or we just not very good at it yet because we're using the wrong.
*  Metaphor I mean the human brain learns with much fewer examples and with much less tuning of the whatever whatever whatever probably that requires to get those like deep mind networks up and running.
*  But yeah so I don't really know, but the one thing I have observed is that the yeah there's a.
*  The mundane nature of some of the working with these models tends to lead people to think that.
*  That do it like it could be Skynet or it could be like a lot of pain to get you know the thermostat to do what we wanted to do there's a lot of open questions yeah in between there and then, of course, the at a distributed the distributed network.
*  Of humans that use the system so like you can have the system itself then you know network, but you can also have like little algorithms controlling the behavior of humans, which is what you have a social networks.
*  it's possible that a very what is a toaster whatever the opposite of Skynet.
*  When taking a scale by used by individual humans and controlling their behavior can actually have the Skynet effect yeah so the the scale there we might have that now.
*  We might have that now we just don't know yeah like as it's happening is Twitter creating a little mini Skynet I mean yeah because of what happens it twirls out ramifications in the world and.
*  Is it really that much different if it's a robot with tentacles or a bunch of servers that yeah and the destructive effects could be.
*  I mean it could be political, but it could also be like you know you could probably make an interesting case that the virus the the coronavirus spread.
*  On Twitter to in the minds of people like the fear and the misinformation in some very interesting ways mixed up and maybe this pandemic wasn't sufficiently dangerous to where that could have created a weird like.
*  On instability, but maybe other things might create instability like somebody God forbid detonates nuclear weapons somewhere and then maybe the destructive aspects of that would not as much be the military actions, but the way those news are spread on Twitter yeah and the panic that creates yeah.
*  Yeah, I mean I think that's a great case study right like what happened not but i'm not suggesting that likes to go let off a nuclear bomb I meant the coronavirus but okay but but yeah I think that's a really interesting case study.
*  i'm interested in the counterfactual of 1995 like do the same virus in 1995 so first of all, it would have been.
*  I get a hear whatever the nightly news we'll talk about it and then they'll be my local health board will talk about it that meant mitigation decisions would probably necessarily be very sort of localized.
*  Okay, our communities trying to figure out what are we going to do what's going to happen like we see this with schools like where I grew up in New Jersey.
*  There's very localized school districts so even though they had sort of really bad viral numbers there my school I grew up and has been open since the fall because it's very localized like these teachers and these parents, what do we want to do, what are we comfortable with.
*  I live in a school district right now in Montgomery county that's a billion dollar a year budget 150,000 kid school district it just can't it's closed you know because it's too so i'm interested in that counterfactual yes you have all this information moving around.
*  And then you have the the the effects on discourse so we were talking about earlier that the the the Neil postman style effects of twitter which shifts people into a sort of a dunk culture mindset of.
*  don't give an inch to the other team and we're used to this and was fired up by politics and the unique attributes of twitter now throw in the coronavirus and suddenly we see.
*  Decades of public health knowledge, a lot of which was home during the HIV epidemic was thrown out the window because a lot of this was happening on twitter and suddenly we had public health officials using a don't give an inch to the other team mindset of like well, if we say this.
*  That might validate something that was wrong over here and we need that if we say this and maybe like that'll stop them from doing this that's like very twittery in a way that in 1995 is probably not the way public health officials would be thinking right now it's like well.
*  This is if we said this about mass, but the other team said that about mask we can't give an inch to this, so we got to be careful and like we can't tell people it's okay after they're vaccinated because that might.
*  we're giving them an inch on this and that's very twittery in my mind right that is the the impact of of twitter.
*  On the way we think about discourse, which is a dunking culture of don't give any answer the other team and it's all about slam dunks we are completely right and they're completely wrong.
*  It's as a rhetorical strategy is incredibly simplistic, but it's also the way that we think right now about how we do debate it combined terribly with election year pandemic.
*  Yeah election year pandemic I wonder if we could do some smooth analysis let's run the simulation over a few times a little bit noise yeah see if I can dramatically change the behavior of the system.
*  Okay, we talked about your love for proving that something is impossible so there's quite a few still open problems and complexity.
*  Of algorithms so let me ask does P equal NP probably not probably not if P equals NP.
*  What kind of you know and you'll be really surprised somebody proves it yeah what would that proof look like and why would that even be what would that mean what would that proof look like.
*  And what possible universe could P equals NP is there something that's actually you could say there.
*  It could it could be true, and I mean i'm not a complexity theorist, but every complexity theorist I know is convinced they're not equal.
*  And are basically not working on anymore, I mean there is a million dollars at stake if you can if you can solve the proof it's one of the millennium prizes.
*  Okay, so here here's how I think the P not equals NP proof is going to eventually happen I think it's going to fall out and it's going to be not super simple.
*  But not as hard as people think, because my my my theory about a lot of theoretical computer science based on just some results i've done, so this is a huge extrapolation is that a lot of what we're doing is just office skating deeper mathematics.
*  So like this happens to me a lot not a lot, but it's happened to me a few times in my work where you know we office skate it because we say well there's an algorithm and has this much.
*  You know memory and they're connected on a network and okay here's our setup and now we're trying to see how fast it can solve a problem.
*  And people do bounds about it and then the end it turns out that like we were just office skating some underlying you know mathematical thing that already existed.
*  Right so this has happened to me I had this paper I was quite fond of a while ago it was looking at this.
*  Problem called contention resolution where you you you put an unknown set of people on a shared channel and they're trying to break symmetry so.
*  it's like an ethernet whatever only one person can use it at a time you try to break symmetry there's all these bounds people have proven over the years.
*  About how long it takes to do this right and like I discovered at some point there's this one combinatorial result from the early 1990s all of these lower bound proofs all come from this.
*  And in fact it improved a lot of them and simplified a lot you could put it all in one paper you know it's like are we really and then okay so this new paper that I submitted a couple weeks ago.
*  I found you could take some of these same lower bound proofs for this contention resolution problem you could reprove them.
*  Using Shannon source code theorem that actually when you're breaking contention what you're really doing is building a code over.
*  You know if you have a distribution on the network sizes is a code over that source and if you plug in a high entropy information source and plug in from 1948.
*  The source code theorem that says on a noiseless channel you can't send things at a faster rate than the entropy allows.
*  The exact same lower bounds fall back out again right so like this type of thing happens there's a there's some famous lower bounds and distributed algorithms that turned out to all be.
*  Algebraic topology underneath the covers and they won the girdle prize for working on that so my sense is what's going to happen is at some point someone really smart.
*  To be very exciting is going to realize there's some sort of other representation of what's going on with these Turing machines trying to sort of efficiently.
*  You know we follow out of that and there'll be an existing mathematical result that.
*  Apply someone or something I guess it could be a I got theorem provers kind of thing it could be yeah I mean not well yeah I mean there's theorem provers like what that means now which is not fun.
*  It's just a bunch of very carefully formulated postulates that but I take your point yeah yeah so okay.
*  I don't know on a small tangent and then you're kind of implying that mathematics it almost feels like a kind of weird evolutionary tree that ultimately leads back to some kind of ancestral few fundamental ideas that all they're just like they're all somehow connected.
*  In that sense, do you think.
*  Of math is fundamental to our universe and we're just like slowly trying to understand these patterns or is it is it discovered.
*  Or is it just a little game that we play yeah amongst ourselves to try to fit little patterns to the world yeah that's the question right that's the physicist question.
*  I mean i'm probably i'm in the discovered camp but I don't do theoretical physics, so I know they have a.
*  They feel like they have a stronger claim to the answer in that question, but you don't think it comes back to it everything comes back to it, I mean all the physics the fact that the universe is well okay.
*  It's a complicated question so how often do you think how deeply does this result describe the fundamental reality of nature.
*  So the reason I hesitated that because it's something i'm I taught the seminar and did a little work on what are called biological algorithms so there's this notion of.
*  So physicists use mathematics to explain the universe right, and it was unreasonable that mathematics works so well.
*  You know all these differential equations, why does that explain all we need to know about thermodynamics and gravity and all the all these type of things well there's this there's this movement within.
*  The intersection of computer science and biology this kind of wolf rammium I guess really that.
*  This kind of wolf rammium I guess really that.
*  algorithms can be very explanatory right that like if you're trying to if you're trying to explain parsimoniously.
*  Something about like an ant colony or something like this you're not going to ultimately it's not going to be explained as a equation like a physics equation is going to be explained by an algorithm so like this algorithm.
*  Run distributedly is going to explain the behavior so that's mathematical but not quite mathematical, but it is if you think about an algorithm like a lambda calculus which brings you back to the world of mathematics i'm thinking out loud here but basically.
*  abstract math is sort of like unreasonably effective at explaining a lot of things and that's just what I feel like I glimpse i'm not a.
*  Not like a super well known theoretician I don't have really famous results so even as a sort of middling you know career theoretician I keep encountering this where.
*  We think we're solving some problem about computers and algorithms and it's some much deeper underlying math it's Shannon but Shannon is entropy but entropy was really you know.
*  You know goes all the way back to whatever it was boiler all the way back to looking at the early physics and and it's anyways to me I think it's amazing.
*  yeah but it could be the flip side of that could be just our brains draw so much pleasure from the deriving generalized theories and simplifying the universe that we just naturally see that kind of simplicity and everything.
*  Yes, that's the whole you know Newton Einstein right so you can you can say this must be right because it's so predictive and it's not quite predictive because mercury wobbles a little bit I think we have it set and then you turn out.
*  Now Einstein and then and then you get more like no not Einstein it's actually statistical and yeah so.
*  It's hard to also know like where smooth analysis fits into all that word a little bit of know it like you can say something very clean about a system and then a little bit of noise like the average case is actually very different and so yeah I mean that's where like the quantum mechanics comes in it's like.
*  Why does it have to be randomness in this yeah I would have to this complex statistics yeah yeah.
*  So to be determined yeah that'll be my next book that be ambitious the fundamental the fundamental core of reality comma and some advice for being more productive at work.
*  Can I ask you just if it's possible to do an overview and just some brief comments of wisdom on the process of publishing a book what's that process until what are the different options and what's your recommendation.
*  For somebody that wants to write a book like yours a nonfiction book that discovers something interesting about this world.
*  So what I usually advise is follow the follow the process as is.
*  Don't try to reinvent I think that that happens a lot where.
*  Where you'll try to reinvent the way the publishing industry should work like this kind of not like in a business model ways but just like this is what I want to do I want to write a thousand words a day and I want to do this and I'm going to put on the Internet and.
*  The publishing industry is very specific about how it works and so like when I got started writing books which is a very young age so you know I sold my first book at the age of 21.
*  The way I did that is I found a family friend that was an agent and I said I'm not trying to make you be my agent just explain to me how this works not just how the world works but give me the hard truth about how would a 21 year old under what conditions could a 21 year old sell a book what would that look like and she just explained it to me well you have to do this and have to be a subject that it made sense for you to write.
*  And you would have to do this type of writing for the publications the validated and blah blah blah you have to get the agent first and I learned the whole game plan and then I executed.
*  And so the rough game plan is with nonfiction you get the agent first.
*  The agents going to sell it to the publishers so like you're never sending something directly to the publishers and nonfiction you're not writing the book first.
*  Right the you're going to get an advance from the publisher once sold and then you're going to.
*  Do the primary writing of the book in fact it will in most circumstances hurt you if you've already written.
*  So you're you're trying to sell well I guess the agent first you sell to the agent and the agent sells it to the publishers it's much easier to get an agent than a book deal so that the thought is if you can't get an agent and why would you so you start with the and also.
*  And the way this works with a good agent is they know all the editors and they have lunch with the editors and they're always just like hey what projects you have coming what are you looking for here's one of my authors that's the way all these deals happen it's not you're not emailing a manuscript to a slush pile.
*  Yeah and so so first of all the agent takes a percentage and then the publishers this is where the process comes in they take also cut that's probably ridiculous so if you try to reinvent.
*  The system you probably be frustrated by the percentage that everyone takes relative to how much bureaucracy and efficiency yeah ridiculousness there's in the system your recommendation is like you're just one and.
*  Stop trying to build your own colony well or or or if you create your own process for how it should work you're not going to the book's not going to get published so there's the separate question the economic question like should I create my own.
*  Like self published it or do something like that but yeah but putting that aside there's a lot of people I encounter that want to publish a book with a main publisher but they invent their own rules for how it works right so then the alternative though is self publishing in the the the downside.
*  There's a lot of downsides it's like it's almost like publishing an opinion piece in the New York Times versus writing our blog there's no reason why writing a blog post on medium can get way more attention.
*  And legitimacy and long lasting prestige than in New York Times article but nevertheless for most people writing in a prestigious newspaper quote unquote prestigious is is just easier.
*  And well and depends on your goal so you know like I push you towards a big publisher because I think your goal is it's huge ideas you want impact right you're gonna have more impact.
*  You know even though in like actually so there's different ways to measure impact right world of ideas in the world of ideas and also yeah in the world of ideas it's kind of like the clubhouse thing now even if the audience is not large.
*  The people in the audience are very interesting as it's like the conversation feels like that has long lasting impact yeah among among the people who in different in disparate industries that are also then starting their own conversations and all that kind of stuff.
*  Because you have other so like so like self publishing a book.
*  The goals that would solve you have much better ways of getting to those goals might be part of it right so if there's the financial aspect of what you get to keep more of it.
*  I mean the podcast is probably going to crush right what the books going to do anyways right yeah if it's.
*  I want to get directly to certain audiences are crowds might be harder to traditional publisher there's better ways to talk to those crowds.
*  It could be on clubhouse with all these new technologies self published books not going to be the most effective way to find your way to a new crowd but if the ideas like I want to have a leave a dent.
*  In the world of ideas, then they have a vulnerable old publisher you know put out your book in a nice hardcover and do the things they do.
*  That goes one way and they do do a lot I mean there's it's very difficult actually there's so much involved in putting together a book they get books into bookstores and all that kind of stuff all this and from an efficiency standpoint.
*  I mean just a time involved and trying to do this yourself is there no process right like you said they have a process they've got a process I mean I know like Jaco did this recently started his own imprint and I have a couple other.
*  But it's a huge overhead if you like if you run a business and you so like Jaco is a good case study right so he got you know fed up with Simon Schuster dragging their feet and said i'm gonna start my own imprint then if you're not going to publish my kids book.
*  But he what does he do he runs businesses right yeah so I think in his world like I already run i'm a i'm a partner in whatever in origin and I have this and that and so it's like yeah we can run businesses that's what we know how to do that's what I do I run businesses I have people but for like you or I.
*  We don't run businesses it'd be terrible yeah yeah well especially these kinds of businesses right so I do want to watch a business very different technology business is very different yes very very different yeah yeah I mean this is like okay copy editors and graphic book binders and I need to contract with the printer but all the printer doesn't have slots and so now I have to try to you I mean it's.
*  I get so I need to shut this off my room I get so frustrated when the system could clearly be improved it's the thing that you mentioning yeah it's like this is so inefficient every time I go to the DMV or something like that you think like this could be done so much better yeah but you know and the same thing is.
*  The worry with with an editor which I guess would come from the publisher like who would who would how much supervision on your book did you receive like hey do you think this is too long or do you think the title like title how much choice do you have in the title in the cover in the presentation and the branding and all that kind of stuff yeah I mean all of it depends right so when it comes on.
*  The relationship on the with the editor on the writing it depends on the editor and it depends on you like at this point I'm on my seventh book and I write for a lot of major publications and at this point I have what I feel like is a.
*  A voice that I've got a level of craft that I I'm very comfortable with right so my editor is not going to be.
*  Niche kind of trust me and is gonna be more big picture like I'm losing the thread here or the seems like it could be longer where's the first book I wrote when I was 21.
*  I had notes such as you start a lot of sentences with so you don't use any contractions because I've been doing scientific writing yeah use contract you should probably use contractions that was way more you know I had to go back and the whole thing yeah.
*  But ultimately the recommendation I mean we talked offline and sort of I was thinking loosely not really sure but I was thinking of writing a book and there's a kind of desire to go self publishing not for financial reasons and the money can be good by the way right I mean.
*  It's very it's very power law type just distributed right so the money on a hard cover is somewhere between one or two dollars a book.
*  So the thing is I personally don't but you give up 15% of the agent so I personally don't care about money as I've mentioned before but I for some reason really don't like spending money.
*  On things that are not worth it like I don't care if I get money I just don't like spending money on like feeding a system that's inefficient it's like I'm contributing to the problem that's my biggest problem right so you think that you're worried about the inefficiencies of the.
*  Yeah the fact that the overhead the number of people involved or overhead the emails again the the the the the fact that they have this way of speaking which I'm allergic to many people like that's very marketing speak.
*  Like you could tell they've been having zoom meetings all day it's like as opposed to.
*  A sort of creative collaborators that are like also a little bit crazy yeah I suppose some of that is finding the right people find the right people that's what I would say I say there's definitely maybe it's just good fortune.
*  Good fortune in terms of like my agents and editors i've worked with there's really good people who they're see the vision or smart or incredibly literary they yeah and.
*  And so let's see yeah I had a great editor when I was first moving into hardcover books, for example, is my first you know.
*  Big book advance and my first sort of big deal and he was like a senior editor and it was very useful you know he was like we had a lot of long talks right I was so that this was my fourth book so good they can't ignore you was my first big hardcover idea book.
*  And we had a lot of talks like even before I started writing it just let's talk about books and his philosophy had been in the business for a long time he was the head of the head of the imprint it was useful.
*  yeah but I mean the other frustrating thing is how long the whole thing takes a long time yeah I suppose that's you just had to accept well I yeah I handed in this manuscript for the book that comes out now like when this I handed it in.
*  I mean over the summer, like during the pandemic so it's not it's not terrible right and we were editing during the pandemic and I finished it in the spring we've talked most of today, except for a little bit computer science, most of today about a productive life.
*  How does love friendship and family fit into that.
*  Is there.
*  Do you find that there's attention.
*  Is it possible for relationships to energize the whole process to benefit or is it ultimately a trade off, but because life is short and ultimately we seek happiness not productivity that we have to accept that tension yeah.
*  Yeah, I mean, I think relationships is the best to found that's the whole deal like I thought about this the other day.
*  I don't think context was I was thinking about if I was going to give like an advice speech like a commencement address or like to give advice to young people and.
*  Like the big question I have for young people is if they haven't already bad things are going to happen that you don't control so what's the plan.
*  Right like let's start let's start figuring that out now because it's not all good you know some people get off better than others, but eventually.
*  Stuff happens right you get sick something falls apart the economy craters the someone you know you know dies like all sorts of bad stuff is going to happen right.
*  So how are we going to do this like how do how do we like live life and life is hard and in ways that is unfair and unpredictable.
*  Then relationships is the that's the buffer for all of that.
*  Because we're wired for it right I went down this this rabbit hole with digital minimalism I went down this huge rabbit hole about the human brain and sociality.
*  it's all we're wired to do it's like all of our brain is for this like everything all of our mechanisms everything is made to service social connections because what kept you alive, you know I mean you had to your tribal connections is how you didn't starve during the famine people share food etc.
*  And so you can't neglect that and it's like everything and people feel it right like there's no our social networks are hooked up to the pain center.
*  That's why it feels so terrible when you miss someone like someone dies or something right that's like how seriously we take it there's a pretty accepted theory that the default mode network like a lot of what the default mode network is doing so that sort of the default state our brain goes into when we're not doing something in particular is practicing sociality.
*  It practicing interactions thing because it's it's so you know crucial to what we do it's like at the core of human thriving so i've more recently the way I think about is like relationships first.
*  Okay, given that foundation of putting like and I don't think we put nearly enough time into it, I worry that social media is reducing relationships strong relationships.
*  Strong relationships where you're sacrificing non-trivial time and attention resources whatever on behalf of other people that's the net that is going to allow you to get through anything.
*  Then alright now what do we want to do with the surplus to remains may want to build some build some fire build some tools.
*  So put relationships first I like the worst case analysis from the computer science perspective put relationships first yeah because everything else is just.
*  Assuming average case assuming things kind of keep going as they were going and you're neglecting the fundamental human drive like we have this we talked about the boredom instinct we want to build things we want to have impact we want to do productivity that's not nearly as clear cut of a drive of we need people.
*  But if we look at the real worst case analysis here is one day you're pretty young now but that's not going to last very long you're going to die one day is that something you think about.
*  Little bit are you afraid of death well i'm up the mindset of let's make that a productivity hack.
*  I'm in the mindset of.
*  We need to confront that soon yeah so let's do what we can now so that when we really confront and think about it we're more likely to feel better about it so in other words like let's let's focus now on.
*  Living and doing things in such a way that we're proud of so that when it really comes time to confront that we're more likely to say like okay I feel kind of good about the situation so what when you're laying in your deathbed would you in looking back.
*  What would make you think like I did a I do okay i'm proud of that I optimized the hell out of that that's a good I mean it's a good question that the the go backwards on.
*  That's a good I mean it's a good question that the the go backwards on I mean this is like David Brooks is eulogy virtues versus resume virtues.
*  Right so his argument is that that's another interesting DC area person I keep thinking of interesting people alright David Brooks.
*  You his argument he thinks eulogy virtues is so what we eulogize is different than what we promote on the resume.
*  That's his whole thing now right his second mountain wrote the character of both these books are yes this whole premise of there's like this professional phase and there's a phase of.
*  Giving of yourself and sacrifice and on behalf of other people I don't know maybe it's all mixed together right you want to I think living by a code is important right I mean.
*  Something that's not emphasized enough I always think of advice that my undergrad should be given that that they're not given, especially at a place like georgetown that has this like deep history of you know trying to promote human flourishing because of the Jesuit connection.
*  there's such there's such.
*  resiliency and pride that comes out of living well even when it's hard like living according to a code living accord to which which you know I think religion used to structure this for people.
*  And but in its absence, you need some sort of replacement, but this even when things were at soldiers get this a lot right.
*  The experiences a lot even when things were tough, I was able to persist and live in this way that I knew was right, even though it wasn't the easiest thing to do in the moment like fewer things give humans more.
*  Resiliency is like having done that your relationships are strong right many people coming to your funeral is a standard like a lot of people are going to come to your funeral like the mean you matter to a lot of people.
*  yeah and then maybe having done to to the extent of whatever capabilities you are happen to be granted, you know and they're different for different people and some people can sprint real fast and some people can do math problems tried to actually do something of impact.
*  i'll just promise to give gift cards to anybody shows up to the funeral.
*  you're going to hack it.
*  i'm going to hack even the funeral.
*  there's going to be a lottery wheel you spend when you come in and someone goes away with $10,000.
*  The see the problem is like with all this the living by principles living a principal life focusing on relationships and kind of thinking of this life is perfect thing kind of forgets the notion that none of it.
*  You know makes any sense right like the.
*  Like it kind of implies that this is like a video game and you want to get a high score as opposed to none of this even make sense like why would eat like what that.
*  Like like what does it even mean to die it's going to be over it's like everything I do all these productivity hacks all this life all these efforts all this creative efforts kind of assume it's going to go on forever there's a kind of sense of immortality.
*  And I don't even know how to intellectually make sense that ends of course got to ask you in that context what do you think is the meaning of it all, especially for computer scientists I mean it's got to be some mathematical.
*  Yeah 27 or what's the.
*  What's the.
*  Yeah.
*  Yeah.
*  Or 40 40 40 40 20 20 sounds a better number I should read more sci fi.
*  You're onto something with a 27 I don't want to give away too much but just trust me 27 visible yeah.
*  So I mean I don't know obviously right I mean.
*  Yeah I don't know but but going back to what you're saying about the sort of the existentialist or the sort of the more nihilist.
*  The one thing that there is our intimations right so that there's these intimations that human halves of somehow this feels right and this feels wrong this feels good this feels like.
*  I'm doing I mean aligned with something you know when I'm acting with courage to save whatever right it's not these intimations are a grounding against arbitrariness like one of the ideas are really interested in is that.
*  Like when the ideas are really interested in is that.
*  When you look at religion right so i'm interested in world religions for my grandfather was like a theologian that studied and wrote all these books i'm very interested in this type of stuff.
*  And there's this great book that's it's it's not specific to a particular religion but it's Karen Armstrong wrote this great book called the case for God.
*  She's very interesting she was a Catholic nun who sort of left that religion and is but one of the smartest thinkers.
*  In terms of like accessible theological thinking that's not tied to any particular religion her whole argument is that the way to understand religion you first of all you have to go way back pre enlightenment where all this was formed we got messed up thinking about religion post enlightenment right and.
*  These are operating systems for making sense of intimations.
*  The one thing we had were these different information of this field like ah and mystical experience and this feels some there's something you feel when you act in a certain way and don't act in this other way.
*  And it was like the scientists who are trying to study and understand the model of the atom by just looking at.
*  Experiments and trying to understand what's going on like the great religions of the world were basically figuring out.
*  What were the tools they were using they were using ritual they were using belief they were using action but all of it was like an OS it was like a liturgical model of the atom that that.
*  It's hard quoted in so it did through the evolutionary process and they want to.
*  I mean they wouldn't have called it that back then or yeah I mean whether they said who they didn't have that as pre enlightenment they just said this is here and and.
*  The directive is to try to live in alignment with that well, then I want to ask who wrote the original code yeah so so question yeah so so Armstrong lays out this good argument and where it gets really interesting is that that she emphasizes that.
*  All of this was considered an ethical right so the whole notion, and this is like rich in Jewish tradition in particular and also an Islamic tradition.
*  Right and so the best we can do to approximate understanding live in alignment is we like act as if this is true do these rituals have these actions or whatever post enlightenment a lot of that got.
*  Once we learned about enlightenment we grew these suspicions around religion that are very much of the modern era right so like the.
*  Right the critiques based on well this is you're making the ascent to propositions that you think are true for which you do not have evidence that they are true so like that's an enlightenment thing right, this is not the context and this is not the religion is.
*  The Rutherford model of the atom like it's not actually maybe what is underneath the
*  And so this is like the way religion was you you there's a God will call it this, this is how it works, we do this ritual we act in this way it aligns with it just like the model, the atom predicted why you know in a and cl is going to become salt this predicts that you're going to feel and live in alignment right it's like this beautiful.
*  Which actually matches how a lot of great theologians have you know thought about it, but then when you come forward in time yeah maybe it's evolution, I mean this is like what peterson hints at right like he's basically.
*  He's not he doesn't like to get super pinned down on this but I'm kind of seems where he said that he's almost like searching for the words he focuses more like you and other people but.
*  I mean I know he's very union but but that same type of analysis I think roughly speaking like Armstrong is sort of a.
*  It's kind of like a Peter sony analysis but she's looking more at the deep history of religion than but yeah he throws in the evolutionary yeah and I wonder what home it finds I wonder what the new home is if religion dissipates what the new home for these kinds of natural inclinations are.
*  Yeah, whether technology whether and if it's evolution I mean this is Francis Collins is book also he's like well.
*  That's a religious that could be a very religious notion I don't I think this stuff is interesting I'm not a very religious person but I'm.
*  I'm thinking it's not a bad idea maybe maybe what replaces honestly like maybe what replaces religion is a return to religion but in this sort of more sophisticated.
*  But if you went back yeah I mean it's the issue with like a lot of the recent critiques I think is it's a.
*  It's a strong and could critique in a complicated way right because the whole way these the way this work and the theologians if you're reading Paul Tillich if you're reading.
*  Hashtag if you're reading these people they're they're thinking very sophisticatedly about religion in terms of this it's ineffable and we're just these things and this is a steep it connects us to these things in a way that puts life in alignment we can't really explain what's going on because we are brains can't handle it right.
*  For the average person though this notion of live as if it's kind of how religions work is Liz live as if this is true it's like an OS for getting in alignment with because we do have a cultural evolution like you behave in this way do these rich and live as if this is true.
*  Gives you the what the goal you're looking for but that's a complicated thing live as if this is true because if you especially if you're not a theologian to say.
*  Yeah this is not true in an alignment sense but i'm living as if it kind of takes the heat out of it but of course it's what people are doing because you know highly religious people still do bad things where if you really were.
*  No there's absolutely a hell and i'm definitely going to go to it if I do this bad thing you would never have you know no one would ever murder anyone if they were evangelical christian right so so it's like what this is kind of a tangent that i'm i'm i'm on shaky ground here but.
*  It's something i've been interested often on a lot was this fast I mean I think we're in some sense searching for because it is it does make for a good operating system we're searching for a good live as if access true and we're searching for a new X.
*  Yeah and maybe artificial intelligence will be the very the new gods that were so desperately looking for or it'll just spit out 42.
*  I thought it was 27 yeah this is a yes you know i've been a huge fan.
*  So are a huge number of people that i've spoken with so they could tell me i absolutely have to talk to you this is a huge honor this is really fun thanks for wasting all this time with me.
*  And likewise i've been a long time fan so this is a lot of fun yeah thanks man.
*  Thanks for listening to this conversation with cal newport and thank you to our sponsors express vpn lenoid linux virtual machines sun basket meal delivery service and simply safe home security.
*  Click the sponsor links to get a discount and to support this podcast and now let me leave you some words from cal himself clarity about what matters provides clarity about what does not thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
