---
Date Generated: April 13, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 6649s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence', 'artificial intelligence podcast', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex podcast', 'mit ai', 'yannis pappas']
Video Views: 298226
Video Rating: None
---

# Yannis Pappas: History and Comedy | Lex Fridman Podcast #175
**Lex Fridman:** [April 12, 2021](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dmVqpx4YOY4)
*  The following is a conversation with Janis Papas, a comedian who co-hosted the podcast
*  History Hyenas that I came across when I was researching the Battle of Crete from World War II.
*  He and his co-hosts were hilarious in their rants about history and about life. The chemistry they
*  have is probably the best of any co-hosted comedy podcast or even podcast in general
*  that I've ever heard. As of a few weeks ago, unfortunately, History Hyenas is no more,
*  at least for now, because all good things must come to an end. But Janis hosts a new podcast
*  called Long Days with Janis Papas, plus he has a comedy special on YouTube for free. Quick mention
*  of our sponsors, Wine Access, Blinkist, Magic Spoon, and Indeed. Check them out in the description to
*  support this podcast. As a side note, let me say that some of you have noticed that I have not
*  spoken with too many computer scientists, physicists, biologists, or engineers recently.
*  The reason has to do mostly with the risk aversion of many of these folks in the time of COVID,
*  especially as they get closer to taking the vaccine. I'm tested several times a week and still
*  some people are just more willing than others to have an in-person conversation in these times.
*  I only do these podcasts in person because I look for the possibility of a genuine human connection.
*  I'm willing to sacrifice a lot for that. Maybe it's silly, but I look for the magic that Charles
*  Bukowski writes about in his poem Nirvana, the magic that is somehow in the air on those rare
*  occasions when two people meet, talk, and you notice that while on the surface you may be worlds apart,
*  you're still somehow woven from the same fabric. I've had that with many guests. Jim Keller comes
*  to mind, but many others as well. I'm an AI person. Machine learning, robotics, computer science is my
*  passion. Trust me, I can't wait to be having more technical conversations again, but I will also
*  continue to mix in comedians, musicians, historians, and of course, wise all-seeing sages like
*  Janis Papas and Tim Dillon, just to keep it as Tim likes to say, fun.
*  This is the Lex Friedman podcast and here is my conversation with Janis Papas.
*  You've co-hosted until recently an amazing history comedy podcast called The History Hyenas.
*  So you're a bit of a student of history? Yeah, an F student of history. F student? Yeah. Okay,
*  I thought it was more like a D minus. D minus, yeah. Okay. Still got to repeat the grade if you
*  get all D minuses. I actually had a 0.67 GPA average my freshman year and I had to do it again.
*  This podcast is going to be the spectrum of human intelligence. It runs the gamut from there to here.
*  So this is going to set the low bar. I'm barely sliding into human. I'm closer to chimp.
*  And I bring that up that you're also friends with the great, the powerful Tim Dillon.
*  So let's talk about power and the corrupting effects of power.
*  Sometimes I look at Tim Dillon as he grows in power. I thought you meant in size.
*  Well, size, I think they're correlated. Yeah, I saw him. I've been in Austin a couple days.
*  I saw him once. We had eight meals in one day. Eight meals. Yeah. So I feel like I've been here
*  longer than I have just because of the meals with Dillon. Kid likes biscuits and barbecue. Okay. So
*  I was imagining Putin or something like that. He's more like the North Korean dictator.
*  Yeah. They get along great, those two. Yeah. Tim Dillon and King John Ohm would be like,
*  they could make a buddy cop movie. They would get along like Lethal Weapon. That would be a good
*  pitch movie. Great podcast. Yeah, that would be a great podcast. Yeah.
*  So much to talk about. So many similar ideas about the world. So what do you think the world
*  would look like if Tim Dillon was given absolute power? He seems like a person
*  that's an interesting study of the corrupting effects of power. Yeah, you don't want to give
*  him power. I don't even want him wearing a suit. I want a guy who's as thoughtful and educated as
*  you wearing a suit. Because suits corrupt you. You put that suit on, you start feeling that power.
*  It's like, yeah, I don't even want Tim Dillon in a suit. Power would, he would kill people,
*  he'd get rid of anything that he deemed. I mean, if you made a lobster roll and it wasn't up to
*  Tim Dillon standard, he would have you executed. The entire restaurant staff is just gone. He would
*  have people below his food standard executed. There'd be programs, not of people who are
*  political dissidents, but of people who don't meet his food standard. His cuisine standard is high
*  and he's usually right. Do you think power does corrupt people? Yes. Like one of the reasons we
*  mentioned offline Joe Rogan, he's been an inspiration to me because he gets, he gets,
*  if you get power, just more famous and famous and yes, probably a bit of power in terms of influence
*  and he's still pretty much the same guy. I'm not sure that's going to be true for everybody.
*  Do you ever think, ask yourself that question? Yeah, he's a rare breed. He's like a benign king.
*  Most people I meet who are like really powerful are like douchebags and that's how they got there.
*  I think that's, psychopaths have the advantage because they don't have feelings
*  and Joe's a rare example. He's just a powerhouse of will and I do think about that. Yeah, I think
*  I should be stopped right now. Just stop me right now because yeah, power for me, I would,
*  when people get power they indulge. I don't think it changes anyone. It just reveals your darkest.
*  You know, people aren't supposed to have anything they want. You got to be able to struggle for
*  everything. So I would have a harem. I'd be like a Roman dictator. Yeah, I'd be like a Roman emperor.
*  I mean, people call them emperors. They were dictators. The most effective leaders are dictators.
*  I hope we get back to that. Democracy hasn't worked. I'm ready for a secession of Caesars
*  and I want to start with AOC. That's true. Dictators get the job done. They do. They do.
*  At a certain point you got, that's why social workers can only get you so far. You need action.
*  I was a social worker for five years and all you do is ask about medications and you don't solve
*  anything. I do ask myself of that like because I'm more in the tech space of constructing
*  systems that prevent me from being corrupt because right now I'm all about love and all about those
*  kinds of things. But I wonder, you said like it just reveals the darkness. The problem is
*  we might not be aware of our own darkness. I have the same feeling about money. Actually, I've been
*  avoiding thinking about money, like basically constructing my moral system, my moral compass
*  around money. It's like the moment I feel a little too happy about the idea of owning some
*  cool shiny thing, I started to think, okay, I'm not going to own that shiny thing because I'm
*  afraid of the slippery slope of it. You ever think about that kind of stuff? Yeah. The funny
*  thing about the capitalist system is it puts sort of a profit motive above beauty. You notice when
*  you see certain cities, especially in the old days where buildings used to be beautiful and now
*  they're just like boxes. They throw a kit up and it's just for all profit margin. It's the illusion
*  of permanence that it's like, oh, let me get as much money as I can. My dad used to say, everyone,
*  it's a cliche, but you can't take it with you. It's comical to me that we're here trying to get
*  this infinite amount. It's like Sisyphus. We're all trying to climb this hill, but the rock's
*  going to fall on us. I think that's a healthy outlook. Yeah. My dad always used to say before
*  he passed, he would say you have to survive not only physically, but you have to survive
*  emotionally. I think a lot of people forget about the emotional part of survival. You have to survive
*  emotionally and humor and understanding reality in its objective context helps with that. Accepting
*  reality as this ephemeral thing that you're really just a part of, but not as significant as your
*  ego wants you to believe is a start. That's a good foundation for surviving emotionally.
*  What's that mean, surviving emotionally? What's an ideal life look like for you?
*  You can't take things too seriously because they're ephemeral. They're not permanent.
*  Nothing's permanent. Your bank account's not permanent. Your proms aren't permanent.
*  Nothing's permanent. Your abilities aren't permanent. Your memory's not permanent.
*  Your dick getting hard is not permanent. Can I curse on this or is this go out to jail?
*  You can curse to your heart's content.
*  Gender's not even permanent anymore. I'm going to change maybe and live my second half as another
*  gender just to have, I'm bored with this gender. It's like nothing is permanent. Accepting that
*  emotionally is a good start to being more flexible. You got to be flexible. My dad used to
*  say anything too stiff snaps. It's a cliche and people have said it a bunch of different ways,
*  but Bruce Lee is right, man. Be water. Be water. Yeah.
*  Bukowski has this quote about love, that love is a fog that fades with the first light of reality.
*  He's a romantic, that guy. But that even love is a thing that just doesn't last very long.
*  Some people would disagree with that. Maybe it morphs like water. It changes. It might not be
*  this because he's mostly just loved like prostitutes, I think.
*  Best kind of love. Yeah. No demand, no responsibilities.
*  Yeah. It's a financial transaction.
*  As ephemeral as ever. You mentioned your dad, he passed away a year and a half ago.
*  What did you learn from him? I love my dad. I would say my dad was my hero. My dad really embodied
*  those values. I think for better or worse, it's made me who I am. My dad was a painter,
*  he was a lawyer, he was a lieutenant in the military. New Yorker?
*  New Yorker, born and bred Brooklyn. His dad, surprise, owned a diner. That's the immigration
*  passport for Greeks into America. Yeah, my dad played football. My dad did what he wanted. He
*  lived as he wanted at all costs and I think I got that from him for better or worse. I think it's
*  hurt me in my pursuits. If you consider money and fame to be paramount, I've always done what I
*  wanted and if I stopped wanting to do it, I just stopped doing it. I think I got that from my dad,
*  so maybe for better or worse, that's what I learned from him. But that's a real currency.
*  Feeling like you're in love with what you're doing when you're doing it,
*  maybe perhaps that's worth more than money. I don't know.
*  You miss him? Yeah, every day, every day, but I'm happy that
*  he got 91 years. It's very rare. He smoked for 60 years. Talk about a guy who was an outlier.
*  He smoked like 60 years, like packs. He didn't die from that. He died, he had prostate cancer,
*  which is the way men should go. Your dick should give out. It should start from the dick. We focus
*  so much of our life on the dick that that's the way, that's a successful life. That's why every
*  man eventually gets prostate cancer because that is the universe's way of saying the thing you
*  focused on the most is you put the most energy into is the thing that's spent. Your rotting is
*  going to start there. That's a successful life. It just spread all over his body and he slowly
*  died. I was with him when he died and that meant a lot to me because me and my brother weren't
*  talking at the time because we're Greeks. We're talking again, but that's how it is.
*  You got a few brothers, right? I got two brothers, but I wanted to make sure I was with him
*  when he died and I got lucky and I was in the room with him when he died.
*  You were in the room with your brother and you weren't?
*  No, my brother wasn't there. We were kind of doing shifts. I was there. I spent the night,
*  the night my dad died. He died early in the morning and I heard the death rat of the last
*  breath. He knew I was there and I think that just probably meant something to him and I'm
*  just glad I was there. Does that make you sad that life is ephemeral, like you said?
*  Yeah. That you die?
*  Yeah. What do you think about your own death? Do you meditate on that?
*  I think the actual, if there is a point to life, it's to hopefully not fear death,
*  to accept reality. I think that's important. I think so much goes awry in the human condition
*  when we lose touch with reality. Every political system that's led to mass murder and everything,
*  I think because the tenets of those political philosophies ended up being utopian. They were
*  detached from reality, detached from nature. I think it's very important to accept and
*  acknowledge your own mortality. I think it's the foundation for what makes a good person,
*  a moral person, a contributing member of society because it's true. True things should be the
*  foundation of all things. If what you believe is based on illusion, you're going to end up
*  doing destruction. Whether that destruction is on a scale of one to ten, you are going to be
*  destructive because it's not real. It's a fantasy. It doesn't exist.
*  See, the thing is though, truth is about, I don't think you can ever reach truth. Truth is about
*  constantly digging. To push back on your idea that you should accept death, I think the more
*  honest response to death, so the least honest is to run away from it, create illusions that help
*  you imagine that there's not a death. The next is to accept it, but the real honest one is to fear
*  it because I'm with Ernest Becker as a philosopher who wrote a book called Denial of Death. He says
*  that much of the human condition is based in the fear of mortality. That's the creative force of
*  the human energy. Freud said, do you want to sleep with your mother? He said, no, that's not what
*  motivates you. Maybe his mom wasn't hot though. Or he wasn't great because apparently at a poll,
*  we found that all things good and bad. Thanks for that.
*  I just don't know if his mom was a looker or not. I have to Google it.
*  All right. I'll look up on Google images. I think that honest, as he says, the thing that we run
*  away from is that there's a terror. He calls it terror. There's something called terror management
*  theory that some philosophers after him followed on that we're basically trying to run away from
*  this fear. Acceptance is actually creating an illusion for yourself. You can actually accept
*  something as terrifying as this. He's more with the Stoics. The Stoics constantly meditate on
*  their death. What does that mean? Acceptance of death isn't a thing you do on a Monday and then
*  you're done. It's a thing you constantly have to meditate on, reminding yourself this ride is over.
*  It could be over today. If you think about it every single day, it gives you an appreciation
*  of Woody Allen movies, at least. It gives you appreciation of basically everything,
*  including Woody Allen movies, which shows you how deep your appreciation for life could be.
*  I've actually haven't been following much of Woody Allen's, but apparently he's been a
*  troublemaker for most of his life. Yeah, I mean, he's caused a little bit of strife. He's left a
*  little confusion in his wake, for sure. But I mean, that's another one. Separate the art from the
*  artist. I mean, the guys will go down in history as the greatest. I mean, a movie a year and they're
*  all ... You can always find something good about each movie, like the dialogue or whatever. I love
*  what you're saying. It's interesting, but the only thing I would say to push back a little bit,
*  since we're playing a little table tennis here, is I don't know if it's a choice to fear death.
*  It seems more instinctual. It seems like something that nature wants you to do,
*  because I've been in positions where I thought I was going to die. I've been shot and
*  I had those moments. Then nature also kicks in an instinct, which is acceptance, where you kind of ...
*  I don't know. It's a chemical release or whatever. I don't know. We're robots, basically.
*  Some sort of chemical is released that protects you, but there is an acceptance. I don't know how much
*  was a conscious choice, probably very little. That's the point I'm making, is it's instinctual.
*  We don't really have a choice in fearing death. Otherwise, there would be no progression. We
*  all life seems to want to survive, not by choice, but by instinct.
*  He argues that the fear is not the instinctual, it's not the animalistic stuff. That's the thing
*  that makes us special, is what humans are able to do is to have a knowledge that we're going to die
*  one day. Animals don't have that. Animals' fear is instinctual. It's like, holy shit, what's that
*  sound over there? He says we're actually able to contemplate the fact that this ride ends.
*  And that kind of cognitive construct is difficult for us to deal with. What the hell does that mean?
*  Just to think about, is it going to be over at a certain point? It's just over, lights out.
*  It's very difficult to kind of load that into whatever this little brain we got. What does
*  that actually mean? Maybe that's what gives everything meaning. Yeah. Because if everything
*  lasted forever, if this went on and infinite, there would be no meaning to it. I'd be like,
*  hey, if I don't see it tomorrow, I'll see it in a million years. There would be no meaning. There
*  would be no urgency. There would be no feelings. There'd be nothing of magnitude or superficiality.
*  It would all just be this kind of... It would be torture. That would actually be torture
*  to be here forever. I mean, I'm already sick of this place. And I'm just in my 40s. I'm done.
*  I'm sick of me. I'm sick of everything. A lot of people, when they talk about immortality,
*  they consider mortality appealing because you get a chance to do basically all these things you
*  might not get a chance to do otherwise, like all the kinds of travel broadly, explore, read every
*  book, explore every idea, do every hobby, all those kinds of things. Somebody I was talking to
*  mentioned the reality of being immortal would be more likely, I like this idea, more likely would be
*  you just sitting there doing nothing because, and putting off all that travel and exploration
*  till later, because you'll always have time. And so what you're going to have, what actual immortality
*  would look like for a bunch of humans is people sitting there doing nothing. It'd be like a Greek
*  Caffeineer just sitting on a drinking coffee watch. I love it. It's a lazy man's paradise.
*  Yeah. But it's so interesting because that rings true to me for what humans are like is we'll
*  basically just put off all those exciting adventures and just be lazy, become lazier and lazier and
*  lazier because you'll always have a chance to do all the exciting things. And we'll just get,
*  we'll basically become Tim Dill. We'll just sit there and have a podcast and that's it.
*  He works hard. Yeah, I mean that sounds actually like heaven, dude. That's speaking to my heart,
*  really. I mean, I'm at heart. I'm a very lazy person. I always try to find ways to lie down.
*  Like if I'm sitting, I'll figure out a way to kind of contort myself to later. That's an interesting
*  thing to like, yeah, if you can always push something off. Yeah, I like that. I think that's
*  heaven. And- See, we just changed your mind. You kind of like the immortality. Yeah, I kind of like
*  it. No, so there'll be no thirsts. No, you can always put it off. Hey, I wanna, I wanna, I wanna
*  have, I wanna bang this girl. You're like, I'll put it off. But now I'm thinking about Muslim heaven
*  and they may be offering the best deal. I mean, if it was an expo and they had a booth, I may go with
*  them because they offer, they offer 62 or 72, but then I'd get sick of them. I'd wanna, I don't know.
*  I always wondered like, are you given the 62 versions or you choose, can you create them like
*  an avatar, like a video game or are you just given? I don't know what the num- why it's important to
*  have that high number. First of all, I think it's a mistranslation about the versions, but outside of
*  that, outside of that, I feel like the conversation is really important. I don't think they ever
*  specify like what kind of books these girls read, like what are they, what are they into? Like,
*  the quality of the conversation, I think if you're talking about eternity, the quality of the
*  intellect and the conversation and the personalities is way more important.
*  And the Greeks have an ancient, ancient expression,
*  pad metronaris stone, which my mother always used to say, which is everything in moderation,
*  nothing in excess. So try and always get the status quo. And yeah, that many women, eventually
*  it's like the Magic Johnson effect, Isaiah Thomas effect. It's just too much. And you're gonna end
*  up, you're gonna end up banging a dude is what I'm saying. You're gonna get sick of it because
*  it's too much. And there's going to be a eunuch that finds its way into your harem. That's been
*  proven throughout history, every empire, when you have all that power. And again, this goes back to
*  power corrupting. If you have, if there's no struggle, there's no meaning, there's the value
*  is from the journey, the working hard, the struggle. And if it's just given to you because you're a
*  Sultan or you're Alexander the Great or whatever, you're gonna get bored and you're gonna bang a
*  dude. That's it's I think that's a scientific axiom actually, eventually you'll get bored and
*  bang a dude. Yeah, but I think it won't stop there. I think you'll go to animals, you go to robot. I
*  mean, eventually it all ends up in robots and then the robots rebel and then the humans will be
*  destroyed. Yeah, I'm sorry. If we're speaking truth, you said the value of life, one of the
*  highest ideals is to seek truth. I think if we're being honest. Quick question. If you live in a
*  I come from small islands, right? And so there's a stereotype that that's where they bang animals.
*  But if you come from a very small community, an island or something, and you have the choice
*  of banging a family member or an animal, which one is worse on the moral scale? Because you're
*  technically not related to the animal. Right. This is interesting. I mean, all of these are human
*  constructs, these ideas. But yet for me personally, taboo would be more taboo to have sex with a family
*  member. Yeah. I mean, animal, I mean, okay. It's good to know where you stand on that. I think
*  viewers, you know, if they didn't have they didn't know they had that question,
*  they just learned a little bit about you. And now I know I look forward to the internet clipping
*  that out. Yeah, I mean, there is listen, in some outside of outside of that, I do think about that
*  a lot. Sounds ridiculous about morality connected to animals in terms of all the factory farming and
*  so on. It seems like that's one of the things we'll look because I love me. But I kind of feel bad
*  about it. And bad in a way where I think if we look like 100 years from now, we'll look back at
*  this time as like one of the great like tortures and injustices that we humans have committed.
*  And I mean, all that has to do with the sex with the animal has to do with consent and about the
*  experience of suffering of animals. The reason I think about that personally a lot because I think
*  about robotics, I think about creating artificial consciousnesses are artificial, like beings that
*  have some elements of the human nature. And then you start to think like, well, what does it mean
*  to suffer? What does it mean for entity to exist such that it deserves rights? This is something
*  that the founding fathers were thinking about, like, you know, all men are created equal. What is
*  it? Which who is included in the men who who's not in that in that sentence? And our animals included
*  in that are robots. I honestly think that there will be a civil rights movement for robots in the
*  future. I don't know. Is that the Turing test? The way you try to is that they call it where you're
*  trying to see if AI can think like a human or whatever or feel like a human? Well, it's the
*  Turing test closely defined is more about talk like a human. So you can you can imagine systems
*  they're able to you can have a conversation like this and I would be a robot, for example, but that
*  doesn't mean I would do in the in society. That doesn't mean I deserve rights or that doesn't mean
*  I would be conscious. It doesn't mean that I would be able to suffer and to experience pleasure and
*  dream and all those kind of human things. The question isn't whether you're able to talk,
*  which is passing the Turing test. The question is whether you're able to feel to be. I mean,
*  I go back to suffering. The thing that the that our documents protect us against is suffering.
*  Like we don't want humans to suffer. And if a robot can suffer, that discussion starts being about
*  like, well, shouldn't we protect them? Currently, we don't protect animals. We protect that dog.
*  There's laws. There's actual legislation that protects dogs for torture places. Yeah.
*  And you know what? Dogs is something I don't think people really understand enough about. It's one of
*  my obsessions. So they they my dad always used to say, he goes, those things are those things are
*  basically human. And I mean, they dream, they have anxiety. And what people often overlook about dogs
*  is without dogs, we wouldn't be here. We would not have ever evolved from hunter gatherer to
*  agrarian to, you know, civilization. We wouldn't have cities, we wouldn't have anything. I mean,
*  they are our partner in survival, and they are a magical animal. There's no there's no animal
*  that was it was like destiny almost. I mean, a malleable animal. There's no animal that's that
*  malleable that in a few generations, you can tailor to a specific job that you need. And without
*  that animal without dogs doing that animal protecting our crops from from, you know,
*  scavengers and stuff like that, you know, the list goes on, we wouldn't be here. So we that's an
*  often overlooked fact that human evolution was not done in a vacuum just with humans. I mean,
*  without dogs, we would have never evolved. I mean, we weren't the apex predator for most of our
*  existence. We weren't even the apex predator. I mean, we're getting eaten by hyenas, which my
*  favorite animal. And you know, it's kind of an injustice to me. I'm kind of mad at dogs that
*  we deserve to get eaten by hyenas. But without dogs, we wouldn't be here. And dogs, dogs deserve
*  the protection. So do horses. They fucking lugged us around for thousands of years. And now these
*  fucking German psychopaths are eating them or whatever. We should not eat horse meat just on
*  like, be a good dude, man. These things lugged us around for generations. They're beautiful.
*  You know, ride them or I don't know, I don't know. But it rubs me the wrong way that we eat horses.
*  Yeah, the horses one is interesting. And one of my favorite books is Animal Farm by Orwell. And the
*  horses don't get a good ending in that. I kind of my spirit animal, I suppose, is the horse from
*  Animal Farm Boxer, where he says, I will work harder. That's his motto. I work really hard
*  at stupid things. That's basically what I just hit my head against the wall for no reason whatsoever.
*  But that probably fulfills you have a big brain. You were probably born with a big brain that kind
*  of fills killing neurons. It's exercise for you. Yes. Yes. Don't you think some animals deserve to
*  be eaten though? Kind of like hyenas? Come on, dude. I mean, you got to respect the hyena.
*  Okay, so first of all, let me just comment on the dog thing. There is conferences on dog cognition
*  from a perspective of people that study psychology, cognitive science, neuroscience. Dogs are
*  fascinating. The way they move their eyes, they're able to, they're the only other animal besides
*  humans that are able to communicate with their eyes. They can look at a thing and look back at
*  you and look back at the thing to communicate that we're all like through our eyes communicate
*  that we're collaborating. So every other animal uses their eyes to actually look at things.
*  The dogs use it to like communicate with you with us humans. It's fascinating. There's a lot of other
*  elements of dogs that are amazing. Yeah, I mean, if it wasn't for them, they are the ones, they were
*  our first alarm system for predators. They would defend us. I mean, the Basenji is one of the most
*  ancient dogs. I mean, they're tiny, but they're fearless. And they would chase off lions. There'd
*  be packs of them and they'd chase off lions and protect the tribes. I even get tingles thinking
*  about dogs because I have a dog, I love my dog. And there's something about when you're walking
*  with your dog off leash in the woods, there's something about it that tugs at that millions
*  of years of evolution, that gut. I had a Finnish friend of mine, he's a comic, Tommy Valle, he's
*  once told me, he was like the gut, he's like, I believe in that, like that gut, you know, when
*  you have that feeling, he's like, always trust that because that is million, those are all your
*  ancestors. That's the survival instinct of all your ancestors at the beginning of time, you know,
*  telling you like, hey, something's off here, something's, you know, so don't get in the car
*  with Ted Bundy is what I'm saying, ladies. How fucking stupid, how can you fall for that? You
*  know, he's got a fucking sling on, don't get in. Yeah, follow the gut. My question to you,
*  are psychopaths essentially robots? So first of all, let's not, you're using the word robot in
*  a derogatory way that I'm triggered by, okay? Yeah, and you should be, you should be because,
*  you know what, people are always scared of robots, but I actually, I have, I've made the sort of,
*  I've made it to say, hey, I've thought about it, like robots have been nothing but helpful.
*  It's the people we should be scared of. Right. Again, we're kind of missing the most destructive
*  thing is us because, but robots are helpful. I mean, this is a fucking robot. You know,
*  I went on a hotel tonight, I'm already booked up, you know, I got my, I can change my flight. If
*  this barbecue with Rogan goes 16 hours, which whatever Rogan wants to do, I'll do if he wants
*  to kick me in the chest, I'll let him kick me in the chest, whatever. Robots are helpful, no?
*  Yeah, tanks and autonomous weapons systems don't kill people, people kill people.
*  Yeah, that's yeah, the other race about to click that for you.
*  Yeah. A lot of love for dogs. I appreciate it very much. And at the same time, you have the
*  other thing that people seem to have love for, which is cats. And on the flip side of everything
*  you've said, I'm trying to understand what have cats ever done for human civilization.
*  They keep rodents away. The domesticated cat is very important. Keeps rodents away. Yeah,
*  that's what they were domesticated for. I mean, they're psychopathic killers who end up
*  killing innocent neighborhood chipmunks and birds. They really affect the balance
*  of the local ecosystem. But if you keep- So you have love for cats too.
*  Not as much as dogs. I mean, dogs are, like you said, they look at humans. I actually read an
*  article there, some people were theorizing they're smarter than chimps because of the way they can
*  work with humans. And there was one border collie that spoke like 300 words, like a quarter, like a
*  almost part of the language. And their nose is like a, I mean, that's like magic, dude.
*  If you can smell in my ass to what I had for breakfast from miles away-
*  That's intelligent.
*  That's intelligence. I mean, in some ways that their nose, if you were to put it on a scale,
*  maybe their nose is more intelligent than our brain for what it does. You know, it's like,
*  I mean, dude, they can smell you from miles away. You ever see a dog just like sniffing, catching?
*  I mean, it's smelling like, I don't remember the date on it, but it's like, they have like
*  millions of receptors or something where we only, you know, thank God we don't have their nose.
*  That would be, that would make sex weird. Be a little too intense.
*  I think you mentioned when you were talking about Woody Allen separating the
*  art from the artist. So that brings to mind Vladimir Putin.
*  How about that transition? I don't know. I'm so sorry.
*  But if you look at just powerful leaders throughout history, Stalin, Hitler,
*  but even modern ones like Putin, and we're talking about power.
*  How do you explain them? You said that power reveals, not corrupts. But do you think there's
*  some element to which power corrupted Hitler, power corrupted Stalin after he gained power?
*  And the same with Putin. When Putin gained power in 2000, do you think
*  the amount of power that he was in possession was for many years? Do you think that corrupted him?
*  I mean, we're joking about dictators get the job done. There is some sense in certain countries
*  where dictator is the only thing that can stabilize a nation.
*  The counter argument to that for democracies is like, yeah, but that's a short-term solution
*  for a long-term problem. So you want to embrace chaos of democracy that might be violent. There
*  might be a lot of just constant changing of leadership. There might be a lot of corruption
*  in the short-term, but if you stay strong with the ideals of democracy, then it will be
*  ultimately create something that as beautiful and stable as the United States.
*  The sad thing is, I don't know if history tells that story. Like I said, you look at Greece,
*  you look at Rome, democracy kind of failed. The majority of Rome, the most successful empire
*  that we've had was a dictatorship for most of its run. But I do believe in a republic,
*  which is sort of a limited democracy. I do believe in what we have here. I believe in common law. I
*  have here. I believe in individual rights. But yeah, I think you said it. Nobody could have said
*  it better. Yeah, it's a short-term solution. You look at Saddam Hussein, when we took him out,
*  then there was a lot of infighting that happened that he was kind of keeping at bay
*  because he was a strong man, dictator. Well, he's an interesting one, it's hard to interrupt.
*  From my understanding, I'm sure people will correct me, but when Saddam Hussein first came
*  to power, he was quite progressive. So as far as I understand, the signs of an evil dictator weren't
*  exactly there. So again, I don't know if power revealed or power corrupted. Or that could have
*  been the initial subterfuge to kind of get everybody. Hitler also is a champion of the
*  people. It's built some new roads. It's what psychopaths do. And that's why it's interesting
*  to me. I'm not sure if power corrupts psychopaths. And now that we know that we can do these CAT scans
*  and brain scans of skin, we know that they're born that way. Power definitely corrupts people who have
*  the capacity to feel and for empathy. I don't think power corrupts people who were born
*  psychopathic with that condition or sociopaths who were closer to psychopaths and then had some
*  traumatic life. I just think the best way to get away with whatever nefarious thing you want to do
*  to feel, I guess the only thing psychopaths can feel is that excitement, is to pretend to be the
*  opposite of what you are. That's what killers do. That's what the worst people... Look at Bill Cosby.
*  I mean, what better way to hide? It's like what wokeness is now. It's like,
*  I'm such a great person. And you're like, are you? The best way to hide is to pretend to be the
*  opposite of what you are. Just like Ted Bundy. I'm just an innocent, helpful guy. And then boom,
*  next thing you know, you're getting your titbit off. It's really well said. It's actually kind
*  of funny because I talk about love a lot. And I think the people that kind of look at me with
*  squinty eyes, they wonder how many bodies are in that closet? You know what I mean? There's
*  something about the duality of... We're so skeptical as a culture. If somebody just seems to be
*  kind of positive and all that kind of... How do I put it? Just simple. Simple-minded in the positivity
*  they express. They think there's some demons in there. Especially if you're a New Yorker,
*  we don't trust any... The nicer you are, the more skeptical we are. I've struggled with that down
*  here. I've been like, what's your angle? And they're like, no, dude, I wanted to show you the best
*  tacos, man. And I'm like, did you really? What do you want? Because in New York, it's like,
*  if anyone's nice to you, they want something. And the pro side to that is it makes you very street
*  smart. The downside to that is it makes you way too cynical. Yeah, I definitely experienced that
*  here in Texas, but people are super nice and they're like, do all this cool shit for you.
*  What's the angle? What are we doing here? You mentioned hyenas as your favorite animal. I forgot
*  to ask you, what the hell were you thinking? Why is hyena is your favorite animal? Yeah, it's
*  fascinating animal. Let's look at the whole animal kingdom. Where do you put... So you like dogs.
*  Love, my favorite. Your favorite is dogs, but they're kind of outside the animal kingdom because
*  you're thinking about wolves. So the animal kingdom is in nature. Dogs escaped nature.
*  They kind of did, yeah. Together with humans, like in a collaborative way. Exactly. So within nature,
*  within the animal kingdom, why not lions? Because lions are predictable. Lions are just,
*  you know, they're regal and kind of they're born... It's like the hot chick. It's like, we get it.
*  You were born the best. I like a scrappy, by any means necessary, intelligent and cunning.
*  But aren't they dishonest? Yeah. And that's why I like them. Yes, they're dishonest. They employ
*  chicanery. That's just a sign of how intelligent they are and how self-reliant they are and how
*  brutal they are. They're brutally honest in how much they lie. Because they're trying to get the
*  job done. Lions are just like, they're too gifted. Everyone hates the fucking... If I went to school
*  with you, I'd be like, of course Lex knows the fucking answer. Lex was born smarter than me.
*  And you'd probably hate me because I was the kid always seeking attention and making people...
*  It's like, that's not interesting. The guy that claws his way to the top, and those are hyenas,
*  they're also fastening just by merely who they are. They're not related to any other animal.
*  They're more closely related to cats than they are to dogs, even though they look more like a dog.
*  But they're very tangentially related even to cats. So they're their own kind of thing,
*  which is kind of mysterious. I don't think they fully figured out. And the pseudopenis thing is
*  the... Can you explain the pseudopenis? Yeah. So it's a matriarchal society, by the way. So that's
*  unique in and of itself. We're talking about an apex predator that is matriarchal, much like the
*  praying mantis. It's very rare though. And they are fucking brutal and vicious. And the women are
*  bigger and they let their cubs fight. A lot of fratricide. And they do that because they're like,
*  hey, you're weaker. I'd let your brother kill you. And the women have penises. The women have
*  pseudopenises that they give birth out of. And the birth is violent, but they roll around with
*  just huge pieces. They're glue guns who are just fucking swinging. And the women are just run the
*  show. And it's just cool that they have these pseudopenises. It's almost romantic the way you
*  describe it. They have the strongest bite force. They pulverize bone. When they eat an animal,
*  the animal's gone. There's no bones. They eat everything. They can pulverize. Their bite is
*  so powerful, they pulverize bone and eat it. So if they consume an animal, the animal was there,
*  and then the animal's gone. There's nothing for the vultures there to grab. Yeah. I'm going to
*  have to revisit the hyenas because my experience with the hyenas was from, first of all,
*  History of the Hyena is your show, has rebranded them for me. But The Lion King, which is
*  a cartoon, I guess, that I get emotional at every time. I probably have father issues.
*  Every guy. You probably just have feelings. You're a good guy. I mean, everyone gets that.
*  I have feelings? That one gets everybody? I don't know. I get every father-son movie,
*  Blow with Johnny Depp and Ray Liotta. Damn, that's a good movie. Whenever there's
*  the disappointment in the father that his son has become this incredibly successful drug lord
*  that then ends up with nothing in prison, just the sadness that could be came through the letters.
*  That gets me every time. But the hyenas are not presented that well in that.
*  No. They're usually portrayed as like, it's really sad that they're portrayed that way.
*  Lions aren't dicks. Lions are dicks. The alpha lions will kill the cubs of another rival. They
*  do all types of dick shit. Yeah. Hyenas are more interesting. They'll just roll in. A hyena will,
*  like you said, they'll lie. When you watch the Serengeti, animals will hang out with each other
*  by water. One hyena will just kind of roll in and pretend like it's not hungry and then, bang,
*  they'll use any means necessary to take an animal down. Lions will just use brute strength. Hyenas
*  use cunning. You can even go on the internet and find memes of this where hyenas will grab the big
*  animal by the balls and just like will sneak up behind it and bite its balls. You'll watch an
*  animal ten times the size of the hyena just slowly go down. It's brutal, but it's fucking hilarious.
*  I think that's, I don't know if you follow the channel Nature's Metal, that one weighs heavy on
*  me with the hyenas and the balls. It's tough to intellectualize it. It's tough to think that
*  the entirety of life on earth has this history of predators being violent, just like, just the murder
*  that we come from. It's crazy. Just like we were talking about meditating on death. I actually,
*  I keep following and unfollowing that Instagram channel because sometimes it's too much. I can't
*  like, I can't continue with the day after seeing the brutality, the honest brutality of that.
*  I don't know how to make sense of it. It's important to acknowledge, I think,
*  because it's real. We do come from that. We evolve from that. It's important. We still do that. We're
*  just hidden from it. When you go to the supermarket and get your slab of meat, you're so disconnected
*  from where that meat came from. It came from that. Often that's uglier to watch than because there's
*  some honesty. The nature channels only show, that's why we have so much sympathy with the prey.
*  This is where I think, the same thing with mafia movies. They don't show what the mafia really does.
*  They glorify the good parts. That's why I like State of Grace because it's really just shaking
*  down old people and fucking being dicks. It's not driving nice cars and being like, you know.
*  Animal channels do the same thing. They only show when the cheetah gets it because that's
*  the exciting part. What most people don't know is that those predators strike out almost always.
*  A majority of the time, the prey wins. If you saw that and put it in context, you might not
*  hate it as much when the predator actually gets the little fawn or whatever because so many fawns
*  got away. It's so hard to capture your prey. No documentary is going to sit around and show you
*  the 99 times the cheetah didn't catch. Thank you for this perspective. Murder is difficult.
*  They never talk about, for people who murder, how difficult it is. It's tough.
*  To trap somebody, to convince them to come back to your place. Give it some respect. Put some
*  respect on Ted Bundy's name. It's not easy to convince somebody to get in your Volkswagen Beagle.
*  Clean up and then you have to plan ahead because you want to keep doing the mass murder. You've
*  got to learn how to saw them up. Put them in duffel bags. Bury. You've got to learn how to dig.
*  You've got to learn how to hide. You've got to learn how to lie. There's a lot that goes into it
*  that we need to put a little respect on. You have to figure out which tools work the best
*  for the sawing and all those kinds of things. Thank you for the perspective. That's what I was
*  hoping we would bring to this table. You got a little bit Greek in you. One of the episodes on
*  on history hyenas, you talked about the Battle of Crete, where the Greeks, your people,
*  in 1941, in the early stages of World War II, this is one of the most epic battles of the war.
*  In fact, in 1941, in a speech made at the Reichstag, Hitler paid tribute to the bravery of the Greeks
*  saying, it must be said, for the sake of historical truth, that amongst all our opponents,
*  only the Greeks fought with the endless courage and defiance of death. So, okay,
*  what do you make of this battle? What do you make of the spirit of the Greek people?
*  This is one of the closest things to me because my mother was actually on the island of Crete during
*  this, the first aerial invasion in history. A lot of people don't know that. So this is a very
*  significant battle. First time there was an invasion from the sky. My mother was a little
*  girl and she lived through four years of Nazi occupation there. So my mother was a human rights
*  lawyer and everything, but she just always hated Germans. That's just what it is. She hated Germans
*  and she never got over it. So the most progressive, open-minded woman just could not get over this.
*  It's a monumental battle that a lot of historians in retrospect have now looked back on and said,
*  because the Nazis, first off, you got to take it back to when Hitler instructed Mussolini,
*  because let's be honest, Mussolini was Hitler's bitch. If it was Fantasy Island,
*  Hitler was the fucking, and Mussolini was boss, the plane guy.
*  Mussolini ever say no to Hitler or even maybe it's always like, yes.
*  Yes, yes, we will do it. And it's like, yeah, you have to take Greece. And so,
*  yeah, so Italy being much bigger than Greece, Greece is a tiny country, nine, 10 million.
*  So Italy invaded Greece and Oki Day is a big holiday for Greeks and this speaks to the spirit.
*  Greeks in fight until we have a common enemy and then we unite. You see it throughout history,
*  Sparta and Athens, you see it in Greek families where the brothers will fight.
*  But then as soon as we have a common enemy, we unite and maybe it's an overactive brain.
*  We think too much, our traditions philosophy and we overthink things and we fight with each other
*  and take things personally. We're ultra passionate. But when Italy said, hey, we're going to move
*  troops through, you know, a Greek said Oki, which means no. And that was, and then Italy attacked
*  and we beat the shit out of them. A much bigger country, much more well-equipped country, Greece
*  beat the shit of them, kicked them back into Albania, actually not only repelled them, actually
*  like conquered some ground in Albania, pushed them back. And then Hitler was like, fuck, you know,
*  I was planning my march to Russia, but I have to go down because he basically said to Mussolini,
*  like, you know, you're basically bitch slapped. I'm like, Fredo, like, I got to do this myself
*  because you're such a fucking bitch. So then the Nazis invaded Greece. Obviously they took the
*  mainland with fight and shot out. The Greeks never give credit to the British and New Zealand and
*  Australian troops that were there. You know, they were a large part of this, the majority of it,
*  but the Greeks fight, dude, civilians. I mean, they fought, you know, the Ottomans were there
*  400 years. You go to Greece now, there's no evidence. There's virtually no evidence
*  of them ever being there. That's the Greek spirit. Kick them out and we kicked out hummus too.
*  So it's like your culture's gone, you're gone because Greeks are, it's philoptimo. It's called
*  philoptimo and it's a real thing. Philoptimo is a very little translate. You can't translate it,
*  but it's kind of like honor, loyalty, friendship, altruism. It's a, it's, you can't define it,
*  but Greeks know it and we're taught it from our, from our families. It's a vibe and it's a Greek
*  cultural thing. And we're an old culture and philoptimo is what it's called. Philoptimo. And
*  it's love, it's passion and it comes out and it comes out. And so, so Hitler had to postpone his
*  invasion of Russia, went down the island of Crete, took 10 days to conquer. It's an island. To put
*  that in perspective, the country of France fell in three or four days. I can't even remember it
*  because they fucking just rolled over. So what is it? What does a couple hours matter when you're
*  that much of a fucking pussy? What does a couple hours, 12 hours, fucking three or four days.
*  The island of Crete took the Germans 10 days to conquer. And because of that, and because of the
*  Greek resistance, Hitler had to postpone his invasion of Russia to winter. And of course,
*  that was, you know, that was his downfall just as it was Napoleon's and never do, never try to invade
*  Russia. They got millions of people to throw at death. Every time you read about Russians in
*  history books, like, and a million died. I mean, you just guys throw millions of people at the
*  problem and don't fuck with that Russian winter and don't fuck with Russian people, dude. They're
*  tough. People in New York know that. You don't go to fucking sheep's head bay and start talking
*  shit. You'll end up in a fucking car trunk and they'll brutally murder you. I do not fuck with
*  Russians. Amen. And then there's, I mean, there's a lot of people, a lot of historians argue that
*  that battle was because of the Russian winter, because of delaying the Russian invasion, but
*  also psychologically delaying the invasion. It was the first time, I think it was the first time
*  the Germans failed or didn't succeed like they wanted to early in the war, which is a little
*  like psychologically, the impact of that, I think is immeasurable. And also a lot of people argue
*  from a military strategy perspective that the, just like you said, it was an aerial attack and that
*  Hitler didn't think that that kind of attack would then be useful for the rest of the war.
*  So that's, that's a really part where, whereas it might've been very useful. So it's a, it's really
*  interesting how these little battles can steer the directions of war. Of course, me growing up in the
*  Soviet Union, we didn't hear much about this battle. Just like you said, millions of Soviets died. All
*  those people in history that you read about dying, those are all civilians, but I mean, not all, but
*  a very large number of them are civilians and their stories, obviously that's the rooted,
*  the literature, the poetry, the music, just the way people talk, the way they drink vodka, the way
*  they love, the way they hate, the way they fear. That's all like rooted in World War II and World
*  War I. And so, but we never kind of think about Europe and we certainly growing up didn't think
*  about the role of the United States. All this, there's plenty of stories of heroism in the Soviet
*  Union, enough for many lifetimes. So, but it was fascinating to reach from a Greek perspective
*  because I, you know, I don't have many Greek friends. I hope you didn't change that.
*  This is the beginning of a love affair of your people.
*  Likewise, the Americans don't hear about the Soviet contribution to the end of World War II
*  because obviously we became, you know, enemies after that because of the two systems. But yeah,
*  without the Russians, World War II wouldn't have been won either. Yeah, the stories are written by
*  the victors. That's really interesting. Just looking at history, you wonder what's missing.
*  I'll tell you what's missing that I know for a fact because my dad told me combat's hell and
*  he would tell me the reality of what it's really like guys pissing themselves, calling for their
*  mother the fog of war. Obviously, fratricide happens all the time. It's pandemonium. I mean,
*  there's skill involved, but I mean, there's no, like it's a lot of it. It's just luck. My dad said,
*  my dad won three. He got, you know, medals, purple hearts, all that shit. And he said the reason was
*  is because he can't, he always said, there's another thing he told me, you can't pin a metal
*  on a dead guy. So it's like, those are the guys who deserve it, but you can't pin a metal. You can't
*  do the pomp and I'll tell you one thing is that it is written by the victors and all these leaders,
*  they say we're in the front. We're not in the front. We're not, whenever the history books say
*  he led his troops into battle, it's like, did he really? Did he? So then how did he live?
*  Because they put like kids in the front, you know, it's like nobody limps back from the front with
*  like a injury, you know, that's, that's army PR. You know, whenever you read, you know, 27 soldiers
*  died, 14 were injured. The word injured is PR. That's like injured. Was he, did he sprain his ankle?
*  Did he need, did he get carried off the court or, you know, he was maimed. I mean, he was like,
*  his leg was blown off, you know, it's like, so I think that, you know, Alexander the Great was
*  just kind of in the back on his horse and just kind of, he had his eunuch blown a few times and
*  he was like, is it bad up there? And then like after the, he was like, okay, what my scribe,
*  give me my scribe. Okay. When you write this down, can you put me in the front? Yeah. And I was just
*  make me a big hero and I was in there and then he, you know, he just blew his, you know, he had sex
*  with his eunuch and rode off into the sunset because there's just no way you survive in the front,
*  especially warfare back then. I mean, it's like brutal. Then again, you have like Genghis Khan,
*  the sense I got that he was a little bit up on the front, at least the first. Yeah. Or is that
*  also, is he a little bit of a... Give me my scribe. Yeah. It's all lore. I mean, you ever play the game
*  of telephone, you know, it's like, you know, there's no video cameras back then. So shit just get,
*  turns into myth, you know, and there's no way he was in the front. There's no way he wouldn't have
*  lived, you know, he was probably good on horseback because those dudes were good on horseback. But
*  it was like Game of Thrones back then. You had all these different people and they kind of, yeah,
*  the Mongols were wild, dude. They actually said like, they started like, they were more adaptable
*  to the horse because they were so good on horseback that kids started to be born like kind of bow-legged
*  to fit the horse. It's wild. And they would stretch their heads and shit like that. They'd wrap them
*  and stretch their heads so they find like Mongol skulls and they look like coneheads. And they were
*  brutal and vicious. And they would maraud and rape and all the fun stuff that, you know, when you visit
*  other places back then, there's no tchotchke stops and souvenir shops. What you do is you take women
*  and those are the tokens, you know, you burn a few huts. Different. Tourism was different back then.
*  Yeah, that's another difficult thing. Just we're talking about nature and predators to think about
*  the long stretch of history where we're just murder. Yeah. And we made so much progress, I guess,
*  in the past couple of centuries. The United States is a shining example of that.
*  But do you think also that it's that effect that we would, a lot of good things had to happen too,
*  or else we wouldn't be here. So do we just focus, isn't it like a car crash effect
*  that like we're, you know, the rubber neck that everyone pulls over to see a car crash? Are we
*  just only focusing on the negative things of history because they're just more exciting to us?
*  Like it's just not, it's boring to be like, yeah, and then there was a bunch of villagers and they
*  ate every day and danced and loved. Yeah. I wonder, I wonder how different those people were,
*  you know, like they might've had the same exact loves and fears and like they perhaps had the same
*  kind of brilliant ideas in their head, if not more brilliant. And we kind of think about like
*  this moment in history is like the most special moment. Like we're doing the coolest shit, but
*  we're doing the most amazing building and most amazing things. But maybe they were building
*  amazing things in their different way with like less technological, but in the space of ideas,
*  in the space of just all the different, the camaraderie and the space of like concepts,
*  mathematics, all those kinds of things. Yeah. I mean, Greece, you look at the architecture,
*  it still stands up. I mean, all the government, it's still arguably, I mean, as far as objective
*  beauty, it's hard to argue that Greco-Roman, it's just something about it with the, with the
*  columns. It's just, it's powerful. It's, I don't know, even Ayn Rand would probably appreciate it.
*  She doesn't know. No, no. So your history hyenas that unfortunately has come to an end,
*  we're talking about empires coming to an end, all empires fall. Yeah. That one,
*  you may rise again, empires might rise again, who knows, who knows? I'm obviously a fan, so I hope
*  it does rise again, but you've seemed to develop your own language. Can you, you know, it's what it
*  is. What is, what is that? What the hell, is this some kind of medical condition or can you explain
*  like the linguistic essentials that catch us up to the linguistic essentials that people need to know
*  to understand the way you speak? You know, Leopold and Loeb, you know the story of those two,
*  they murdered that kid and they had this weird relationship. Anyway, it's an interesting thing
*  to Google, Leopold and Loeb, these two guys who ended up murdering a kid because they developed
*  their own language with each other and this own reality and this weird thing and they wanted to
*  know what it's like to murder a kid and they murder a kid. It's a famous story in American
*  lore and history or whatever, famous case, but this phenomenon, yeah, me and Chris got together.
*  It wasn't as dark as Leopold and Loeb. We didn't murder a kid, but we murdered a podcast.
*  Well, we stabbed it a few times.
*  Yeah, it's, it was something in the organic chemistry of me and Chris that I think we'll both
*  end up appreciating even probably more than we do now that it's mysterious. I gotta be honest with
*  you, it's, it was the thing that it wasn't conscious, wasn't intentional. It was something
*  that happened in the music of our energies that just went. Like when you hear someone sing or
*  when a jazz band hits a rhythm or even when I'm on stage and I just catch a rhythm, it's like,
*  dude, I didn't make a choice there. I don't know what that is. I don't know how to explain it,
*  but it comes from somewhere else and I don't know what it is. It's beyond my comprehension, but
*  with Chris, there was this magical chemistry that, you know, I have chemistry with a lot of people
*  and it can be funny. I feel zero chemistry here. This is great. Yeah, it's a little bit more
*  intelligent than what me and Chris did. But, you know, me and Chris, I think we connected
*  on the funny bone. Like I, he, I found him so funny and we found the same things funny. And from
*  that, these organic expressions came from some part of our brains that was created from this
*  chemistry. And yeah, we just developed this language and this cult following and people
*  were really upset when we ended, but it was the right thing to end because like all things that
*  end, it was kind of done a few episodes even before we finished. And I think we pulled the
*  plug before it started rolling downhill, like all, you know, like all great flings, you know,
*  there's your long relationship, long marriages are boring and comfortable. The one you really like
*  fucking always ends abruptly and sadly, but you always look back and you jerk off to it.
*  So you guys made love.
*  We made, yeah. So it's like, it was like a hot fling with me and him and it was intense and we
*  burned the candle at both ends. And it was, I think that podcast was meant to be three years
*  and maybe people will go back and appreciate it and listen to it over and over again. And I think
*  the new things we do people will love. I'm doing long days now that podcast and people seem to
*  enjoy. I'm really enjoying the long days on YouTube. I just found myself just like staring
*  at you ranting for a same with Tim Dillon. I really enjoyed the, whatever those rants are,
*  the genius of just one thing after the other, but definitely the chemistry, almost as a study.
*  I remember the reason I first started listening to it, I was trying to get
*  an, a perspective on certain historical moments. Like it was interesting. I tuned in to learn
*  history. Yeah. I came for the history and like stayed for the chaos and the crack open and clean
*  out. And yeah, this, it was almost, I listened to Rogan like this sometimes. I'll, I'll re-listen
*  to an episode, uh, to, to try to understand why was this so fun to listen to?
*  It's almost like trying to analyze humor or something like that, but it's nice from,
*  from a conversational perspective, like why was this so easy to listen to? And then, and uh,
*  with history, Hayen is like, why is the chemistry so good? It's so, it's weird. It's weird. Uh,
*  cause there's not many podcasts like that. I don't know any with the chemistry like that.
*  It's interesting. And it's kind of sad that, uh, that, uh, the, the fling with a prostitute in
*  Vegas has to end, you know, like that, but that's what makes it special. It's the Bukowski thing
*  with the fog. The, the British office, one of my favorite shows was, was that it ended very quick.
*  You know, it's only a couple of seasons or something like that. And that was tragic,
*  but that took guts to just end it. Given all the money you could have made, given all the,
*  you just end it. And that's what makes it like truly special.
*  Yeah. And I'll tell you, man, I'll just emphasize it because I marvel at it too. Um,
*  cause as a guy who tries to always figure out, uh, what the causes of things, I gotta be honest,
*  man, looking back on that, even with retrospective wisdom, you know, that 2020 hindsight,
*  we've been done a couple of months now. It's, um, it's something that I can't explain. It's something
*  that I don't know how you quantify it. I don't know how you describe it. It's, it's musical.
*  It's really kind of rhythmic. So maybe, uh, maybe like a Netflix show about history. That's,
*  that's in the, that that's in the future that would do with the two of you. You guys will meet
*  like, uh, with that, the way you meet with a fling, like a decade from now at a diner and, uh,
*  you're both way fatter and uglier and, and then you just reminisce over some cigarettes and coffee.
*  That could be, yeah, it could be. Yeah. But, uh, it's definitely a classic podcast that people can
*  go back and appreciate it. It's fast paced and it was unique. What was it like to research for, uh,
*  I mean, it was really scholarly, the depth of research that you performed. Uh, it, uh, sometimes
*  felt like you almost read an entire Wikipedia article beforehand.
*  Yeah. That's exactly true. Uh, we were, we were, uh, one, uh, fan, we attracted such funny people
*  to that podcast and the fans were so funny and one fan called us, nicknamed us Wikipedia sluts.
*  And so it just stuck. Yeah. We just would read Wikipedia. I would do a lot more research to
*  Chris. And, um, so I would actually, uh, you know, once in a while he'd get into it too, but
*  for very interesting episodes, I got, I got some, some, some subject matter would just pull me in,
*  like Bernie Madoff, just to think of one that was recent. It was one of our last ones. And I think
*  one of our better episodes, and I'm glad that, uh, it kind of ended after that, cause it was rare.
*  Did I think we started to slip a little bit? Um, I got fascinated and I got, I did a lot of research
*  for Bernie Madoff, but usually, yeah, we'd pull up Wikipedia and we'd have fun. We were sort of the
*  antithesis of Dan Carlin. I mean, you went to Dan Carlin for, uh, accuracy and thoughtfulness
*  and you went to us for, it was a hang with history. That's why history hyenas was such an appropriate
*  name because it was, it was a little bit of history. Some, some episodes were more hyena,
*  more wild and a little history. And some were a little more dense, like the battle of Crete
*  and less hyena. So you were, you were always going to get both. You're either going to get
*  a majority of one or the other. Yeah. And Dan Carlin is the lion, I guess. And you guys
*  predictably good. Uh, I mean, what, what are your thoughts about, I mean, he's a storyteller too.
*  He gets a lot of criticism for them from the historians, quote unquote. That's why he likes
*  to knock. He keeps saying he's not a historian, but what's your, um, what are your thoughts about
*  hardcore history with Dan Carlin? Like, we'll see an inspiration to the, the, the podcast you were
*  doing, uh, or, or like an account, like, uh, almost like reverse psychology inspiration where
*  you wanted to do some kind of opposing type of podcast and history, or was history always just
*  like a, a launching pad to just talk shit about human nature? More the latter. I wasn't even aware
*  of his podcast when we started. Oh, interesting. Yeah. And so we, it was just very organic again,
*  like the chemistry, me and Chris became very good friends. We started the podcast. First,
*  we did a web series called Bay Ridge Boys, which has it sort of little cult following. We did like
*  five episodes and ended it. Um, and then we did the podcast and, uh, hi, he is my favorite animal
*  and I talk about them passionately and I told Chris about them. And then he started appreciating
*  them and we both love history. I majored in history. It's one of the things I love. I go
*  to museums all the time. I go to his, I do history tours. So does he. And so it was just sort of a
*  natural, let's do a history podcast. And it gave us something to talk about each episode
*  to sort of lean our, you know, hang our hats on and, and riff off of. So it had nothing to do
*  with Dan's. What I think about Dan's, I think it's great. I think even if he's inaccurate, uh,
*  in the opinions, uh, of the historical community, it starts conversations, which is good. It's like
*  this thing where people go, oh, it's dangerous rhetoric. It's like, no, rhetoric only becomes
*  dangerous when education fails. What's going on in America is education has failed. So if you call
*  someone online dangerous, it's not him that's dangerous. It's the stupid people that's dangerous
*  and it's the fall of this country. We didn't listen to Aristotle. The future of a civilization
*  depends on public education and we failed. Education has failed. Kids are, kids are not
*  interested in shit. And, um, so in some sense, those, uh, like Dan's podcasts and podcasts can
*  be incredibly educational. That's he's, uh, the storytelling that pulls you in ultimately leads
*  to you internalizing these stories and like remembering them and thinking through them and
*  all those kinds of things that is much more powerful than you book on history. That's accurate.
*  I think often it inspires you to go learn more. So it's like, I know we did that. I mean, you know,
*  people would go, Hey, I went and learned about this because they knew with us, there was no
*  pretense, which was great that we had no standard. So it's like, nobody came to us for historical
*  accuracy, but I was kind of turned on by the fact that it inspired people to go learn about this
*  stuff or to at least know like battle of Crete, like you said, a very underappreciated battle.
*  Even Winston Churchill said, uh, from here on, we will no longer say that, uh, Greeks fight like
*  heroes, but heroes fight like Greeks. I mean, it was a monumental battle and, um, you know,
*  not talked about enough. And I, uh, our podcast would inspire people to go actually learn more
*  to go listen to Dan Carlin or to go pick up a book or to do research on their own. And so
*  I think podcasts, Dan Carlin is obviously much more accurate than us, but it's good that people
*  are going to podcasts like yours and to learn shit. Joe was, is really like the progenitor of that.
*  I mean, you know, having intellectuals on and getting the public interested with this new medium,
*  um, in, in people who are intelligent, it's nice because you know, what the mainstream press pushes
*  out is horse shit, gorgeous horse shit. It's got a beautiful veneer, but no substance. And so this,
*  this is a nice pushback. Yeah. The authenticity of Joe's show. I mean, I'm through, I started
*  listening from the very beginning, you know, doing my in grad school, you know, I, like a
*  technical person and he just pulled me in and made me curious to learn about all kinds of things
*  and use my own critical reasoning skills on some of the bullshit guests he's had and some of the
*  most inspiring guests he's had. So I teach you to think, can you, uh, I don't know much about
*  Bernie Madoff as a small tangent. Can you tell me who the hell is Bernie Madoff? Oh,
*  Bernie Madoff is the goat. The greatest thief of all time, dude. Um, hedge fund guy ran a hedge
*  fund and, uh, pulled a, uh, stole the most money in the history of America. I mean, a con artist
*  and, um, he does people, obviously he's become, he's a household name because of the magnitude
*  of his crime, but you got to appreciate, again, you got to appreciate what went into this and how
*  long he was able to pull it off, uh, by tricking the smartest and richest people in the world
*  and, uh, brilliant scam. The con man, uh, con man is short for confidence man and it, it came from,
*  yeah, a con man, basically they, they exude confidence and they trick people by playing
*  on their ego and blind spots and the word comes from a guy, I can't remember where, but what he,
*  what he used to do, I can't remember the guy's name, you know, whatever, you can Google it,
*  con man, but it's very interesting. The first con man that is on record, what he would do,
*  he'd just go to very rich people and he'd be very well dressed, right? And he'd go, he's like,
*  I bet you, you don't have the confidence to give me your watch. And he would plan the egos,
*  these very powerful and rich people, and they would give them the watch for some reason,
*  some sort of reverse psychology bullshit. And he'd take the watch and he would just steal it.
*  Cause basically saying like, I don't, you don't have the compass, give me the watch. Cause you
*  don't, I don't know, you don't think I'm going to give it back. And he would just take it. So
*  Bernie Madoff was a very sophisticated con man. And again, we were talking about people pretending
*  to be the opposite of what they are. Bernie hid his, uh, thievery in how available he was to his
*  clients, how he would show up at every bar mitzvah, every birthday. He was always available for their
*  phone calls and he played on their egos. He made it so people were, wanted to invest in him. Like
*  they were competing. He made it very exclusive. He wouldn't just take anyone. And there was a
*  method behind that madness because he wanted the whales that wouldn't notice that he was,
*  he was had this pyramid scheme going. And so what he would do is he would just rob from the richer
*  and he just kept, it was like, he'd pay back the richer with the guy who was a little less.
*  And it was a pyramid scheme. And, um, he was able to do it for so long and steal so much money.
*  And he would win people over with the scheme because with that scheme, he was the only guy
*  who could provide, who could guarantee like a 1% return even during times of recession.
*  And because he was such a good con man, he hijacked people's reasoning with his charm.
*  And that's what con artists do. That's what psychopaths do. They're so fucking charming.
*  They get you in that Volkswagen Beetle because if they use their reasoning for one second,
*  they'd go, Hey, nobody can provide 1% returns during recessions. How the fuck is this guy
*  doing it? I'll tell you how he's doing it. He's stealing from another guy to pay you. You fucking
*  idiot. So charisma is a sensitive. Maybe you can help explain something to me, something I have been
*  affected by. I'm going to be way too loud for your listeners. There's going to be comments like,
*  tell this guy to calm down. I'm sorry. I'm Greek apostolate.
*  No, that's beautiful. I love it. Something that I have been thinking about and have encountered
*  indirectly is Jeffrey Epstein. And I have a sense because of MIT, because of all the other
*  people that have been touched the wrong term by Jeffrey Epstein in the sense that. Literally
*  literally and figuratively. Yeah. And it always felt to me like there's not a deep conspiracy.
*  I don't know. I don't know, but it felt to me like this not some deeply rooted conspiracy where
*  like Eric Weinstein thinks that there's some probability that, uh, that, uh, Jeffrey Epstein
*  is a front for like an intelligence agency, whether it's Israeli or, uh, the CIA, I don't know,
*  but is a front for something much, much bigger. And then I always thought that he's just,
*  maybe you can correct me, but more of the Bernie Madoff variety where he's just a charismatic guy
*  who, uh, maybe a psychopathic in some sense. So, you know, also a pedophile, but just
*  charismatic and is able to convince people of that 1% of any idea that, uh, in the, in the case of
*  scientists is able to convince these people that their ideas matter. Uh, so one thing scientists
*  don't really, you know, despite what people say, I don't think they care about money as much as
*  people think. I mean, people are ridiculous when they think that, yeah, that's why people get into
*  science for the money. Yeah. The person who is against the science are obsessed with minutiae
*  they do the scientific method. You know how boring that is? Like you have to have a love for it.
*  Yeah, exactly. But the thing, what drives you is for your ideas to be then heard.
*  And when a, when a rich guy comes over, probably super charismatic is going to tell you that your
*  ideas, uh, especially so for some of these outsiders at MIT, at Harvard, at Caltech, all these like,
*  uh, sort of, uh, big science, like, uh, physics, biology, artificial intelligence, computing,
*  uh, fields to hear somebody say that your ideas are brilliant ideas matter. It's pretty powerful,
*  especially when you've been an outsider. Like he's talked to a bunch of people who were,
*  who had outsider ideas. You know, the, the, the, the big negative for me of modern academia is that
*  most people actually like most communities, most people think the same and there's just these
*  brilliant outsiders and the outsiders are just, uh, derided. And so when you have Jeffrey Epstein,
*  like a hyena, sorry, sorry, sorry, uh, going from on the outside and picking off these brilliant minds
*  that are the outsiders, he can use charisma to convince them to, uh, to, to collaborate with him,
*  to take his funding. And then thereby he builds a reputation, like, uh, slowly accumulates these
*  people that actually results in, um, in a network of like some of the most brilliant people
*  in the world, you know, and then pulls in people like Bill Gates and I don't know, political figures.
*  I tend to believe a one, one person can do that. Yeah. I mean, look at Hitler,
*  charisma is blinding. I think that's what con men, speaking of Bernie Madoff, that's one of their
*  major tools is flattery, just glib, superficial charm. It creates those blind spots. People want
*  to hear how great they are. They want to be flattered. It takes your defenses down,
*  plays to our ego, the, the, how much we're all just pieces of garbage and want to hear how great we
*  are. We want that love from our mother and our father. It's Freudian and, and they know because
*  they're not burdened with that need, they're not burdened with that, uh, empathy or emotions. And
*  they just see things very calculatively. Um, they play, they know that we're prey in their game and
*  they use that against us. And that is why someone who is not that intelligent, like Hitler can
*  probably convince a lot more intelligent people, you know, and that's why we can't give him Dylan
*  power because, you know, he already stands on a stage. I mean, if we let that guy, I mean,
*  he will just take over a country and everyone who can't cook well will be eliminated. So it's like,
*  I wonder why he keeps complimenting me when we're in private. Be careful. He looks at me,
*  just your, your, I like your suit. I like the cut of your jib. Yeah, definitely. Be careful
*  that kid. He's Hitler, but it's crazy to clip that to his internet. I mean,
*  putting Tarantino said it to bed, I mean, in his grip personality goes a long way, dude. I mean,
*  personality can, can usurp common sense and reason of the smartest people. These absolute
*  smartest people can be hypnotized. It's sort of like a sexy woman. It's like you can just,
*  it just, you can be tricked because we have such a blind spot for, you know, for, for flattery.
*  Yeah. I wonder, I think there's a BBC documentary on, I think it's called something like charisma,
*  Hitler's charisma or something like that. Does quite, I mean, that one focused more about the
*  power of his speeches, but I wonder if most of the success or the rise of Hitler and the third
*  rike had to do with the charisma of Hitler when he's alone in a room with somebody with the
*  generals, just one-on-one. Like I wonder, I wonder if that's the essential element of just being able
*  to just look into a person's eyes, like flatter them or whatever is needed to earn their trust
*  and then convince them of anything you want. Right. Yeah. I mean, you're right. Cause that's,
*  that's the one piece of history we don't have. We don't know. We do know that the kid crushed.
*  I mean, he was a headliner. He got up there and his phone would flop. I mean, he crushed it.
*  Yeah. There's certain elements about nationalism and pride that are really powerful. Like a lot of
*  us humans, I think long for that, for the feeling of belonging. And when some charismatic leader
*  makes us feel like we belong to a group, the, the amount of evil we can do to other humans because
*  of that, especially when you give people a scapegoat, nobody wants to look in, nobody wants to do the
*  work to be better or look at where they messed up. Why does it always have to be the Jews that,
*  you know, it's like, get over it guys. I mean, it's like they killed Jesus. You get over it.
*  Yeah. Okay. It's a long time ago. I mean, move on. I'm Jewish. I understand because we do run
*  the central banks and the weather and the weather. Yeah. Don't forget about the weather. That's a big
*  one. That's a funny one that people created. Like who gives a shit? Well, what is the weather? Like
*  what's the importance of the weather? All right. Like Jews made a rain outside. Good. You got to
*  fuck, you know, they made it snow. Okay. You get a day off. Thank the Jews. Yeah. It's like,
*  yeah, there's certain conspiracies that make me like flat earth. Like what, what's the motive?
*  Like what, who, what's the motivation for lying that the earth is round? Like what's the conspiracy?
*  Yeah. What does anyone get out of that? Yeah. What is exactly the profit? What's the, yeah,
*  what's the strategy? Do you have any from a historical perspective or just a human perspective
*  conspiracy theories you connect with or you're not necessarily conspiratorial?
*  I'm, I'm not necessarily conspiratorial. Nobody cares that much. But there,
*  but then you, you know, what happens is you find out this one of this two,
*  you start questioning everything and you start questioning everything, man. It's like, you know,
*  the Vietnam war started. That was a lie. That was a false flag. And then next thing, you know,
*  everything's a false flag. There are some strange things on 9-11. You know, there's some strange
*  things from a scientific perspective. I'm no scientist, but it's like, you know, yeah, three
*  steel frame skyscrapers falling on the same day in the same way. A lot of people say, oh, it was,
*  they were hit by planes. It's like, yeah, but that's not why they fell. They fell because of fires
*  and usually, not usually, all the time, except for three times. And there was buildings that have
*  burned for longer than that. And there might be good explanations, but the lack of transparency,
*  it's like, I feel like government. And building seven's weird. I mean, the way it kind of died,
*  just a neat, just a neat, the physical, I mean, you're a scientist. Is that, well, I don't, I,
*  is there resistance from the steel? And so, no, free fall. Not all scientists know everything. I'm
*  just a computer guy. Cause I had some questions I wanted to ask you about my biology. Yeah. So
*  exactly. I don't understand biology. I don't understand the melting point of steel. I don't,
*  but I'm just a common sense human that looks at government and institutions when they try to
*  communicate. And there's a certain human element where you can sense that there's dishonesty going
*  on. That dishonesty might not be deeply rooted in a conspiracy theory and something malevolent.
*  It might just be rooted more likely to me in a basic fear of losing your job. Right. So when
*  you have a bunch of people that are afraid of losing their job, you know, and they just don't
*  want to, like the origins of the virus, whether it came from a lab or not, you know, that's a
*  pretty, I know a lot of biologists behind a closed doors that, that say it's very likely it was leaked
*  from the lab, but like they don't want to talk about it because there's not good evidence either
*  way. It's mostly you're just using common sense. So they're waiting for good evidence to come out
*  in either direction, but just like nobody in positions of institutional, like centralized
*  power wants to just honestly say, we don't know or on the point of masks or all those kinds of
*  things to say, you know, here's the best evidence we have. We're not sure. We're trying to figure
*  that out. We're desperately trying to figure that out or just like honesty, especially in the modern
*  day. That's the hope I have for the 21st century is people seem to detect bullshit much, much better.
*  Yeah. Internet. Yeah. Yeah. And we, we see, but they also believe crazy shit too. There's no yin
*  without a yang, I guess. But I think the conspiracy theories arise only when the people in positions
*  of power and government and institutions are full of shit. Like the air will be taken out of the
*  conspiracy theories. If the people in elected power would be much more honest, like just like real,
*  you have people like Andrew Yang, whatever you think about him, just more honest. He, he just like
*  says whatever the hell comes to mind. By the way, he's running for new York mayor. Yeah. Do you have
*  opinions? Yeah, it's no good. I like Andrew Yang and it's no good. I'd be honest with you. I'm a
*  lifelong New Yorker. I mean, I'm a New Yorker. Well, you're in New York. So nothing is good.
*  Well, something is good. Okay. And talking on, let's be honest about New York. It's a very socially
*  liberal place. It is the head of the snake. New York is the country. If New York, when New York's
*  not doing good, country's not doing good. It's the most important city, DC, New York. It's really Rome.
*  Be honest. It's, it's, uh, I, maybe I'm biased. I don't know. No, we just did New Yorkers. We walk
*  around everywhere and we go, this is just like New York, but not New York. It's, um, but New York
*  needs, and I'm a guy who leans left. I, you know, I just, I'd lean left and that's just what it is.
*  A dictator. Is that where you're going? No, we need, we need, it's a money town. Let's be, come on,
*  man. I mean, New York is a money town and, uh, wall street. And then when AOC and her cronies,
*  um, at the local level rejected that Amazon thing, you're going like, what do you think makes
*  cities? What, what, what, what's going to create jobs in the 21st century? What do we need more
*  nail salons, more pizza places? I mean, we're living in the tech revolution and you know,
*  whatever your opinions are about Jeff Bezos, that's the world tech. And they want to come here. Of
*  course you give them tax breaks. That's why any companies go anywhere. She's so fucking utopian
*  and that, that progressive wing is so utopian and that always ends in disaster because it's not
*  rooted in reality. It doesn't accept the reality that people are self-interested. Now they're going
*  to do this 14%, 15% tax hike on people making a million dollars more in New York city. A million
*  dollars is not that much. So people are going to flee New York. The tax base is going to flee.
*  New York's going to fall to shit like it did before. So you're saying it basically needs a
*  more capitalist front, like capitalistic type of thinker that Bloomberg Giuliani, when he was still
*  sane and his hair wasn't melting off his face, prosecutor, you need a top. I mean, I don't know
*  what's happened. That guy's lost it, but it's fun. Yeah. It's fun to watch. Yeah. It's fun to watch
*  him be just like a Trump's lackey like, yeah, boy, whatever you want, boss. I'll just say whatever
*  you want, boss. New York is a money town that needs a money guy and sort of more of a Republican. I
*  have to say on the local level, as more of a guy who leans left, I'll just be honest. It's a tough
*  city that needs a tough mayor, not some guy who's going like, I understand. We all need free money.
*  Andrew Yang, I think is right in the big picture because all the real jobs are somewhere else. You
*  look at those Asian cities, you go like, oh, that's what our cities used to look like at the
*  industrial revolution. There was jobs and people were making things here. Now you look at those
*  cities in Asia and you're going like, wow. Then you go to Detroit and you're like, yeah, we're done.
*  You go to Cleveland, you go, we're done. So I don't actually, it's funny. The reason I really
*  like Andrew Yang is I've learned a lot every time he talks. Like it's not his opinions. He's just
*  giving a lot of data, like information, which I just start a podcast. Don't run from there.
*  Yeah, that's true. He already has a podcast. I think Yang Yang speaks. Who doesn't? Who doesn't?
*  That's the way we communicate. I don't even talk to people unless it's on a podcast.
*  What? Listen, man, I'm a, I'm not going to criticize that because there is something like
*  I talked to my dad on a podcast for four hours and I'm not sure I would, I would ever talk to him
*  in the way we talked without the podcast. What does he do? You that physicist? Oh shit. But like,
*  yeah, it's a episode 100 and you know,
*  the way I recorded that podcast is I tried to put my ego aside. It's actually really tough to talk
*  to your dad, especially because you're giving him a platform. So at that time there's already a bit
*  of a platform for this podcast. And so there's this, as a son, you think like, oh, here it goes
*  with this bullshit again. Like that's the natural son thought you have. But at the same time, I
*  wanted to, the way I thought about it is in 20 years when I look back, like I want to do a
*  conversation where I'm happy with it, you know, so I want to make him shine. But I also called him
*  out on like, why were you so distant? Like all of that kind of stuff. Yeah. It was very difficult
*  to do, but it was really important to do. And I don't think I'd be able to do without a,
*  without a microphone. Right. Listen, how often do we sit there and just focus our attention,
*  listen, how often do we sit there and just focus our attention, just look at the other person?
*  I don't know, man. This is not even recording right now. I just invited you over. Just so we
*  could actually, you're right. The podcast does make, like I listen, I've been listening to every
*  word you've been saying. And if we weren't doing a podcast, I might be looking at my phone or
*  being self-conscious about something else or nervous or anxious. Especially with people close
*  to you. I mean, that was, I recommend that actually for people to talk to their family on a podcast
*  to get, or like fake or not. That's really powerful. It made me realize that there's a clear
*  distinction between the conversations we usually have with humans and those we have when a podcast
*  is being recorded. What the fuck were we talking on before that? I knew you were going to lose
*  your train of thought on that one because that's a big one. There's emotion behind that one.
*  Podcast with Dad is going to take you to a place. It took you to a place. It took you outside of
*  interviewer. New York. I went to a place in New York and Yang. So the data, one of the things that
*  really surprised me about, I like the psychoanalysis you just threw in there. Yeah, it took you to a
*  place. So Angie Yang mentioned- Do you respect me now, Dad? MIT, is it enough? A million people
*  listening to this? I got 14 Rogans. Is it enough, Dad? I'm creating robots. Is that enough for you?
*  That's what drives you, probably. That's probably what drives me. That's what gives meaning to life
*  is it's never enough. And I hope to pass that on to my kids one day that nothing's ever enough.
*  Whether they're robot or human, right? Your kids. Most likely. Let's be honest. You might call one
*  of your robots. Do you love your robot? Are you starting to love your robot? Is it going to be
*  like that Pygmalion thing? You create them and then they kill you. But even while they're killing
*  you, you got a tear rolling. A tear. A slow one. One tear. One tear. And just- Why are you doing
*  this Frankenstein? Why? Why? But I loved you. Those would be the last words out of my mouth.
*  But Angie Yang mentioned something on the- that it cost $400,000, over $400,000 per year to support
*  one person in prison in New York. Like when I heard that number, it was really confusing to me.
*  It cost that much. $400,000 per person. And it was really refreshing to hear a politician
*  describe a particular problem with data. That this is this prison industrial complex, whatever the
*  hell it is. And whether the solution- it's unclear what the solution is. I think he has solutions.
*  But just the honesty of presenting that information was refreshing. And I'm not sure a
*  capitalistic person would solve that. Those kinds of problems he might make worse. And I'm not-
*  I'm a huge fan of capitalism. I think the free market is the way we make progress in this world.
*  But it seems to go wrong in certain directions. Like the military industrial complex, the prison-
*  anything that ends with industrial complex. And so I'm not sure. I'm not sure if all of the problems-
*  You're basically saying, let's put New York's problems aside. We need to have New York shine
*  first. To do what it does best. Essentially, yeah. And then the problems will fix them. Well,
*  and then we can focus on the problems. But if you just say like, here's a problem, here's a problem,
*  here's a problem. Let's make sure we have the safety net that protects us against all these
*  kinds of problems. That's not going to- that's going to kill the city, the spirit of the city.
*  That is, in your biased opinion, the Rome of the world. That said, a lot of people are
*  fleeing New York. Yeah, that's why I say it. That's the reality of the situation is, you know,
*  I'm all for the public good. But yeah, there needs to be, back to that Greek expression,
*  pan metroniris. I also think the free market is responsible for progress. I think it's the
*  most natural thing, the thing that's most aligned with human nature, which is self-interest.
*  And which I believe, not to the extent that I and Rand would, but I do believe people are mostly
*  self-interested, especially with one gun to the head. Morals are out the window. You know,
*  it's about survival. So, you know, create a system that respects that and acknowledges that.
*  But socialism works very well, at least right now, as a check, as to temper the excesses of
*  capitalism. And in certain scenarios, is the more appropriate system, you know, in a vacuum. So one
*  being prisons or, you know, governance, you know, parks. Maybe even, well, and this is a difficult
*  one, but in healthcare, healthcare, it's unclear what's right. There's a lot of debates there.
*  Yeah, doctors want votes. Yeah, so I guess you're voting for AOC, you're saying? No, I'm not voting
*  for AOC, but I do. It's just a tough one. That's a tough one. But ultimately, the Hippocratic Oath,
*  it's like, how do you turn people away, man? How do you do that to people? It's like, it's a tough
*  thing to reconcile helping people, curing people with the marketplace. It's just, I can understand
*  why that one's so tough. And then you got hypochondriacs, of course, who drain the system,
*  you know, like people who have anxiety like me, who had COVID and called 14, you know,
*  I called 14 ambulances. So and then of course, we're fat and the free market made us fat because
*  it played the marketing made us want all this junk food. And that's a burden on the healthcare system.
*  So we got to do something about that. We got to get creative. We need new thinkers. I'll be one
*  of them. When you go to a fast food restaurant, you stand on a scale. If you're over a certain
*  thing, you can't be served. It's good for the healthcare system. You know, you're just handed
*  a salad and say, sorry, this burger is illegal for right now. If you achieve these certain BMI goals,
*  then you can you can have this burger. But right now you can't. That's where the state's important.
*  Yeah. Okay. Regulate our freedoms. No slurpees. I'm with you, Bloomberg.
*  Well, I'm with you to go along. I think the salads are too expensive. They should be subsidized.
*  If you if you go to like a fast food joint, the burgers always going to be cheaper than the salad.
*  And this does not make sense. We should run this platform. I'll be your vice president.
*  Yeah. We'll ban burgers for for people over a certain weight and make salad cheap.
*  Three day work weeks. Why has that? Okay. Where are you going with this? Good. Good for the economy
*  stimulates the economy, right? More shifts, creates more jobs, more people spending because
*  they have more leisure time, boosts the leisure economy. You know, why are we still doing the
*  five day work week that that was that was tempered from the seven day work week that was so the seven
*  day used to be seven day work. It used to be like people who are just these libertarians like,
*  come on, dude, what is this fresh? Are we freshmen in college? Yeah. You're going to talk about
*  Iran next. Let's talk about reality. Okay. And human nature. People are fucking greedy.
*  They lie. They you know, there's no end to up, which is one of my favorite expressions.
*  No end to up. No end to up. There's no end to up. Can we dissect that? Yeah. From a Randian
*  perspective, there's no end to up, which is you just keep going. It's never enough. The human
*  never thought. It's never enough. No end to up more, more, more. And you know, you have to
*  reconcile the fact that you're going to die. So like this no end to up thing is that balance is
*  just as valuable as progress. So we have to reconcile those two things and put them on
*  a seesaw and figure out how to get two people who have the equal weight to keep it like that. And
*  that's the goal. And it constantly vacillates according to the time. Sometimes you need a
*  little more socialism. Sometimes you need a little more capitalism. You gotta, you gotta,
*  you gotta fly the plane, man. You gotta fly the plane, dude. What's your
*  looking back at history? Is there a moment, time period in history, a person in history
*  that's most fascinating to you? You mentioned Bernie Madoff, maybe second to Bernie Madoff.
*  Is there in a battle of Crete, is there something that you've always been curious about, even if
*  it's something you haven't actually researched that well yet, just something that pulled your
*  curiosity that instructed the way you think about the world, an individual or an event or
*  individual, you know, yeah, moment in history or a person in history?
*  There's a few, but you know, Queen Elizabeth, the Elizabethan era, you know, the sun never sets in
*  the British Empire, very successful empire. What an absolute success story that is for a leader
*  and a woman. Can you tell a little bit about her story? Well, I actually don't know much about
*  the British Empire. Yeah, she had a good run. I think it's like 70 years, you know, there's a
*  Shakespeare, you know, the, oh, I guess what's the word, Pax Romana, the period of Rome that was at
*  peace and they flourish like a couple of emperors like Trajan or some good ones. And I think he was
*  part of the Pax Romana that sort of just a peace and a comfortable flourishing time. And England
*  had sort of that in their empire under her successful reign. She murdered her cousin.
*  She, you know, the movies, there's, you know, um, Kate Blanchett plays her and does so. And she
*  didn't win the Oscar because fucking Gwyneth Paltrow put a British accent on in Shakespeare
*  in love. It's a tragedy. Why do I know this? Because I'm not a full man. I'm a comedian,
*  which means I do skits and I perform. And I, Kate Blanchett's incredible actress, great movies.
*  She was just so, and here's the thing. She, she never got married. She was, oh, she was so, um,
*  astute at public relations. And, and, and, and imagine how strong you gotta be as a woman to lead
*  the greatest empire maybe known to man at the time and to do so so successfully, how Machiavellian
*  you have to be, how idealist you have to be, how much of a good marketer you have to be.
*  Propaganda machine was on point. She was married to England. She was adored the way she adorned
*  herself. You walked in, you're like, holy man, God just walked in here. And of course she got fucked.
*  I mean, who doesn't fuck? We all fuck. Even robots one day will fuck. But she was, she, she did that
*  propaganda thing. And historians aren't, uh, haven't, they haven't decided this, but I believe
*  she fucked. And I believe she did that as a tool of propaganda. I'm married to England.
*  So you, oh, you're, you're directly referring to like using sex as a way to manipulate people.
*  Well, she, her, she was known as like the, the Virgin Queen and, uh, and her thing was like,
*  I'm married to England. Like I can't be distracted by man or woman, blah, blah, blah. She never had
*  any kids, nothing. I think she did that as a tool of manipulation. Yes. Which you need.
*  Rulers need to, you know, Obama made you feel good. And then he went and bought carpet bombed
*  everywhere. You need to feel good about your guy, no matter how evil they are. And she was fucking
*  a dictator. But when you look back at her, everyone's like, oh my God, she was so great.
*  The horror and the shit that she had to do. She didn't put that in the history books,
*  but that's what probably was part of what made her successful. And, um, she's a fascinating
*  character to, to partner with because she was so successful and, and, and England flourished so
*  much. And, uh, it's just fascinating to me because she was the great Virgin Queen. And can you think
*  of, there's no other woman who was that say, I mean, Angela Merkel, I mean, come on. I mean,
*  there's nobody who comes close and defeating the Spanish or Mata. I think that happened under her.
*  I mean, I'm no professionalist, but I mean, the woman crushed and, uh,
*  do you think it's more effective to lead by love, which it sounds like what she did from the PR
*  perspective or by fear? Where do you land on that? That's a great question. Um, I'm not, we gotta ask
*  Joe. Well, yeah, this is interesting. Cause I think leading in the 21st century in whatever ways
*  is different. I think it's very difficult to lead by fear. I mean, um, that's why I find Putin
*  fascinating and like really fascinating. Like, is he a relic of another era or is he something
*  that will still be necessary in the coming decades for certain nations? I think he's a,
*  I don't think he's a relic from another era. I think his background, I think he is who you think
*  he is because his background was in espionage. His background was in subterfuge and espionage.
*  I think I've said the word subterfuge maybe 10 times now, but he, uh, big words,
*  intellectuals. I just, I was sitting here with you. It's time to flex. Um, but he, um, he's very good
*  at that, right? Like, uh, controlling people with psychology. And even if you look at the way he's
*  sort of used the internet and, um, has sort of been, you know, gotten in to the citizens of other
*  countries opinions. And it's very KGB. He also looks great without a shirt on a pony on a horse,
*  on a horse. Yeah. Yeah. I thought he would choose a pony because a pony smaller makes
*  him look good. Would, uh, would you, would you put queen Elizabeth as the greatest leader of all time?
*  Probably. Yeah. I think as a woman and you look at, uh, you look at the,
*  the length of the rain, I think it's like 70 something years or something like that,
*  that she rained success, man, success. She used the church, she used public psychology,
*  Shakespeare, the greatest playwright of all time, uh, under her reign, you know, people were going
*  to plays and, and, uh, it was, it was a successful one and she was marauding everywhere else, marauding
*  and, and culling resources for the empire and just say, uh, absolute successful. It's even, uh, a
*  token of her success. We don't consider her a dictator. Yeah. She's a dictator, you know,
*  she was queen. I, this is my thing. I love about the feudal system that these fucking countries
*  still have feudal systems. They're celebrating a horrible thing. Divine right of Kings, oppression,
*  Kings were dictators and now they have fucking ceremonial. Why don't we have a ceremonial
*  Fuhrer? What does in Germany? He doesn't do any of the bad stuff. He just rolls around and does
*  I mean, it's like, what the fuck? There's no difference between a Hitler and a fucking King.
*  They did the same horrible shit. Why not a fucking ceremonial conqueror? Alex had a great
*  rapes a little bit, but it's all fun. It's for ceremony. He represents the country. Macedonia
*  is Greek. It's interesting to see that, uh, some you're starting to see a bit of that in Russia
*  with Stalin, actually the celebration of, of a man that helped win the great patriotic war.
*  Right. So like you, you're already starting to see that as very possible in the history books,
*  you'll be seen as maybe like a Genghis Khan type of character and you forget the millions that he
*  tortured. So you're one of the most successful and brilliant people the world has ever seen.
*  So you're the good person to ask, uh, for advice. You know, there's a lot of young people that look
*  up to you. Uh, God bless their souls and hearts made the right choice. What advice would you give
*  to a young person, maybe to yourself, to a young version of yourself, you know, just how to live a
*  successful, a good life. Be doggedly you. I think, uh, the magic happens when you are stubbornly
*  doggedly you and you meet other people who are doing the same. And, um, the real magic of life,
*  the real true currency in this ephemeral life is sort of the communication that happens between
*  people. Uh, that's the real currency friendships, love it's, it's cliche, but it's a, I think the
*  meaning of life is to experience, to experience love. And, uh, I think, uh, people often mistake,
*  maybe it's because of Hollywood films and things like that, that love is a feeling, but it's not,
*  it's an action. So, uh, that took me a while to learn. And I think that's why I've made decisions
*  since that I think have been good for me and healthy for me. Love is an action. People can say
*  things, you can feel things. Um, that doesn't mean they're necessarily real. It's all chemical
*  actions. It's all, um, tied to our immaturity and, uh, psychological issues and, uh, survival,
*  but action when some, when you do things, when you act out of love and you, that's,
*  that's what it's about. Is there, uh, times when you were younger, where you were kind of
*  dishonest with who you are to yourself in terms of like, what, what kind of things did you have
*  to do to, to shake yourself up and be like, okay, I thought, um, I thought I'm going to be a
*  scientist, but instead I, I realized I'm going to do this. Yeah. My parents weren't funny. Yeah.
*  My, my comedy is a hard, hard thing to explain to, uh, you know, an immigrant mother who came here
*  and under Nazi occupied Crete and became a human rights lawyer and lawyer. And, uh, my brother's a
*  lawyer and my father's lawyer, you know, Claude his way up. His dad was a, was a, um, so your
*  disappointment. I'm the black sheep. Yeah. My brother went to Oxford, Georgetown law at Brown,
*  you know, has a master's in law degrees. My mother has followed four law degrees. Uh, you know,
*  she was on the human rights commission in New York up for a judgeship under Dinkins. Um, wrote a,
*  you know, uh, she was the editor of unitar. She, she wrote a seminal piece on the human rights of
*  children for the United nations. Um, and I, yeah, it was a comedian. I was always a fuck up. And,
*  the thing that I was best at, the only thing I was ever decent at was just like making people laugh.
*  I don't know why. I don't know where that comes from, but, uh, was there ever a question or was
*  there a moment where you decided this is what I'm going to do? There was a moment after I graduated
*  college. Yeah. But I was thinking about all types of stuff that other people imposed on me. And, um,
*  I was honest with myself. And, uh, once I figured out that it was an actual career path, I wasn't
*  even aware back then the internet wasn't huge, you know, late 99, 2000, it wasn't big yet. So I,
*  I thought Robin Williams was just like an actor. I didn't know there was comedy clubs and all.
*  So once I learned that, I was just like, I tried it. Uh, I suffer from massive anxiety. I remember
*  the first time I did comedy, my arms went numb. I started having a massive panic attack. I have my
*  first set. I can show it to you. It's like, I suggest, I just can go. On video. Yeah, on video.
*  Oh, nice. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. And the reason why I kept saying thank you is because I
*  forgot my whole joke. I was so scared. And then they laughed because of the amount of times I said
*  thank you. And then once they laughed, I was, I remembered the whole thing and I did the five
*  minutes and I remember getting off and for a person who never felt like he had a place anywhere,
*  nothing ever felt right. That felt like, okay, I found it. This is what I'm supposed to do.
*  This is it. It was the only time in my life. I felt that I haven't felt it since never felt it
*  before. So that's the only thing I can do. And, um, yeah, I had that, you know, it's funny because
*  I've similar experience like immigrant family in the world tells you to do certain things and you
*  think that's right. But, but then you put yourself in situations by luck probably where it's like,
*  oh, this, this, this, this feels right. I don't know what this means, but this feels right.
*  I think the, the, the biggest moment like that for me was, uh, I don't know what to make of it
*  exactly. But when I met spot, the robot, the full legged robot was like five years ago,
*  it felt like this, the depth of fascinating ideas that are yet to be explored with this thing.
*  This felt like a journey. It was like a door that opened. I was like, I don't want to be a professor.
*  At that point, I realized I don't want to do sort of a generic stuff. I want to do something crazy.
*  I want to do something big. That's the reason I stepped away from MIT. That's the reason
*  I have this burning desire to do a startup. That's the reason I came to Austin.
*  Yeah. I don't know what the hell it all means, but you just kind of follow that.
*  That's awesome. That sounds like you're following what's doggedly you. And also I think,
*  just to, just to piggyback off it, I think that means no matter what it is, because I think our,
*  the American dream is sold. Like, Hey, if you're not Beyonce or if you're not famous,
*  you're not worth it. I hate that. And that's what I love so much about certain countries like
*  Sweden. It's like where everyone has healthcare and stuff like that, because everyone's a little,
*  is valued more. It's like whatever, if you want to be a doorman, do it. Like it's all the same.
*  Prince was not happy. There's no, just because you're rich or famous, you're still the same guy.
*  Possessions are a lot little, you know, it's like, I have met some doorman. I have met some tax
*  cappers that I lie to you not are more fascinating. I have comedians are horrible people.
*  I want to get away from all of them. I have very few friends, Paul Verzi, Tim Dillon, who are
*  comedians because they're awful, awful people. Some of the people who you know the most, who are the
*  most famous are not who they say they are. Usually that's the case. They're putting on that public
*  facade because they're sozziopaths. They're horrible people. And some of the most beautiful
*  people I've met and the most interesting people I've met have regular jobs. There is no shame in
*  any fucking job. We don't all have to be rappers with like rims. It's just a weird thing.
*  Yeah. Fame is a drug and yeah, comedians, I agree with you. There's some part of me that knows
*  that there'll be a moment in my life when I'm standing there with like a sword or a knife
*  in my stomach and looking at Tim Dillon's smiling face saying,
*  you shouldn't have trusted me. You stupid fuck. So on that note, Janice, I've been a huge fan
*  of yours. I love what you're doing with Long Days, Nala, your new podcast. And I obviously love all
*  the stuff you've done before with history, hyenas, the chemistry, the chemistry you have with yourself
*  is also fun to watch. So man, I'm a huge fan. It's a huge honor that you come down here.
*  Thanks so much for talking to me. It means so much to me to hear you say that. I really appreciate
*  I'm a big fan of yours and having me on has been amazing and just thank you, man. Thank you for
*  having me on. And people, if they want to watch my special, it's called Blowing the Light. It's on
*  YouTube and please come listen to Long Days of Podcasts. And let's go eat some barbecue. Let's
*  do it. Thanks for listening to this conversation with Janice Pappas and thank you to Wine Access,
*  Blinkist, Magic Spoon, and Indeed. Check them out in the description to support this podcast.
*  And now let me leave you with some words from Karl Marx. Revolutions are the locomotives of history.
*  Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
