---
Date Generated: April 13, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 6217s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence', 'artificial intelligence podcast', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex podcast', 'mit ai', 'ronald sullivan']
Video Views: 181533
Video Rating: None
---

# Ronald Sullivan: The Ideal of Justice in the Face of Controversy and Evil | Lex Fridman Podcast #170
**Lex Fridman:** [March 21, 2021](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Iuven0crywo)
*  The following is a conversation with Ronald Sullivan, a professor at Harvard Law School,
*  known for taking on difficult and controversial cases. He was on the head legal defense team
*  for the Patriots football player, Aaron Hernandez, in his double murder case. He represented one of
*  the GNS6 defendants and never lost the case during his years in Washington, D.C.'s Public Defender
*  Services Office. In 2019, Ronald joined the legal defense team of Harvey Weinstein, a film producer
*  facing multiple charges of rape and other sexual assault. This decision met with criticism from
*  Harvard University students, including an online petition by students seeking his removal as
*  faculty dean of Winthrop House. Then, a letter supporting him signed by 52 Harvard Law School
*  professors appeared in the Boston Globe on March 8, 2019. Following this, the Harvard administration
*  succumbed to the pressure of a few Harvard students and announced that they will not be renewing
*  Ronald Sullivan's dean position. This created a major backlash in the public discourse over
*  the necessary role of universities in upholding the principles of law and freedom at the very
*  foundation of the United States. This conversation is brought to you by Brooklyn and Sheetz,
*  Wine Access Online Wine Store, Monk Pack Low Carb Snacks, and Blinkist app that summarizes books.
*  Click their links to support this podcast. As a side note, let me say that the free exchange of
*  difficult ideas is the only mechanism through which we can make progress. Truth is not a safe space.
*  Truth is humbling, and being humbled can hurt. But this is the role of education, not just in
*  the university, but in business and in life. Freedom and compassion can coexist, but it requires work
*  and patience. It requires listening to the voices and to the experiences unlike our own. Listening,
*  not silencing. This is the Lex Friedman podcast, and here is my conversation with Ronald Sullivan.
*  You were one of the lawyers who represented the Hollywood producer, Harvey Weinstein,
*  in advance of a sexual assault trial. For this, Harvard forced you to step down as faculty deans,
*  you and your wife, of Winthrop House. Can you tell the story of this saga from first deciding to
*  represent Harvey Weinstein to the interesting, complicated events that followed?
*  Yeah, sure. So I got a call one morning from a colleague at the Harvard Law School who asked if
*  I would consent to taking a call from Harvey. He wanted to meet me and chat with me about
*  representing him. I said yes, and one thing led to another. I drove out to Connecticut,
*  where he was staying, and met with him and some of his advisors. Then a day or two later,
*  I decided to take the case. This would have been back in January of 2019, I believe.
*  The sort of cases, I have a very small practice most of my time is teaching and writing,
*  but I tend to take cases that most deem to be impossible. I take the challenging sorts of cases.
*  And this was fit to build. It was quite challenging in the sense that everyone had
*  prejudged the case. When I say everyone, I just mean the general sentiment in the public
*  had the case prejudged, even though the specific allegations did not regard any of the people in
*  the New Yorker. That's the New Yorker article that exposed everything that was going on,
*  allegedly, with Harvey. So I decided to take the case.
*  Is there a philosophy behind you taking on these very difficult cases? Is it a set of principles?
*  Is it just your love of the law? Or is there a set of principles why you take on the cases?
*  Yeah, I do. I like to take on hard cases, and I like to take on the cases that are
*  with unpopular defendants, unpopular clients. And with respect to the latter, that's where Harvey
*  Weinstein fell. It's because we need lawyers and good lawyers to take the unpopular cases,
*  because those sorts of cases determine what sort of criminal justice system we have.
*  If we don't protect the rights and the liberties of those whom the society deems to be the least
*  and the last, the unpopular client, then that's the camel's nose under the tent. If we let the
*  camel's nose under the tent, the entire tent is going to collapse. That is to say, if we
*  short circuit the rights of a client like Harvey Weinstein, then the next thing you know,
*  someone will be at your door, knocking it down and violating your rights. There's a certain
*  creep there with respect to the way in which the state will respect the civil rights and
*  civil liberties of people. And these are the sorts of cases that test it.
*  For example, there was a young man many, many years ago named Ernesto Miranda. By all accounts,
*  he was not a likable guy. He was a three-time knife thief and not a likable guy. But lawyers
*  stepped up and took his case. And because of that, we now have the Miranda warnings,
*  you have the right to remain silent, those warnings that officers are forced to give to people.
*  So it is through these cases that we express oftentimes the best values in our criminal
*  justice system. So I proudly take on these sorts of cases in order to vindicate not only the
*  individual rights of the person whom I'm representing, but the rights of citizens writ large,
*  most of whom do not experience the criminal justice system. And it's partly because of lawyers
*  who take on these sorts of cases and establish rules that protect us, average, everyday, ordinary,
*  concrete citizens. From a psychological perspective, just you as a human,
*  is there fear? Is there stress from all the pressure? Because if you're facing,
*  I mean, the whole point, a difficult case, especially in the latter that you mentioned
*  of the going against popular opinion, you have the eyes of millions potentially looking at you with
*  anger as you try to defend these set of laws that this country is built on.
*  No, it doesn't stress me out particularly. It sort of comes with the territory. I try not to get
*  too excited in either direction. So a big part of my practice is wrongful convictions. And I
*  have gotten over 6,000 people out of prison who've been wrongfully incarcerated and
*  a subset of those people have been convicted. And if people have been in jail, 20, 30,
*  years who have gotten out. And those are the sorts of cases where people praise you and that sort of
*  thing. And so, look, I do the work that I do. I'm proud of the work that I do. And in that sense,
*  I'm sort of a part-time Taoist. The expression reversal was the movement of the Tao. So I don't
*  get too high. I don't get too low. I just try to do my work and represent people to the best of
*  my ability. So one of the hardest cases of recent history would be the Harvey Weinstein in terms of
*  popular opinion or unpopular opinion. So if you continue on that line, where does that story take
*  you of taking on this case? Yeah. So I took on the case and then there was a few students at the
*  college. So let me back up. I had an administrative post at Harvard College, which is a separate
*  entity from the Harvard Law School. Harvard College is the undergraduate portion of Harvard
*  University and the law school is obviously the law school. And I initially was appointed as master
*  of one of the houses. We did a name change five or six years into it and were called faculty deans.
*  But the houses at Harvard are based on the college system of Oxford and Cambridge. So when students
*  go to Harvard after their first year, they're assigned to a particular house or college and
*  that's where they live and eat and so forth. And these are undergraduate students.
*  These are undergraduate students. So I was responsible for one of the houses as its faculty
*  dean. So it's an administrative appointment at the college. And some students who didn't,
*  clearly didn't like Harvey Weinstein, began to protest about the representation. And from there,
*  it just mushroomed into one of the most craven cowardly acts by any university in modern history.
*  Just a complete and utter repudiation of academic freedom. And it is a decision
*  that Harvard certainly will live to regret. Frankly, it's an embarrassment. We expect
*  students to do what students do. And I encourage students to have their voices heard and to protest.
*  That's what students do. What is vexing are the adults. The dean of the Faculty of Arts and
*  Science, Claudine Gay, absolutely craven and cowardly. The dean of the college, same thing,
*  Rakesh Karana, craven and cowardly. They capitulated to the loudest voice in the room
*  and ran around afraid of 19-year-olds. Oh, 19-year-olds are upset. I need to do something.
*  And it appeared to me that they so desired the approval of students that they were afraid to
*  make the tough decision and the right decision. It really could have been an important teaching
*  moment at Harvard. A very important teaching moment. So they forced you to step down from that
*  faculty dean position at the house. I would push back on the description a little bit.
*  The reference is to the op-ed I did in New York Times, Harvard made a mistake by making me step
*  down or something like that. So I don't write those things. I did not step down and refuse to
*  step down. Harvard declined to renew my contract. I made it clear that I was not going to resign as
*  a matter of principle and force them to do the cowardly act that they in fact did.
*  The worst thing about this, they did the college, Dean Gay and Dean Karana, commission this survey.
*  They've never done this before, surveyed from the students. How do you feel at Winthrop House?
*  And the funny thing about the survey is they never released the results. Why did they never release
*  the results? They never released the results because I would bet my salary that the results
*  came back positive for me. And it didn't fit their narrative because most of the students were fine.
*  Most of the students were fine. It was the loudest voice in the room. So they never released it.
*  I challenged them to this day, release it, release it. But no, they wanted to
*  create this narrative. And when the data didn't support the narrative, then they just got silent.
*  Oh, we're not going to release it. The students demanded it. I demanded it. And they wouldn't
*  release it because I just know in my heart of hearts that it came back in my favor that most
*  students at Winthrop House said they were fine. There was a group of students that weaponized
*  the term unsafe. They said, we felt unsafe. And they bantied this term about. But again,
*  I'm confident that the majority of students at Winthrop House said they felt completely fine and
*  felt safe and so forth. And the super majority, I am confident, either said, I feel great at
*  Winthrop or I don't care one way or the other. And then there was some minority who had a different
*  view. But lessons learned. It was a wonderful opportunity at Winthrop. I met some amazing
*  students over my 10 years as master and then faculty dean. And I'm still in touch with a
*  number of students, some of whom are now my students at the law school. So in the end,
*  I thought it ended up being a great experience. The national media was just wonderful in this.
*  Just wonderful. People wrote such wonderful articles and accounts and wagged their finger
*  appropriately at Harvard. Compare me to John Adams, which I don't think is an app comparison,
*  but it's always great to read something like that. But anyway, that was the Harvard. The
*  Harvard versus Harvey situation. So that seems like a seminal mistake by Harvard.
*  And Harvard is one of the great universities in the world. And so sort of its successes and
*  its mistakes are really important for the world as a beacon of like how we make progress.
*  So what lessons for the bigger academia that's under fire a lot these days? What bigger lessons
*  do you take away? Like how do we make Harvard great? How do we make other universities, Yale,
*  MIT great in the face of such mistakes? Well, I think that we have moved into a model where
*  we have the consumerization of education. That is to say,
*  we have feckless administrators who make policy based on what the students say. Now,
*  this comment is not intended to suggest that students have no voice in governance,
*  but it is to suggest that the faculty are there for a reason. They are among the greatest minds
*  on the planet Earth in their particular fields at schools like Harvard and Stanford.
*  The schools that you mentioned, MIT, quite literally the greatest minds on Earth. They're
*  there for a reason. Things like curriculum and so forth are rightly in the province of faculty. And
*  while you take input and critique and so forth, ultimately, the grownups in the room have to be
*  sufficiently responsible to take charge and to direct the course of a student's education.
*  And my situation is one example where it really could have been an excellent teaching moment
*  about the value of the Sixth Amendment, about what it means to treat people who are in the crosshairs
*  of the criminal justice system. But rather than having that conversation,
*  it's just this consumerization model. Well, there's a lot of noise out here, so we're going
*  to react in this sort of way. Higher education as well, unfortunately, has been commodified in other
*  sorts of ways that has reduced or impeded, hampered these schools' commitments to free and
*  robust and open dialogue. So to the degree that academic freedom doesn't sit squarely at the
*  center of the academic mission, any school is going to be in trouble. And I really hope that
*  we weather this current political moment where 19-year-olds without degrees are running
*  universities and get back to a system where faculty, where adults make decisions about
*  the best interests of the university and the best interests of the student. Even to the degree,
*  though, some of those decisions may be unpopular. And that is going to require a certain courage,
*  and hopefully, we'll be able to get back to the system where we're going to be able to
*  do that. And I'm confident that in time, administrators are going to begin to push
*  back on these current trends. Harvard's been around for a long time. It's been around for
*  a long time for a reason. And one of the reasons is that it understands itself not to be static.
*  So I have every view that Harvard is going to adapt and get itself back on course and be around
*  another 400 years. At least that's my hope. So what this kind of boils down to is just having
*  difficult conversation, difficult debates. When you mentioned sort of 19-year-olds,
*  and it's funny, I've seen this even at MIT, it's not that they shouldn't have a voice.
*  They do seem to, I guess you have to experience it and just observe it. They have a strangely
*  disproportionate power. It's very interesting to basically, I mean, you say, yes, there's great
*  faculty and so on. But it's not even just that the faculty is smart or wise or whatever. It's that
*  they're just silenced. So the terminology that you mentioned is weaponized as sort of safe spaces
*  or that certain conversations make people feel unsafe. What do you think about this kind of idea?
*  Is there some things that are unsafe to talk about in the university setting?
*  Is there lines to be drawn somewhere? And just like you said, on the flip side with a slippery
*  slope, is it too easy for the lines to be drawn everywhere? Yeah, that's a great question. So this
*  idea of unsafe space, at least the vocabulary, derives from some research, academic research
*  about feeling psychologically unsafe. And so the notion here is that there are forms of
*  psychological disquiet that impedes people from experiencing the educational environment
*  to the greatest degree possible. And that's the argument.
*  I, and assuming for a moment that people do have these feelings of
*  disquiet at elite universities like MIT and like Harvard, that's probably the safest space people
*  are going to be in for their lives. Because when they get out into the quote unquote real world,
*  they won't have the sorts of nets that these schools provide, safety nets that these schools
*  provide. So to the extent that research is descriptive of a psychological feeling,
*  I think that the duty of the universities are to challenge people. It seems to me that it's a shame
*  to go to a place like Harvard or place like MIT, Yale, any of these great institutions and come out
*  the same person that you were when you went in. That seems to be a horrible waste of four years
*  and money and resources. Rather, we ought to challenge students, that they grow,
*  challenge some of their most deeply held assumptions. They may continue to hold them,
*  but the point of an education is to rigorously interrogate these fundamental assumptions that
*  have guided you thus far and to do it fairly and civilly. So to the extent that there are
*  lines that should be drawn, there's a long tradition in the university of civil discourse.
*  So you should draw a line somewhere between civil discourse and uncivil discourse. The
*  purpose of a university is to talk difficult conversations, tough issues, talk directly and
*  frankly, but do it civilly. So to yell and cuss at somebody and that sort of thing, well,
*  do that on your own space, but observe the norms of civil discourse at the university.
*  I think that the presumption ought to be that the most difficult topics are appropriate to talk about
*  at a university. That ought to be the presumption. Now, should MIT, for example, give its
*  imprimatur to someone who is espousing the flat earth theory, the earth is flat.
*  Right. So if certain ideas are so contrary to the scientific and cultural thinking of the moment,
*  yeah, there's space there to draw a line and say, yeah, we're not going to give you this platform to
*  tell our students that the earth is flat. But a topic that's controversial, but contestatory,
*  that's what universities are for. If you don't like the idea, present better ideas and articulate
*  them. And I think there needs to be a mechanism outside of the space of ideas of humbling. I've
*  done martial arts for a long time. I got my ass kicked a lot. I think that's really important.
*  In the space of ideas, even just in engineering, just all the math classes, my memories of math,
*  which I love, is kind of pain. It's basically coming face to face with the idea that I'm not
*  special, that I'm much dumber than I thought I was, and that accomplishing anything in this world
*  requires really hard work. That's really humbling. That puts you, because I remember when I was 18
*  and 19, and I thought I was going to be the smartest, the best fighter, the Nobel Prize winning,
*  all those kinds of things. And then you come face to face with reality and it hurts.
*  And it feels like there needs to be efficient mechanisms from the best universities in the world
*  without abusing you. It's a very difficult line to walk without mentally or physically abusing you,
*  be able to humble you. And that's what I felt was missing in these very difficult, very important
*  conversations, is the 19-year-olds, when they spoke up, the mechanism for humbling them with ideas,
*  was missing. It kind of got broken down because, as you say, there does...
*  I sensed fear. Everything was permeated with fear. And fear is paralyzing, fear is destructive,
*  especially in a place that's supposed to be all about freedom of ideas.
*  I don't know if you have anything, any thoughts to say on this whole idea of cancel culture,
*  where people... A lot of people use it as become political, so staying maybe outside of the world,
*  the politics. Do you have thoughts about it? Does it bother you that people are sort of put in this
*  bin and labeled as something and then thereby you can ignore everything they say? I mean,
*  Steven Pinker, there's a lot of Harvard folks that are fighting against these set of ideas,
*  but do you have thoughts? I think that we as a culture are way, way, way too quick to cancel
*  people. And it's become almost reflexive now. Someone says something or makes an
*  offhand comment, even a mistake, there's a move to simply cancel folks. So I think that
*  this quote unquote cancel culture has really gotten out of control at this point. It's forcing
*  people to be robotic in many ways. No offense, you're a robot.
*  I was going to say, now I know I'm venturing into your intellectual domain.
*  For future robots watching this, no offense. And there are many... It's discouraging a lot
*  of good people from getting into public life in any sort of way because who needs the stress of it?
*  In some sense, you're an inspiration that you're able to withstand the pressure of the masses.
*  But it is a sad aspect of human nature that we kind of get into these crowds and we start chanting
*  and it's fun for some reason and then you forget yourself and then you
*  sort of wake up the next day not having anticipated the consequences of all the chanting.
*  And we would get ourselves in trouble in that. I mean, there's some responsibility on social
*  networks and the mechanisms by which they make it more frictionless to do the chanting, to do
*  the canceling, to do the outrage and all that kind of stuff. So I actually on the technology side,
*  have a hope that that's fixable. But yeah, it does seem to be...
*  It's almost like the internet showed to us that we have a lot of broken ways about which we
*  communicate with each other and we're trying to figure that out. Same with the university.
*  This mistake by Harvard showed that we need to reinvent what the university is. And I mean,
*  all of this is... It's almost like we're finding our baby deer legs and trying to strengthen
*  the institutions that have been very successful for a long time. The really interesting thing
*  about Harvey Weinstein and you choosing these exceptionally difficult cases is also thinking
*  about what it means to defend evil people. What it means to defend these, we could say unpopular,
*  and you might push back against the word evil, but bad people in society. First of all,
*  do you think there's such a thing as evil or do you think all people are good and it's just
*  circumstances that create evil? And also, is there somebody too evil for the law to defend?
*  So the first question, that's a deep philosophical question, whether the category of evil does any
*  work for me. It does for me. I do think that... I do subscribe to that category that there is evil
*  in the world as conventionally understood. So there are many who will say, yeah, that just doesn't
*  do any work for me. But the category evil, in fact, does intellectual work for me and I
*  understand it as something that exists. Is it genetic or is it the circumstance?
*  What kind of work does it do for you intellectually? I think that it's highly contingent,
*  that is to say that the conditions in which one grows up and so forth
*  begins to create this category that we may think of as evil. Now, there are studies and whatnot
*  that show that certain brain abnormalities and so forth are more prevalent in, say, serial killer.
*  So there may be a biological predisposition to certain forms of conduct, but I don't have the
*  biological evidence to make a statement that someone is born evil and I'm not a determinist
*  thinker in that way. So you come out the womb evil and you're destined to be that way.
*  To the extent there may be biological determinants, it still requires some
*  nurture as well. But do you still put a responsibility on the individual?
*  Of course. Yeah, we all make choices. And so some responsibility on the individual indeed.
*  We live in a culture, unfortunately, where a lot of people have a constellation of bad choices in
*  front of them. And that makes me very sad that the people grow up with predominantly bad choices
*  in front of them. And that's unfair and that's on all of us. But yes, I do think we make choices.
*  Wow, that's so powerful, the constellation of bad choices.
*  That's such a powerful way to think about equality, which is the set of trajectories
*  before you that you could take if you just rolled a dice. Life is a kind of optimization problem,
*  life is a kind of optimization problem, sorry to take this into math, over a set of trajectories
*  under imperfect information. So you're going to do a lot of stupid shit to put it in technical terms.
*  But the fraction of the trajectories that take you into bad places or into good places is really
*  important. And that's ultimately what we're talking about. And evil might be just a little
*  bit of a predisposition biologically, but the rest is just trajectories that you can take.
*  I've been studying Hitler a lot recently. I've been reading probably way too much. And it's
*  interesting to think about all the possible trajectories that could have avoided this
*  particular individual developing the hate that he did, the following that he did, the actual final
*  that he did. There's a few turns in him psychologically where he went from being
*  a leader that just wants to conquer and to somebody who allowed his anger and emotion to take over,
*  to where he started making mistakes in terms of militarily speaking, but also started doing
*  evil things. And all the possible trajectories that could have avoided that are fascinating,
*  including he wasn't that bad at painting, at drawing.
*  Right, that's true.
*  From the very beginning. And his time at Vienna, there's all these possible things to think about.
*  And of course, there's millions of others like him that never came to power and all those kinds
*  of things. But that goes to the second question on the side of evil. And Hitler is often brought up
*  as an example of somebody who is the epitome of evil. Do you think you would, if you got that same
*  phone call after World War II and Hitler survived during the trial for war crimes, would you take
*  the case defending Adolf Hitler? If you don't want to answer that one, is there a line to draw
*  for evil, for who not to defend? No, I think everyone, I'll do the second one first,
*  everyone has a right to a defense if you're charged criminally in the United States of America. So,
*  no, I do not think that there's someone so evil that they do not deserve a defense. Process matters.
*  Process helps us get to results more accurately than we would otherwise. So, it is important,
*  and it's vitally important, and indeed more important for someone deemed to be evil to receive
*  the same quantum of process and the same substance of process that anyone else would. It's vitally
*  important to the health of our criminal justice system for that to happen. So, yes, everybody,
*  Hitler included, were he charged in the United States for a crime that occurred in the United
*  States? Yes. Whether I would do it, if I were a public defender and assigned the case, yes,
*  I started my career as a public defender. I represent anyone who was assigned to me. I think
*  that is our duty. In private practice, I have choices, and I likely, based on the hypo you
*  gave me, and I would tweak it a bit because it would have to be a US crime. But I get the
*  broader point and don't want to bog down in technicalities. I'd likely pass right now as I
*  see it, unless it was a case where nobody else would represent him. Then I would think that I
*  have some sort of duty and obligation to do it. But yes, everyone absolutely deserves a right to
*  competent counsel. That is a beautiful idea. It's difficult to think about it in the face of
*  public pressure. It's just terrifying to watch the masses during this past year of 2020
*  to watch the power of the masses to make a decision before any of the data is out,
*  if the data is ever out, any of the details, any of the processes. There is an anger to the justice
*  system. There's a lot of people that feel like even though the ideal you describe is a beautiful
*  one, it does not always operate justly. It does not operate to the best of its ideals. It operates
*  unfairly. Can we go to the big picture of the criminal justice system? What do you, given the
*  ideal, works about our criminal justice system and what is broken?
*  06.1% Well, there's a lot broken right now, and I usually focus on that. But in truth, a lot
*  works about our criminal justice system. There's an old joke. It's funny, but it
*  carries a lot of truth to it. The joke is that in the United States, we have the worst criminal
*  justice system in the world, except for every place else. And yes, we certainly have a number
*  of problems and a lot of problems based on race and class and economic station. But we have a
*  process that privileges liberty, and that's a good feature of the criminal justice system.
*  So here's how it works. The idea of the relationship between the individual and the
*  state is such that in the United States, we privilege liberty over and above very many
*  values, so much so that a statement by Increase Mather, not terribly far from where we're sitting
*  right now, has gained traction over all these years. And it's that better 10 guilty go free
*  than one innocent person convicted. That is an expression of the way in which we understand
*  liberty to operate in our collective consciousness. We would rather a bunch of guilty people go free
*  than to impact the liberty interests of any individual person. So that's a guiding
*  principle in our criminal justice system, liberty. So we set a process that makes it difficult
*  to convict people. We have rules of procedure that are cumbersome and that slow down the process and
*  that exclude otherwise reliable evidence. And this is all because we place a value on liberty. And
*  I think these are good things, and it says a lot about our criminal justice system.
*  Some of the bad features have to do with the way in which this country sees color as a proxy for
*  criminality and treats people of color in radically different ways in the criminal justice system,
*  from arrests to charging decisions to sentencing. People of color are disproportionately
*  impacted on all sorts of registers. One example, and it's a popular one, that although there appears
*  to be no distinguishable difference between drug use by whites and blacks in the country,
*  blacks though only 12% of the population represent 40% of the drug charges in the country.
*  There's some disequities along race and class in the criminal justice system that we really
*  have to fix. And they've grown to more than bugs in the system and have become features,
*  unfortunately, of our system. Oh, to make it more efficient, to make judgments.
*  So the racism makes it more efficient. It efficiently moves people from society to the streets.
*  And a lot of innocent people get caught up in that.
*  Well, let me ask in terms of the innocence. So you've gotten a lot of people who are innocent,
*  I guess, revealed their innocence, demonstrated their innocence. What's that process like?
*  What's it like emotionally, psychologically? What's it like legally to fight the system?
*  In the process of revealing sort of the innocence of a human being?
*  Yeah, emotionally and psychologically, it can be taxing. I follow a model of what's called
*  empathic representation. And that is I get to know my clients and their family. I get to know
*  their strivings, their aspirations, their fears, their sorrows. So that certainly
*  sometimes can do psychic injury on one. If you get really invested and really sad or happy,
*  it does become emotionally taxing. But the idea of someone sitting in jail for 20 years,
*  completely innocent of a crime, can you imagine sitting there every day for 20 years knowing
*  that you factually did not do the thing that you were convicted of by a jury of your peers?
*  It's got to be the most incredible thing in the world. But the people who do it and the people
*  who make it and come out on the other side as productive citizens are folks who say they've
*  come to an inner peace in their own minds. And they say these bars aren't going to define me,
*  that my humanity is there and it's immutable. And they are not bitter, which is amazing. I
*  would tend to think that I'm not that good of a person. I would be bitter for every day of 20
*  years if I were in jail for something. But people tell me that they can't survive, like one cannot
*  survive like that. And you have to come to terms with it. And the people whom I've exonerated,
*  I mean, they come out, most of them come out and they just really just take on life with a vim and
*  vigor without bitterness. And it's a beautiful thing to see. Do you think it's possible to
*  eradicate racism from the judicial system? I do. I think that race insinuates itself in all aspects
*  of our lives and the judicial system is not immune from that. So to the extent we begin to eradicate
*  dangerous and deleterious race thinking from society generally, then it will be eradicated
*  from the criminal justice system. I think we've got a lot of work to do and I think it'll be
*  a while, but I think it's doable. I mean, you know, the country, so historians will look back
*  300 years from now and take note of the incredible journey of diasporic Africans in the US. An
*  incredible journey from slavery to the heights of politics and business and judiciary and the
*  academy and so forth, in not a lot of time, and actually not a lot of time. And if we can have
*  that sort of movement historically, let's think about what the next 175 years will look like.
*  I'm not saying it's going to be short, but I'm saying that if we keep at it, keep getting to
*  know each other a little better, keep enforcing laws that prohibit the sort of race-based
*  discrimination that people have experienced and provide as a society opportunities for people to
*  thrive in this world, then I think we can see a better world and if we see a better world,
*  we'll see a better judicial system. So I think it's kind of fascinating if you look throughout
*  history and race is just part of that, is we create the other and treat the other with disdain
*  through the legal system, but just through human nature. I tend to believe, we mentioned offline
*  that I work with robots. It sounds absurd to say, especially to you, especially because we're
*  talking about racism and it's so prevalent today, I do believe that there will be almost like a
*  civil rights movement for robots because I think there's a huge value to society of having
*  artificial intelligence systems that interact with humans and are human-like. And the more they
*  become human-like, they will start to ask very fundamentally human questions about freedom,
*  about suffering, about justice, and they will have to come face to face, like look in the mirror,
*  in asking the question, just because we're biologically based, just because we're
*  sort of, well, just because we're human, does that mean we're the only ones that deserve the
*  rights? Again, giving, forming another other group, which is robots, and I'm sure there could be along
*  that path different versions of other that we form. So racism, race is certainly a big other
*  that we've made, as you said, a lot of progress on throughout the history of this country,
*  but it does feel like we always create, as we make progress, create new other groups.
*  And of course, the other group that perhaps is outside the legal system that people talk about
*  is the essential, now, I eat a lot of meat, but the torture of animals, you know, the people talk
*  about when we look back from, you know, a couple centuries from now, look back at the kind of things
*  we're doing to animals, we might regret that. We might see that in a very different light.
*  And it's kind of interesting to see the future trajectory of what we wake up to about the
*  injustice in our ways. But the robot one is the one I'm especially focused on,
*  but at this moment in time, it seems ridiculous. But I'm sure most civil rights movements throughout
*  history seem ridiculous at first. Well, it's interesting, sort of outside of my intellectual
*  bailiwick robots, as I understand the development of artificial intelligence, though the aspect that
*  still is missing is this notion of consciousness. And that it's consciousness, that is the thing
*  that will move if it were to exist. And I'm not saying that it can or will, but if it were to
*  exist, would move robots from machines to something different, something that experienced the world in
*  a way analogous to how we experience it. And also as I understand the science, there's a,
*  unlike what you see on television, that we're not there yet in terms of this notion of the machines
*  having a consciousness. Or a great general intelligence, all those kinds of things.
*  A huge amount of progress has been made and it's fascinating to watch. So I'm on both minds. As a
*  person who's building them, I'm realizing how sort of quote unquote dumb they are, but also looking
*  at human history and how poor we are predicting the progress of innovation and technology.
*  It's obvious that we have to be humble by our ability to predict, coupled with the fact that
*  we keep, to use terminology carefully here, we keep discriminating against the intelligence of
*  artificial systems. The smarter they get, the more ways we find to dismiss their intelligence.
*  So this has just been going on throughout. It's almost as if we're threatened in the most
*  primitive human way, animalistic way. We're threatened by the power of other creatures
*  and we want to lessen, dismiss them. So consciousness is a really important one,
*  but the one I think about a lot in terms of consciousness, the very engineering question
*  is whether the display of consciousness is the same as the possession of consciousness. So if a
*  robot tells you they are conscious, if a robot looks like they're suffering when you torture them,
*  if a robot is afraid of death and says they're afraid of death and are legitimately afraid,
*  in terms of just everything we as humans use to determine the ability of somebody to be their own
*  entity, the one that loves, one that fears, one that hopes, one that can suffer, if the robot,
*  like in the dumbest of ways, is able to display that, it starts changing things very quickly.
*  I'm not sure what it is, but it does seem that there's a huge component to consciousness
*  that is a social creation. Like we together create our consciousness. Like we
*  believe our common humanity together. Alone, we wouldn't be aware of our humanity.
*  And the law, as it protects our freedoms, seems to be a construct of the social construct.
*  And when you add other creatures into it, it's not obvious to me that like you have to build,
*  there'll be a moment when you say this thing is now conscious. I think there's going to be a lot
*  of fake it until you make it. And there'll be a very gray area between fake and make that is going
*  to force us to contend with what it means to be an entity that deserves rights, where all men are
*  created equal. The men part might have to expand in ways that we are not yet anticipating. It's
*  very interesting. I mean, my favorite, the fundamental thing I love about artificial
*  intelligence is it gets smarter and smarter. It challenges us to think of what is right,
*  the questions of justice, questions of freedom. It basically challenges us to understand our own
*  mind, to understand what like almost from an engineering first principles perspective,
*  to understand what it is that makes us human, that is at the core of all the rights that we
*  talk about in all the documents we write. So even if we don't give rights to artificial
*  intelligence systems, we may be able to construct more fair legal systems to protect us humans.
*  05.00 Well, I mean, interesting ontological question between the performance of consciousness and
*  and actual consciousness to the extent that it's that actual consciousness is anything beyond
*  some contingent reality. But you've posed a number of interesting philosophical questions. And then
*  there's also it strikes me that that philosophers of religion would pose another set of questions
*  as well when you deal with issues of structure versus soul, body versus soul. And it would be a
*  will be a complicated mix. And I suspect I'll be dust by the time those questions get worked out.
*  06.00 And so yeah, the soul, the soul is a fun one. There's no soul. I'm not sure maybe you can
*  correct me, but there's very few discussion of soul in our legal system, right?
*  06.00 Right, correct. So, but there is a discussion about what constitutes a human
*  being. And I mean, you gestured at the notion of the potential of the law, widening the domain of
*  so of human beings. So in that sense, right, you know, people are very angry because they can't
*  get sort of pain and suffering damages if someone negligently kills a pet, because a pet is not a
*  human being. And people say, Well, I love my pet, but the law sees a pet as chattel as property like
*  this water bottle. So the current legal definitions trade on a definition of humanity
*  that may not be worked out in any sophisticated way, but certainly there's a broad and shared
*  understanding of what it means. So probably doesn't explicitly contain a definition of
*  something like soul. But it's, it's more robust than, you know, a carbon based organism,
*  there's something a little more distinct about what the law thinks a human being is.
*  07.00 So if we can dive into, we've already been doing it, but if we can dive into more difficult
*  territory. So 2020 had the tragic case of George Floyd. When you reflect on the protests on the
*  racial tensions over the death of George Floyd, how do you make sense of it all? What do you take
*  away from these events? 08.00
*  The George Floyd moment occurred at an historical moment where people were in quarantine for COVID.
*  And people have these cell phones to a degree greater than we've ever had them before. And this
*  was a sort of the straw that broke the camel's back after a number of these sorts of cell phone
*  videos surface. People were fed up. There was unimpeachable evidence of a form of mistreatment,
*  whether it constitutes murder or manslaughter, the trial is going on now. And jurors will figure
*  that out. But there was widespread appreciation that a fellow human being was mistreated,
*  that we were just talking about humanity, that there was not a sufficient recognition
*  of this person's humanity. 09.00
*  The common humanity of this person. 09.00
*  Common humanity of this person, well said. And people were fed up. So we were already in a COVID
*  space where we were exercising care for one another. And there was just an explosion,
*  the likes of which this country hasn't seen since the civil rights protests of the 1950s and 1960s.
*  And people simply said, enough, enough, enough, enough. This has to stop. We cannot treat
*  fellow citizens in this way. And we can't do it with impunity. And the young people say,
*  we're just, we're just, we're not going to stand for it anymore. And they took to the streets.
*  010.00 But with the millions of people protesting,
*  there is nevertheless taking us back to the most difficult of trials. You have the trial,
*  like you mentioned, that's going on now, Derek showing of one of the police officers involved.
*  011.00 What are your thoughts? What are your predictions on this
*  trial where the law, the process of the law is trying to proceed in the face of so much racial
*  tension? 012.00
*  Yeah, it's, it's going to be an interesting trial. I've been keeping an eye on it. They're in jury
*  selection now today as we're talking. So a lot's going to depend on what sort of jury gets selected.
*  013.00 Yeah, how the, sorry to take, sorry to interrupt,
*  but, uh, so one of the interesting qualities of this trial, maybe you can correct me if I'm wrong,
*  but, uh, the cameras are allowed in the courtroom, at least during the jury selection.
*  014.00 So, uh, so you get to watch some of this stuff.
*  And, uh, the other part is the jury selection. Again, I'm very inexperienced, but it seems like
*  selecting and what is it? Unbiased jury is really difficult for this trial. It's, it almost like,
*  015.00 I don't know. Uh, me as a listener, like listen, you know, listening to people, uh, that are
*  trying to talk their way into the jury kind of thing, trying to decide, is this person really
*  unbiased or are they just trying to hold on to their like deeply held emotions and trying to
*  get onto the jury? I mean, it's incredibly difficult process. I don't know if you can comment on
*  a case so difficult, like the ones you've mentioned before, how do you select a jury
*  that represents the people and doesn't and carries the sort of the ideal of the law?
*  015.00 Yeah. So a couple of things. So first, yes, it is televised and it will be televised
*  as they say gavel to gavel. So the entire trial, the whole thing is going to be televised. So,
*  people are getting a view of how laborious jury selection can be. I think as of yesterday,
*  they had picked six jurors and it's, it's taken a week and they have to get to 14.
*  So they've got, you know, probably another week or more to do. I've been in jury trials where
*  took a month to choose a jury. So that's the most important part. You have to,
*  you have to choose the right sort of jury. So unbiased in the criminal justice system has a
*  particular meaning. It means that, that, let me tell you what it doesn't mean. It doesn't mean
*  that a person is not aware of the case. It also does not mean that a person has informed an opinion
*  about the case. Those are two popular misconceptions. What it does mean is that
*  notwithstanding whether an individual has formed an opinion, notwithstanding whether an individual
*  knows about the case, that individual can set aside any prior opinions, can set aside any notions
*  that they've developed about the case and listen to the evidence presented at trial in conjunction
*  with the judge's instructions on how to understand and view that evidence. So if a person can do
*  that, then they're considered unbiased. So, you know, as a long time defense attorney, I,
*  you know, I would be hesitant in a big case like this to pick a juror who's never heard of a case
*  or anything going around. Cause I'm thinking, well, who is this person and what, what, what in
*  the world do they do? So, or are they lying to me? I mean, how can you not have heard about
*  this case? So they may bring other problems. So I, you know, I don't mind so much people who've
*  heard about the case or folks who've formed initial opinions. But you, you, what you don't want is
*  people who have tethered themselves to that opinion in a way that, you know, they can't be
*  convinced otherwise. So, but you also have people who, as you suggested, who just lie
*  because they want to get on the jury or lie because they want to get off the jury. So
*  sometimes people come and say, you know, the most ridiculous, outrageous, offensive things
*  to know because they know that they'll get excused for cause. And others who, you can tell,
*  uh, really badly want to get on the jury. So they're, you know, they're just, they pretend to be the,
*  the, the most neutral, unbiased person in the world. Uh, what the law calls the reasonable person. We
*  have in law, the reasonable person standard. And I would tell my class the, uh, you know, the,
*  the reasonable person in, in real life is the person that you would be least likely to want to
*  have a drink with. They're the most boring, uh, neutral, not interesting sort of person in the
*  world. And so a lot of jurors, uh, engage in the performative act of presenting themselves as the
*  most sort of even killed, rational, reasonable person. Cause they really want to get on the
*  jury. Yeah. There's an interesting, uh, question. I apologize that I haven't watched a lot cause it
*  is very long. I watched it. Uh, you know, there's, there's certain questions you've asked in the
*  jury. You asked in the jury selection. I remember, uh, I think one jumped out at me, which is, uh,
*  you know, something like, uh, does the fact that this person is a police officer make you feel any
*  kind of way about them? So trying to get at that, you know, I don't know what that is. I guess that's
*  bias. And it's such a difficult question to ask. Like I asked myself with that question, like how
*  much, you know, we all kind of want to pretend that we're not racist. We don't judge. We don't have,
*  we're like these were the reasonable human, but you know, legitimately asking yourself, like, are
*  you, what are the, what are the prejudgments you have in your mind? Uh, is that even impossible for
*  a human being? Like when you look at yourself in the mirror and think about it, is it possible
*  to actually answer that? Yeah, I look, uh, uh, I do not believe that people can be completely
*  unbiased. We all have baggage and bias and bring it wherever we go, including to court.
*  What you want is to try to find a person who can at least recognize when a bias is working.
*  And actively try to do the right thing. That's the best we can, we can ask. So if a juror says,
*  yeah, you know, look, I grew up in a place where I tend to believe what police officers say. That's
*  just how I grew up. But if the judge is telling me that I have to listen to every witness equally,
*  then I'll, you know, I'll do my best and I won't weigh that testimony any higher than I would
*  any other testimony. If you have someone answer a question like that, that sounds more sincere to
*  me. It sounds more honest. And if you want a person, you want a person to try to do that.
*  And then in closing arguments, right, as the lawyer, right, I'd say something like, ladies and
*  gentlemen, you know, we chose you to be on this jury because you swore that you would do your level
*  best to be fair. That's why we chose you. And I'm confident that you're going to do that here.
*  So when you heard that police officer's testimony, the judge told you, you can't give more credit
*  to that testimony just because it's a police officer. And I trust that you're going to do that
*  and that you're going to look at witness number three, you know, John Smith, you're going to look
*  at John Smith. John Smith has a different recollection and you're duty bound, duty bound
*  to look at that testimony and this person's credibility, you know, the same degree as that
*  other witness, right? And now what you have is just a he said, she said matter, and this is a criminal
*  case that has to be reasonable doubt. Right. So, you know, so you and really someone who's trying
*  to do the right thing, it's helpful, but no, you're not going to just find
*  14 people with no biases. That's, that's absurd.
*  Well, that's, that's fascinating that, especially the way you're inspiring the way you're speaking
*  now is, I mean, I guess you're calling on the jury. That's kind of the whole system is you're calling
*  on the jury, each individual in the jury to step up and really think, you know, to step up and be
*  their most thoughtful selves, actually most introspective. Like you're trying to basically
*  ask people to be their best selves. And that's, and they, I guess a lot of people step up to that.
*  That's why the system works. I'm very, I'm very pro jury juries. They,
*  they get it right. It works a lot of the time, most of the time, and they really work hard to do it.
*  So what do you think happens? I mean, maybe, uh,
*  I'm not so much on the legal side of things, but on the social side,
*  it's like with the OJ Simpson trial, do you think it's possible that Derek
*  Showman does not get convicted of the, what is it? Second degree murder?
*  How do you think about that? How do you think about the potential social impact of that?
*  The, the riots, the protests, the either, either direction, any words that are said,
*  the tension here could be explosive, especially with the cameras.
*  Yeah. Yeah. So yes, there's certainly a possibility that he, he'll be acquitted, um, for homicide
*  charges, um, for the jury to convict, uh, they have to make a determination as to officer Chauvin's,
*  former officer Chauvin's state of mind, uh, whether he intended to cause some harm,
*  whether he was grossly reckless in causing harm so much so that he disregarded a known risk of
*  death or serious bodily injury. And as you may have, um, read in the papers yesterday, the judge
*  allowed a third degree murder charge in Kentucky, which, um, is, uh, it's the mindset, the state of
*  mind there is not an intention, uh, but it's a depraved indifference. Uh, and what that means is
*  that the jury doesn't have to find that he intended to do anything, uh, to get him to
*  anything. Uh, rather they could find that he was just indifferent to a risk, uh, as dark.
*  Yeah. Yeah. I'm not sure what's worse. Uh, well, that's, that's a good point, but, uh, but, but it's,
*  it's another basis for the jury, uh, to convict, but, but look, uh, you never know what, what
*  happens when you go to a jury trial. So there could be a, um, an acquittal. And if there is, I,
*  imagine there would be massive, uh, uh, protests, uh, if he's convicted, uh, I, I don't think that
*  would happen, uh, cause I just don't see at least nothing I've seen or read suggest that there's a,
*  a big pro, uh, Chauvin camp out there ready to protest.
*  Well, there could be a set. Is there also, uh, potential tensions that could arise from the
*  sentencing? I don't know how that exactly works. Sort of not enough years kind of thing.
*  Yeah, it could be.
*  All that, all that kind of stuff.
*  I mean, it's a lot could happen. So it depends on what he's convicted of. Uh, you know,
*  one count I think is like up to 10 years, another counts up to 40 years. Uh, so it depends what he's
*  convicted of. And yes, it depends on how much of the, how much time the judge gives him if he is
*  convicted. Uh, there's a lot of space for people to be very angry. And so we will,
*  we will see what happens.
*  I just feel like with the judge and the lawyers, there's an opportunity to have
*  really important, long lasting speeches. I don't know if they think of it that way,
*  especially with the cameras, it feels like they have the capacity to heal or to divide. Um,
*  do you ever think about that as a, as a lawyer, as a legal mind, that your words aren't just about
*  the case, but about the reverberate through history potentially?
*  That is, that is certainly a possible consequence of things you say. I don't think that most lawyers
*  think about that, uh, in the context of the case, uh, your role is much more narrow. Uh, you're the
*  partisan advocate as a defense lawyer, partisan advocate for, uh, that client as a prosecutor,
*  you're a minister of justice, um, attempting to prosecute that particular case. But the reality
*  is you are absolutely correct that sometimes the things you say, uh, will have a shelf life.
*  And you mentioned OJ Simpson before, you know, if the glove doesn't fit, uh, you must have quit.
*  It's going to be, you know, just in our lexicon for probably a long time now. So, so it happens,
*  but that's not, uh, and it shouldn't be a foremost on your mind.
*  Right. What do you make, uh, what do you make of OJ Simpson's trial? Do you have thoughts about it?
*  He is, uh, he's out and about on social media now. He's a public figure. Is there a lessons to be
*  drawn from that whole saga? Well, you know, that was an interesting case. I was a young public
*  defender. I want to say in my first year, uh, as a public defender, when that verdict came out.
*  So that case was important in so many ways. One, um, it was the first DNA case, um, major DNA case,
*  and there were significant lessons learned from that. One, um, mistake that the prosecution made
*  was, uh, that they didn't present the science in a way that a lay jury could understand it. Um,
*  and, uh, what Johnny Cochran did was he understood the science and was able to, uh,
*  uh, translate that into a way, into a vocabulary that he bet that that jury, uh, understood. Uh,
*  so, so Cochran was dismissive of a lot of DNA. They say, you know, he said something like,
*  oh, you know, they say they found, you know, uh, such and such amount of DNA. That's just like me,
*  wiping my finger against my nose and, and, and, and just that little bit of DNA. And, uh, that
*  was effective because the prosecution hadn't done a good job of establishing that. Yes, it's
*  microscopic. You don't need that much. Yes. Wiping your hand on your nose and touching something.
*  You can transfer a lot of DNA and that gives you good information. But, you know, it was the first
*  time that the public generally, and that jury, maybe since high school science, it heard, you
*  know, you know, nucleotide. I mean, it was just all these terms getting thrown at them and, and,
*  but it was not weaved into a narrative. So, uh, Cochran taught us, um, that no matter
*  what type of case it is, no matter what science is involved, it's still about storytelling.
*  It's still about a narrative. And he was, uh, and he was great, uh, at that, at that, uh, at that
*  narrative and was consistent, uh, with his narrative all the way out. Uh, another, uh, lesson
*  that, uh, was relearned, uh, it's that, you know, you never ask a question to which you don't know
*  the answer. That's like, uh, trial, have to see one on one. And so when they gave, uh,
*  OJ Simpson the glove and it wouldn't fit, you know, you don't, you don't do things where you
*  just don't know how it's going to turn out. It was way, way too risky. And then, and, and I think
*  that's what acquitted him because that glove, the glove just wouldn't fit. And he got to do this and
*  ham in front of the camera and all of that. And, uh, and it was big. Do you think about,
*  do you think about our representation as a storytelling, like you yourself in your role?
*  Absolutely. We tell stories. It is fundamental. We, uh, since time immemorial, we have told
*  stories to help us make sense of the world around us. So, um, as a scientist, you tell a different
*  type of story. Uh, but we, as a public have told stories, um, uh, from time immemorial to, to,
*  to help us make sense of the physical and the natural, uh, world. And, uh, we are still a, a,
*  a species that is moved by storytelling. So that, that's first and last in trial work. You have to
*  tell a good story. Um, and you know, the basic introductory books about trial work, uh, teach
*  young students, young students and young lawyers to, to start an opening with this case is about.
*  This case is about, and then you fill in the blank and, you know, that's your narrative. That's the
*  narrative you're going to, you're going to tell. And of course you can do the ultra dramatic,
*  the glove doesn't fit kind of, uh, the climax and all those kinds of things.
*  Yes. But that's the best of narratives. The best of stories. Yes.
*  Speaking of other really powerful stories that you were involved with is the Aaron Hernandez trial
*  and the whole story, the whole legal case. Can you maybe overview the big picture, uh,
*  story and legal case of Aaron Hernandez? Yeah. So Aaron, whom I miss a lot, um,
*  so he was charged with a double murder in, in, in the case that I tried. And this was a unique case
*  in one of those impossible cases, uh, in part because Aaron had already been, uh, convicted
*  of a murder. And so we had a client who was on trial for a double murder after having already
*  been convicted of a separate murder. And we had a jury pool, uh, just about all of whom, uh, knew
*  that he had been convicted of, of a murder because he was a very popular football player in Boston,
*  which is a big football town with the, with the Patriots. Uh, so, you know, so everyone knew that
*  he was convicted murderer and here we are, uh, defending for, uh, in a double murder case. Um,
*  so that was the, that was the context. It was not a case in the sense that the, this murder had gone,
*  gone unsolved for a couple of years. And then a nightclub bouncer, uh, said something to a cop
*  who was working at a club, uh, that, uh, Aaron Hernandez was somehow involved in that, in that
*  murder that happened in the theater district. That's the district where all the clubs are in
*  Boston and where the, the homicide occurred. And once the police heard Aaron Hernandez's name, then
*  it was, you know, they went, uh, all out in order to, to, to, to do this. They found
*  a guy named Alexander Bradley, uh, who, uh, was a, a very significant, uh,
*  uh, uh, a drug dealer in the sort of, uh, Connecticut area, uh, very, very significant,
*  very powerful. Um, and, uh, he essentially in exchange for a deal, uh, pointed to Aaron,
*  said, yeah, I was with Aaron and, um, and Aaron, uh, was the, uh, was the murderer. Uh,
*  so that's how the case came, came to court. Okay. So that, that sets the context. What was your
*  involvement in this case, like legally, intellectually, psychologically, uh,
*  when this particular, uh, second charge of murder? So a friend, uh, called me a Jose Baez, uh, who is
*  a defense attorney and he, uh, comes to, uh, a class that I teach every year at Harvard,
*  the trial advocacy workshop, uh, as one of my, um, uh, teaching faculty members. Uh, it's a class
*  where we teach students how to try cases. Uh, so, uh, Jose called me and said, hey, uh, I got a call
*  from Massachusetts, uh, Aaron Hernandez. Uh, you want to go and, and talk to him, uh, with me.
*  So I said, sure. So we went up to the, to the prison and, um, uh, and met, uh, Aaron and, uh,
*  spoke with him for two or three hours that first time. And before we left, he said he, he wanted to,
*  uh, retain us. Uh, he wanted to work with us. And that started the representation.
*  What was he like? Uh, what would, in that time, what was he worn down by the whole process? Was
*  there still a light in that? He was not, he, he had, I mean, more than just a light, he was luminous
*  almost. Uh, he had a radiant million dollar smile. Uh, whenever you walked in, uh, my first
*  impression I distinctly remember was, wow, this is what a professional athlete looks like. I mean,
*  he walked in and he's just, just bigger and more fit than, you know, than anyone, you know,
*  anywhere. And it's like, wow, this, and you know, when you saw him on television, he looked kind of
*  little. And I was like, so I was, I remember thinking, well, what, what did those other guys
*  look like in person? Um, and, um, and he's extraordinarily polite, uh, uh, young, uh, uh,
*  is that I was surprised by how young, uh, he was both in mind and, uh,
*  embody chronologically. I was, you know, thinking he was in his, you know, in his early twenties,
*  I believe, uh, but there seemed to be like an innocence stone, uh, in terms of just the way
*  he saw the world. Uh, I think that's right. They picked that up from the, from the documentary,
*  just taking that in. I think that's right. Yeah. Yeah. Uh, so there is a Netflix documentary
*  titled killer inside the mind of Aaron Hernandez. What are your thoughts on this documentary? I
*  don't know if you got any chance to see, I did not, I have not seen it. I did not participate in it.
*  I know I was in it because of, uh, there was news footage, uh, that, but I did not participate in
*  it. I had not talked to Aaron about, uh, about, uh, press or anything, uh, before he, he died.
*  Uh, my strong view is that the attorney client privilege survives death. And so I was not in
*  client to talk about anything that Aaron and I talked about. So I just didn't, uh, participate
*  in and, and, and never watched it. Not even watch, huh? So does that, does that apply to
*  most of your work? Do you try to stay away from the way the press perceives stuff?
*  Uh, during, uh, yes, I try to stay away from it. I will view it afterwards. I just hadn't gotten
*  around to watching, uh, Aaron cause it's kind of, it's kind of sad. Uh, so I just haven't watched
*  it, but I definitely stay away from the press during trial. Uh, and you know, there are some
*  lawyers who watch it religiously to see what's going on, but you know, I'm, I'm confident in my
*  years of training and so forth that, and that I can, uh, actively sense what's going on in the
*  courtroom and, and that I really don't need advice from Joe four seven six at Gmail. Uh,
*  you know, some random guy on the internet telling me how to try cases. So it's just, to me, it's
*  just confusing and I just keep it out of my mind. And even if you think you can ignore it, just
*  reading it will have a little bit of an effect on your mind. I think that's, I think that's right.
*  Over time, I might accumulate. Uh, so the documentary, but in general, uh, it mentioned
*  or kind of, uh, emphasized and talked about Aaron's sexuality or sort of, they were discussing
*  basically the idea that he was a homosexual and some of the trauma, some of the
*  suffering that he endured in his life had to do with the sort of fear given the society of,
*  uh, of what his father would think of what others around him sort of, especially in,
*  in a sport culture and football and so on. So I don't know in your interaction with him was,
*  uh, do you think that maybe even leaning up to a suicide, do you think his struggle with
*  coming to terms with the sexuality had a role to play in much of his difficulties?
*  Well, I'm not going to talk about my interactions with him and anything I derived from, from that.
*  Um, but you know, what I will say is that, um, a story broke on the, on the radio, uh,
*  uh, at some point, uh, during the, the, the trial that Aaron had been in the same sex
*  relationship with someone and some sport, local sportscasters, local Boston
*  sportscasters, or we really, uh, mushroomed, uh, the, the, the story. So, um, uh, he and everyone,
*  uh, was aware of it. Um, you'll, you also may know from the court record that the, uh,
*  prosecutors floated a, uh, specious theory, um, for a minute, but then backed off of it that,
*  you know, that Aaron was, um, that there was some sort of, uh, I guess, gay rage at work with him
*  and that might be a cause, a motive, uh, for the killing. And, uh, luckily they, they really
*  backed off of that. That was quite an offensive, uh, claim and, and, and, and theory. So, um, but,
*  um, to answer your question more directly, I mean, I have no idea why he, he, he killed himself. It
*  was a, a surprise and a shock. Um, I was scheduled to go see him like a couple of days after it
*  happened. I mean, he was anxious, uh, for, um, Jose and I to come in and do the appeal from the
*  murder, which he was convicted for. He wanted us to take over that appeal. Um, he was talking
*  about going back to football. I mean, he said, well, you talk about this earlier, you talked
*  about the sort of innocent aspect of him. He said, you know, well, Ron, maybe not, maybe not the
*  Patriots, but you know, I want to get back in the league. And I was like, you know, Aaron, that's,
*  that's going to be tough, man. Uh, but, uh, but he really, you know, he really believed it. And, um,
*  and then, you know, for a few days later, that to happen, it was just, it was a real shock to me.
*  Like when you look back at that, at his story, uh, does it make you sad?
*  Very, very. Uh, I thought, uh, uh, so, so one, I believe he, he, he absolutely did not, uh, commit
*  the, the, the crimes that we could acquitted him on. Uh, I think that was the right answer, uh, for,
*  for, for that. Um, uh, I don't know enough about Bradley, the first case, I'm sorry, to make, uh,
*  make an opinion on, but, but, but in our case, uh, you know, uh, it was just, he had the
*  misfortune of having a famous name and the police department just really, just, just, just really
*  got, got on him there. So, um, uh, it'd be, yes, it's, it's, it's, I miss him a lot. It was very,
*  very sad, surprising. Yeah. And, and I mean, just on the human side, of course, we don't know the
*  full story, but just everything that led up to suicide, everything led up to, uh, an incredible
*  professional football player, you know, that whole story. If a remarkably talented athlete,
*  remarkably talented athlete, and it's, it has to do with all the, all the possible trajectories,
*  right? That we can take through life as we were talking about before. And some of them lead to,
*  uh, to suicide, sadly enough. And it's, it's always tragic when you have some, you know, somebody with,
*  uh, with great potential result in, in the things that happen. Right. People love it. When I ask
*  about books, I don't know if, uh, uh, whether technical, like legal or fiction, nonfiction books
*  throughout your life have had an impact on you. If there's something you could recommend
*  or something you could speak to about something that inspired ideas, insights about this world,
*  complicated world of ours. Oh, wow. Uh, yeah. So, uh, I'll give you a couple. Uh, so one is, uh,
*  contingency irony and solidarity by Richard Wardy. He's a, he's passed away now, but was a,
*  uh, philosopher, uh, at some of our major institutions, Princeton, uh, Harvard, uh,
*  Stanford. Um, uh, contingency irony and solidarity, at least that's a book that really helped me
*  work through, um, a series of thoughts. So it, it stands for the proposition that, uh, that our most
*  deeply held beliefs, uh, are contingent, that there, there's nothing, uh, beyond history or
*  prior to socialization that's definatory of the, of the, of the human being that's Wardy. Um,
*  and he says that, uh, our most deeply held beliefs are received wisdom and highly contingent along
*  a, uh, a number of registers. And he does that, uh, but then goes on to say that, uh, he nonetheless,
*  uh, can hold strongly held beliefs, recognizing their contingency, but still believes them to be
*  true and accurate. And it helps you to work through, um, what could be an intellectual tension,
*  uh, of the world. So, so you don't delve into, one doesn't delve into relativism, uh,
*  everything is okay, but he gives you a vocabulary to think about, uh, uh, uh, how to negotiate these,
*  these, these realities. Uh, do you share this tension? I mean, there, there is a real tension
*  that it seems like even like the law, the legal system is all just the construct of our human
*  ideas. And yet it seems to be, uh, almost feels fundamental to what a, uh, what a
*  justice ideas. Yeah, I definitely share, share the tension and, and, and love the, uh, uh, his,
*  his vocabulary in the way he's helped me resolve the, the, the tension. So, right. I mean,
*  yeah. So like, you know, uh, infanticide, for example, perhaps it's, uh, socially contingent,
*  perhaps it's received wisdom, perhaps it's anthropological, uh, you know, we need to
*  propagate the species and I still think it's wrong. And, uh, and, and, and, and Rorty, uh,
*  has helped me develop a category to say, to, to, to say that, no, I can't provide any,
*  in Rorty's words, non-circular theoretical backup for this proposition. At some point,
*  it's going to run me in this, in a circularity problem, but that's okay. I'm, I, I, I, I hold
*  this nonetheless and full recognition of its contingency, but what it does is, is, is, is,
*  makes you humble. And, and when you're humble, that's good because, you know, this notion that
*  ideas are always already in progress, never fully formed, uh, I think is, is, is the sort of
*  intellectual I strive to be. And if I have a, a, a sufficient degree of humility that I don't have
*  the final answer, capital A, then that's going to help me to get to better answers, lowercase A.
*  And, and, and Rorty does, and, and he talks about, uh, uh, in, in the solidarity part of the book,
*  he has this concept of imaginative, uh, uh, the imaginative ability to see other different people
*  as we instead of they. And I just think it's a beautiful concept, but he talks about this
*  imaginative ability and it's this active process. So, I mean, so that's a book that's done
*  a lot of work, uh, uh, for me, uh, over the, the, the years. Um, uh, Souls of Black Folk by W.B.
*  Du Bois, uh, was absolutely pivotal, pivotal in my intellectual development. Uh, uh, one of the, uh,
*  premier, uh, set of essays in the, uh, Western literary tradition. And it's a, a deep and profound
*  sociological, uh, philosophical, uh, and historical analysis of the, uh, predicament of Blacks in
*  America from, um, one of our country's greatest polymaths. Uh, it, uh, it's just a, it's, it's a
*  beautiful text and, uh, and I go to it, uh, yearly. Um.
*  So for somebody like me, so growing up in the Soviet Union, the struggle, the civil rights
*  movement, the struggle of race and all those kinds of things, uh, that, that is, you know,
*  this universal, but it's also very much a journey of the United States. It was kind of a foreign
*  thing that I stepped into. Um, is that something you would recommend somebody like me to read?
*  Or is there other, uh, things about race that are good to connect? Because my, my,
*  my flavor of suffering and just, I'm a Jew as well. My flavor has to do with World War II
*  and the studies of that, you know, all the injustices there. So I'm now stepping into
*  a new set of injustices and trying to learn the, uh, the landscape.
*  I would, I would say, uh, uh, anyone is, is a better person for having read, uh, Du Bois.
*  It's just, uh, he's just a remarkable writer, uh, and thinker. And it, uh, uh, I mean, and to the
*  extent you're interested in learning another history, he does it in a way that is, uh, quite
*  sophisticated. So it's, uh, uh, so, um, uh, I, it's interesting. I was going to give you, uh, three
*  books. Uh, I, I noted the accent when I met you, but I didn't know exactly where you're from.
*  But the other book I was going to say is Dostoevsky's Crime and Punishment.
*  And, um, I mean, I've always wanted to go to St. Pete's, uh, just to, to sort of see with my
*  own eyes what the word pictures that Dostoevsky created in Crime and Punishment. And, you know,
*  I love others of his stuff too, the Brothers Care and Masov and so forth, but, uh, Crime and
*  Punishment, I first read in high school as a junior or senior, and it is a, um, uh, a deep and
*  profound, um, meditation on, uh, the, the, both the meaning and the measure of our lives. And,
*  uh, uh, Dostoevsky, uh, obviously in, in, in conversation with other, uh, thinkers, um,
*  really gets at the, uh, the, the crux of a fundamental philosophical problem, what does
*  it mean to be a human being? And, um, and, uh, for that, uh, Crime and Punishment captured me as a
*  teenager, and that's another text that I return to, uh, often.
*   We've talked about young people, uh, a little bit at the beginning of our conversation.
*  Is there advice that you could give to a young person today thinking about their career,
*  thinking about their life, thinking about, uh, making their way in this world?
*   Yeah, sure. I'll share some advice. It actually picks up on a question we talked about
*  earlier with, in, in the academy and schools, but it's an, it's some advice that a professor gave
*  to me when I got to Harvard, and it is this, that, uh, you have to be willing to come face to face
*  with your intellectual limitations and keep going. And that's, and it's hard for people, I mean,
*  you mentioned this earlier, to, to face really difficult tasks to, uh, and particularly in these
*  sort of elite spaces where you've excelled all your life and you come to MIT and you're like,
*  wait a minute, I don't understand this. Wait, this is hard. I've never had something really hard
*  before. And there, there are a couple options, and a lot of people will pull back and take the, uh,
*  gentleman or gentlewoman's bee and, and just go on, or risk going out there, giving it your all,
*  and still not quite getting it. And that, that, that's a risk, but it's a risk well worth it,
*  uh, because you're just going to be the better person, the better student for it. And you know,
*  and even outside of the academy, I mean, come, come face to face with your, uh, fears and keep
*  going and keep going in life. And you're going to be the better person, the better human being.
*  Yeah, it does seem to be, I don't know what it is, but it does seem to be that fear is a good
*  indicator of something you should probably face. Yes. Like fear kind of shows the way a little bit.
*  Not always. You might not want to go into the cage with a lion, but, uh, but it's, um, maybe you
*  should. Maybe, uh, let me ask sort of a darker question because we're talking about the
*  Stasievsky. We might as well. Do you, uh, do you, and connected to the freeing innocent people,
*  do you think about mortality? Do you think about your own death? Are you afraid of death?
*  I'm not afraid of death. I do think about it more now, uh, because I'm now in my mid fifties.
*  So I used to not think about it much at all, but, uh, uh, the harsh reality is that I've got more
*  time behind me now that I do in front of me. And it kind of happens all of a sudden to realize,
*  wait a minute, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm actually on the back nine now. Uh, so, uh, yeah, my mind moves
*  to it from time to time. I don't, uh, dwell on it. I'm not afraid of it. Uh, my own personal
*  religious commitments, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm Christian and my religious, uh, uh, commitments, uh, buoy me
*  that, uh, you know, that, that death, uh, and I, I believe this death is not, not, not the end.
*  So I'm not afraid of it now. This is not to say that I want to, I want to, I want to rush to the
*  afterlife. I'm, I'm good right here for a long time. I hope I've got, you know, 30, 35, 40 more
*  years to go. Uh, but, um, but, uh, but no, I don't, I don't really, I don't fear death. Uh,
*  we're, we're, we're finite creatures. We're, we're all gonna, we're all gonna die.
*  Well, the mystery of it, uh, you know, for, for somebody, at least for me, we human beings
*  want to figure everything out. Uh, whatever the afterlife is, there's still a mystery to it.
*  That, that uncertainty can be terrifying if you ponder it, but maybe, uh, what you're saying is,
*  uh, you haven't pondered it too deeply so far and it's worked out pretty good.
*  It's worked out. Yeah. No, no, no complaints. So you said, uh, again, the Sijewski kind of,
*  well, it was exceptionally good at getting to the core or what it means to be human.
*  Do you think about like the why of why we're here, the, the meaning of this whole, uh, existence?
*  Yeah, no, I, I, I do. I think, uh, and I actually think that's the purpose of an education. Uh,
*  what does it mean to be a human being? And in one way or another, uh, we set out to answer those
*  questions and we do it in a different way. Uh, I mean, some, uh, may look to, uh, philosophy to
*  answer, uh, these questions. Why is it in one's personal interest to, to, um, to do good, to,
*  to do just, uh, to do justice. Uh, some may, um, look at it through the economist's lens. Uh,
*  some may, uh, look at it through the, uh, microscope in the laboratory that the phenomenal
*  world is, uh, is, is the meaning, uh, of life. Uh, others may say that that's one, uh, vocabulary,
*  that's one description, but the poet describes a reality to the same degree as a physicist.
*  But that's the purpose of, uh, of, of an education. It's to sort of work through these issues. What
*  does it mean to be a, uh, uh, uh, what does it mean to be a human being? And I think it's a
*  fascinating journey. And I think it's a lifelong, uh, endeavor to figure out what is the thing,
*  that nugget that makes us, uh, human. Do you still see yourself as a student?
*  Of course. Uh, yes. I mean, that's, um, that's the best part about going into,
*  into university teaching. You're, you're, you're a lifelong student. I'm always learning. I learn
*  from my students and with my students and, uh, my colleagues and you're, you continue to read and,
*  and, and learn and, and modify opinions. And I think it's just a wonderful thing.
*  Well, Ron, um, I'm so glad that, uh, somebody like you is, uh, carrying the fire of what, uh,
*  is the best of Harvard. So it's a huge honor that you spent so much time waste so much of your
*  valuable time with me. I really appreciate that. Not a waste at all. I think a lot of people love
*  it. Thank you so much for talking today. Thank you. Thanks for listening to this conversation
*  with Ronald Sullivan and thank you to Brooklyn and Sheetz, Wine Access Online Wine Store,
*  Monk Pack Low Carb Snacks, and Blinkist app that summarizes books. Click their links to support
*  this podcast. And now let me leave you with some words from Nelson Mandela.
*  When a man is denied the right to live the life he believes in, he has no choice but to become
*  an outlaw. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
*  Bye.
