---
Date Generated: April 10, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 8515s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence', 'artificial intelligence podcast', 'comedian', 'dudesy', 'hulk hogan', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex podcast', 'madtv', 'mit ai', 'pro wrestling', 'ten minute podcast', 'will sasso']
Video Views: 263279
Video Rating: None
---

# Will Sasso: Comedy, MADtv, AI, Friendship, Madness, and Pro Wrestling | Lex Fridman Podcast #323
**Lex Fridman:** [September 24, 2022](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xewD1apJNhw)
*  Once this whole thing falls apart and we are climbing the kudzu vines that spiral up the
*  Sears Tower like they say in Fight Club, Bobby will go back to his gather reform and be happy
*  as a pig and shit just walking around in a loincloth with his bird hanging out
*  tracking jokes to people and climbing up on them for a stool lap dance or whatever he does.
*  You think some level of crazies are required for comedy?
*  Like at some point?
*  Yes.
*  Have there been low points in your life?
*  Uh, yeah, I don't know.
*  The following is a conversation with Will Sasso, a comedian, actor, podcaster,
*  and someone I've been a fan of for many years since Matt TV in the late 90s to recently with
*  the 10 minute podcast and now the new podcast called Dudezy.
*  This is the Lex Friedman podcast. To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description.
*  And now dear friends, here's Will Sasso.
*  So let's call it the elephant in the room. You wore a black suit in a recent episode of Dudezy.
*  Yes.
*  You wore a black suit again today. Uh, Shakespeare, then Mark Twain said clothes make the man.
*  Uh, what kind of man does a suit make you?
*  Well, me in particular, it makes me a fellow who did not get this dry cleaned in between
*  because that episode of the show, as we sit here now, was around a week ago.
*  So that's, that's the kind of man it makes me.
*  Well, the, uh, the nice thing is you're wearing pants, I think.
*  Yes, I am wearing pants.
*  I don't think you were wearing pants in the episode.
*  That's correct. I prefer to wear shorts, but this was a special occasion. So I'm wearing pants.
*  And I thought it fitting obviously to just wear, you know, the black tie
*  and, uh, clothes do make the man. And I'm a, I would not consider myself to be a man of leisure,
*  but I do enjoy shorts because my legs get hot. So that's what kind of man the shorts make me.
*  How often do you wear a suit?
*  I fucking hate wearing suits.
*  So what is this? A statement of, uh, is it ironic or is it,
*  are you honoring the gods of this particular podcast?
*  I'm honoring the gods of this particular podcast would be a good way to put it.
*  Yes. No, this is, this is in, in reverence of and in dedication to you
*  and our new found friendship here, which we are, uh, making on the podcast. You and I just met.
*  Everything that we're saying here is the first things that we're saying to each other.
*  So I'm meeting you on common ground dressed like,
*  Well, I've been actually a one-way friend of yours for many, many years. It's mad TV.
*  Oh, uh, when did you start on that? So that was many, I mean, in nineties, 97, yeah.
*  97. So I was a huge fan of yours and the cast was incredible. It was one of the funniest shows
*  ever created that your whole journey watching through that was, was incredible from mad TV to
*  three stooges to the podcasts, the, uh, the 10 minute pod and then the new podcast is incredible.
*  Cheers. My favorite role that you played was the mountain in the game of Thrones. What was it like
*  working with dragons? Well, the dragons are usually tennis balls on the end of sea stands,
*  but, uh, sometimes they, they hang out. Um, I am, it's like, you know, it's like a little,
*  like the thing you got the camera on here. Oh, this is like film lingo. Yeah. No,
*  I understand. I'm trying to impress you with my film lingo. You know what a banana is?
*  Yeah. When you walk like this, do it a banana. I take it back. I did not know what a banana was.
*  Yeah. See, it means something. Yeah. Cause it's just a food. Yeah. Normally, uh, I'm,
*  Hollywood folk with the lingo and I'm, uh, my name is Bjorn Hapthor Bjornsson and I am seven foot four
*  and, uh, yeah. So dragons don't, dragons don't scare me even though they've been extinct for a
*  while. We use scientists, right? Is that check out? Yeah, I actually, I'm really into video games.
*  I don't know if you play video games. There's a, there's a Skyrim, uh, video game. That's part of
*  the other scroll series. And for the longest time, there's a legend that there's dragons.
*  I think it started in Daggerfall. And so I always, I grew up playing those video games and dreaming
*  of one day meeting a dragon in a virtual world. And eventually you did in Skyrim. So it's dragons
*  represent, I don't know exactly what they represent, but they represent maybe this kind of
*  mythical creature that is bigger than anything humans can possibly comprehend. Maybe because
*  they're so, they're so, they show up so often in myth from the, from the religious stories,
*  you know, of the snake and so on the serpent. And I don't know what that is with this breathing
*  fire. That's kind of weird. It's interesting when I think about dragons, cause now that you bring it
*  up, these are people that probably wouldn't have access to the fact that there used to be dinosaurs.
*  Maybe they did. If they didn't, they're drawn things that look like, you know, a dinosaur cousin,
*  but cool. They can breathe fire and has wacky wings and a spiked tail. Yeah. Where the heck did
*  they come up with that? Cause they're clearly of course represented in mythology all the way back
*  to, no, not cave drawings. Well, the Egyptians probably knew what the, and they could time travel.
*  So they would have gone back to the caves. Well, the aliens that placed living organisms on earth
*  could time travel and they could plant legends into the, into the collective intelligence of the
*  human species. Yeah. And perhaps they were thinking of us to do something smart with it. And we didn't,
*  we just came up with Skyrim. We're just, what's that? Sorry, that was very offensive. I'm sorry.
*  I don't mean to offend you with your video game. I'm more of a burger, a burger time, a donkey Kong
*  dude. Oh, what is that? That's an original burger time was an arcade game that later showed up on
*  the Intellivision. It was Intellivision. I believe it was made by Texas instruments, horrible first
*  generation video game console and burger time. You just, it's like super Mario. You just got to
*  stay away from the eggs and the pickles and stuff. And you just go, and you, the bun falls. And then
*  you go down to the, and the cheese and then the meat. I'm not going to say it's as complicated as
*  Skyrim, but took me a while to finish it when I was seven. Did you play video games?
*  That was a part of your life, a part of the source of happiness for you at all. It was, it was,
*  I played video games up until around, I think in 2010, I got the red ring of death on my Xbox 360.
*  That was it. That was it. I never, or whatever the Xbox was then. Yeah. I had, I was playing,
*  I had finished the Grand Theft Auto that was out and finished the Red Dead Redemption. So I was
*  doing that thing where you just drive around the streets of New York or just ride around on your
*  horse shooting people and throwing grenades into groups of people in Grand Theft.
*  And you're describing the same thing that happened a decade later, because it's now
*  Red Dead Redemption 2 and there's still not a new Grand Theft Auto. So yeah.
*  Yeah. There isn't, right?
*  They're working on it. They're always flirting with that idea. You know who else plays Skyrim?
*  Another person, the two people I'm a huge fan of from that time in Matt TV is Bobby Lee.
*  He plays Skyrim?
*  He's a huge fan of Skyrim.
*  He plays every.
*  So what Bobby Lee loves to do is to grind, do the boring task over and over, gather mushrooms.
*  Like in Skyrim, you can fight dragons, you can fight all kinds of things, but you can also gather
*  mushrooms and different ingredients and make potions and all that kind of. He loves the
*  ingredients that he's the, you know, in the hunter gatherer world, he's the gatherer.
*  He's the gatherer. Yeah. I've heard him described that way and he likes to describe himself that
*  way. I worked with Bobby not too long ago. He came and did a couple of days on this thing.
*  We were shooting and I was looking forward to catching up with my old pal. And if you know
*  anything about Bobby Lee, you'd probably be able to predict that he spent that entire time
*  playing farming on his iPad.
*  Well, humans are a source of anxiety and trouble. So sometimes it's good to escape human interaction
*  through video games. Totally. I'm with him on that. He's, he's one of the funniest people ever.
*  What do you think is, uh, what do you think makes him funny? It's just all the times you've worked
*  with him, the, the non-standard non-secular way of his being.
*  Bobby Lee is one of the most raw people, raw performers who lets it all hang out to the degree
*  that he will even get naked in front of his audience, which is usually a metaphor for someone
*  doing standup. I'm bearing all. Yeah. I'm showing you everything. And Bobby will just pull his bird
*  out of his pants. Yeah. I don't think he understands metaphor too much. He embodies metaphor. Yes. He
*  embodies metaphor. He's the gather. We call them the gathering metaphor, Bobby, the gatherer
*  metaphor. He's a metaphor for something else for somebody else's life. Someday he'll be in the
*  dictionary representing some kind of concept, maybe the metaphor itself. Yeah. Once, once this
*  whole thing falls apart and we are climbing the kudzu vines, uh, that spiral up the Sears tower,
*  like they say in fight club, Bobby will go back to his gather reform and be happy as a pig and shit.
*  Just walking around in a loin cloth with his bird hanging out, tracking jokes to people and climbing
*  up on them for a stool lap dance or whatever. I'd love to dig into something he, he did.
*  You guys did a lot of great podcasts together. He asked you in a very uncomfortable process of why
*  you don't do standup. So let me ask you, do you hate money? Well, I'm originally from Canada. Yeah.
*  So I'm a, I'm, yeah, I'm a, I'm a fricking pinko socialist. Is that what, uh, where you come from?
*  That's not a nice thing to say. I thought the Soviet union, that is a nice thing to say.
*  Right? He's a good socialist. Yeah. Red, like bold colors. Yeah. Yeah. There was an interesting
*  tension in your voice and the way you talked about it. There's just not a source of happiness for
*  you. You, you, you respect the art form, but it was not something that you were connected to.
*  That's a good way to put it. Yeah. I respect the art form a lot. I, and I grew up with all the
*  albums and stuff. I had an older brother and sister who, so I, you know, we had the,
*  we had George Carlin, we had, uh, you know, Richard Pryor, we had Robert Klein, we had
*  Gilda live, the Gilda Radner, uh, concert. We had, we had all sorts of stuff, but
*  you know, I don't know, there's a lot of, there's a lot of reasons. I do feel like a career in show
*  business is, you know, they, it never goes the way you plan, uh, like most things. And I was
*  fortunate enough to get started outside of my native Vancouver or in my native Vancouver. I
*  grew up in the burbs outside and there was a lot of industry there. So I was fortunate enough to
*  get started as an actor when I was like 16. So there, there, yeah, there was, there were some
*  times early on where I came up with some standup stuff and did it, but, uh, yeah, I quickly
*  abandoned it. And then, you know, you go through, you do mad TV and stuff. And then,
*  and that's where my, and this is going to sound weird. Do I sound as anxiety as I did when I was
*  on Bobby's podcast, trying to avoid his questions? Well, he was giving you this face this whole time
*  that was making the whole just atmosphere feel full of anxiety. So I'm trying not to give you
*  a face. I mean, the whole time I was saying play cool, play cool. Yeah. Okay. Uh, play cool.
*  You said it out loud a couple of times. I did. Just, you know, you cut that out. Play cool.
*  Play cool. Cut out, cut it out. Maintain bro. Here's what I'll say. There's two ways to do it.
*  I think it's lame when someone who's done one thing for a while goes and starts doing standup
*  out of nowhere. Cause I think it's an art form that's, uh, under attack because it's not like
*  anything else you need. Although now you can of course, you know, make whatever you want.
*  It's the era of self publishing as far as making a product and putting it out there,
*  which is getting easier, of course. And I can't wait to talk to you about that with,
*  with AI and how it's changing art. Um, but, uh, the, in standup, all you need is a, is a microphone
*  and you know, perhaps, uh, it'd be good to have some mental illness and then you can just run up
*  there and, uh, uh, talk forever. And I say this to, to, you know, comedians. It's like,
*  Hey, you guys have to deal with just an influx of people who aren't sure why they're doing comedy.
*  I would ask comedians and like, I mean, not good ones and good ones. You know what they're doing,
*  but everyone else like, what are you doing? Why, why are you doing standup? Having said that,
*  I am allergic to money. Yeah. Do you think they have a good answer for that? Why are they doing
*  it? Cause I actually like when I'm in Austin, I like going to open mics, just listening.
*  It's inspiring to me both the funny and the unfunny people because they've been doing it for several
*  years, sometimes over a decade. And they're still at it. They're still right there. There's going
*  for the punch and then especially open mics that are really sad in that there is, you know, only
*  like five other people in the audience and they're usually just other comedians and they're still
*  going all out as if they're in front of a stadium. But that to me sounds like someone who loves it.
*  Yeah. I got no questions for that person. I got questions for someone who goes sideways from here,
*  I'm recognizable doing something and then I'm doing standup because it's like, and truly look,
*  I've been fortunate enough to be in the business for a long time. And at this point, if I came up,
*  I mean, doing live stuff is fun. I have friends that are like, you know, some guys who are
*  primarily sketch people or you would look at them as sketch people and they can sell tickets for
*  being sketch people and they, and we'll talk about it. And they're like, well, you know,
*  I do a monologue and I do a little standup. Then I do a song. Then I do another monologue. Then I
*  play off the audience, do a little standup. But standup is, it's almost like playing music
*  in that, you know, people are going up there playing music, but what band have you been
*  listening to? That's what you're going to sound like. So it's really, I mean, of course,
*  I'm speaking from zero experience, but I've heard it takes years, of course, to find your own voice.
*  Standups that when they first go up, they're doing some sort of impersonation of so-and-so
*  and so-and-so. And then you got to pop this audience that's paying and you're going to get
*  run over by the next person who's coming up. And it's hard to follow the last person who went up
*  before you. And I mean, that is a really hard way to, it's a very, it's quite a gauntlet to be in
*  to find your voice comedically. But don't you have that same kind of thing with sketch? You still
*  have to find your own voice with like all the impressions you do. They're just terrible.
*  There are different spins and different people. They're not like perfect impressions, right?
*  Yeah. So that's, I mean, that's a similar kind of challenge and journey as standup. You're just
*  saying they're kind of distinct and you fell into this one and you fell in love with it, which is
*  what MADtv kind of opens you up to. Yeah. As a kid, I literally wanted to be an actor. I always
*  wanted to be an actor from a very young age, as far back as I can remember. And I was a class clown
*  and wanted to do comedy stuff and comedic acting. So comedic acting. Yeah. Early on, my influences
*  were a very predictable list of guys from SCTV, Early Saturday Night Live, Monty Python, all of
*  those performers really influenced me. It was later that I saw people like Kevin Klein, who's
*  an incredible actor. I vividly remember being like 12, 13, seeing him get an Academy Award for
*  Fish Called Wanda. And it blew my mind because I was like, he was hilarious. I mean, it was one of
*  my favorite movies back then and now. And he won an Academy Award. And at that point, I started
*  thinking more about acting. And then I was, like I said, really fortunate to fall in with,
*  I mean, I always wanted to do it and I was trying to hustle this and that when I was a kid. And then
*  I ended up getting represented. And then I ended up on a teen show. I was on, I basically, the
*  easiest way to pitch it is it's like a Canadian, my so-called life with these kids in their lives
*  and stuff. And I did that for like five years and I really love acting. I really truly love acting.
*  And I don't, I'm not someone who wants people to know my opinion. So that's another thing about
*  standup. Like I love the illusion of what I get to do in entertainment and podcasting is great for
*  that. But to stand up there and from, I don't know, just for me, it's like, it would have to all be
*  fantasy. And... Yeah. So Nietzsche said that every profound spirit needs a mask.
*  Like you said, you don't like to talk about, in your comedy, you don't like to talk about
*  stuff that's personal to you. Yeah. What is that? If you were to psychoanalyze yourself,
*  do you think it's just not something you find funny or is it, are you running from something?
*  And it's not your fault. Well, it's not your fault. Well, speaking of another really great
*  comedic actor who's also a serious actor, Robert Williams. One of the best serious actors. I mean,
*  I mean, I, and you know, one of the funniest people of all time, but as great, as incredible
*  as he was as a funny man, as a standup and a performer, I almost like his serious stuff
*  better. Can I ask you a question about that? What do you make of the, that he committed suicide?
*  I think it's, I think it's, I mean, it's super depressing. I've referred to him as like the Jesus
*  Christ of, of depression. It's almost like he died for others, depression. You know what I mean?
*  Like, yeah, yeah. You'd look at someone like that and go, wait a minute, you're a rock star. Like,
*  you don't, you could just check out if you're not liking your life. And of course, something like
*  suicide begs that you look a little deeper and realize how tortured the human mind can, can make
*  someone. Is there some aspect to still, you know, we're in LA, is there some aspect of celebrity
*  that it's isolating that can make you feel really lonely? Not me. I don't feel, no, not really.
*  You feel the love? No, I just feel like I'm not, I mean, it's like,
*  I don't know. I've always kind of had a small group of friends and those people don't, you know,
*  it's like I've known the same people for years and years. You never really felt the celebrity
*  really? Nah, in LA, it's hard to, it's hard for people. Nobody cares. They see you and then the
*  next minute they see so and so. So it's like, you know, I'm the guy from that,
*  Mike and Molly, right? Nope. Nope. Close. King of, King, you shave your head, you go bald.
*  Are you King and Queens? Nope. Not me. So close. You're wow, shit. You used to be the mountain on
*  King of Thrones. You look like shit. What happened? Just eating fried dough. Yeah. That's what's up.
*  Can't lift any weights anymore. I'm at the gym doing like 15 pounds with shoulder press.
*  And people coming up to me. You used to be a dragon killer. Half a man used to be. What's,
*  have there been low points in your life? Sorry to go there, but. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
*  Yeah. There's everybody has a low point in life. The opposite. You suffer from like depression and
*  those kinds of things. You know what I do? I do. I have a bunch of stuff.
*  How do you deal with it? Said friends, the friends and the. They don't do anything for me.
*  Yeah. I have an incredible fiance who that's nice to have somebody constant that you love very much
*  and see as the best person and all that good stuff. Hopefully vice versa. And then. Well,
*  on your recent Instagram, she said that she loves you. So. Wow. At least. Yeah. Allegedly.
*  That might all be for. Yeah. That's how much money did you pay her to say that? I don't have
*  any because I'm not a standup. I was like, I can do you got Venmo. Yeah. Yeah. I got, I only have
*  like $123. I gave you some Doge coin. Yeah. Some Doge. Yeah. Yeah. Do you want some Doge?
*  I got some of those monkey NFTs. Oh, before I forget. Yes. Hold on a second. Oh no.
*  Put a dude's sticker on your microphone if that's okay. Sure. Here. Oh yeah. Now these are tricky
*  because I have the thumbs of a, I have like Italian sausage. Thumbs. Yeah. Just wait. I'm just gonna.
*  This will take another. Yeah. Yeah. Oh man. Yeah. Ooh. This is embarrassing. When this.
*  Are you good under pressure? I have anxiety. I have performance anxiety. Do you have anxiety?
*  Yeah. You have anxiety period? Period. Yeah. I, I. Like I don't like it when I, if I have to pee
*  and then everyone's waiting in the urinals. Yeah. Yeah. I don't like it. You know what'll help you
*  in that situation? What's that? Taking a shit. Cause whenever you take a shit, you always pee a
*  little. It's hard to take a shit while you're standing at a urinal, but. Not in my world.
*  Okay. Just got to keep yourself full of things that make you shit. Oh good. Have you ever heard
*  of banana? I did recently. Somebody told me about it. Not the showbiz term. I'm talking about the
*  food. Here you go. Which way is up? It's this way. It's like a D no to spin it. All right.
*  So sexy. You're like a brand. Yeah. It's very important to brand yourself. These colors.
*  Are you selling shoes? Yeah. I got some custom kicks coming out. The dudesy. No, actually that
*  would be a good idea. You can probably sell a pair or two of those. Speaking of anxiety,
*  I really am only focused on this right now. Lex, I apologize. Just shit your pants. It'll make you
*  be easier. Get on with it. Oh, this thing has been dog ear to my pocket for a while. I swear this
*  never happens to me. I'm sorry, babe. People don't thumb at a sticker for an hour while they're doing
*  the pocket. This is just an excuse you make when you're with somebody and you're underperforming.
*  Well, here's the thing. As you ask me questions that I don't want to answer, I'll just go to this.
*  Go to the sticker. So if this ends up working, then I won't have it as a product. It's funny how you
*  started doing that when we're talking about depression. That's weird. That is weird. Tell
*  me how that makes you feel. Here we are. For the listener, he succeeded after 10 minutes. Yeah.
*  You know, I do have some of that stuff. Bobby Lee had encouraged me on wax, as I like to say,
*  to talk about it on podcasts, talk about depression because it could help people. I said, no.
*  It's true. I do have some. There's some history in the family.
*  How do you overcome it? Well, I used to not believe in medication
*  at all. I used to think that that was for someone else who's been diagnosed with
*  some of the rougher stuff. But as I got older, then some of the stuff happens and you have to,
*  and by stuff, I mean mental stuff. I believe that the stigma needs to be removed completely.
*  5%. I do therapy. I do talk therapy.
*  I'm on a little bit of stuff, which let me tell you, when I first started it,
*  someone I'm close to was my manager. She goes, this is too much. She was like,
*  you don't have to white knuckle it through life. Because I was literally just like everything
*  became really hard to do at a level that I wanted to do it at, even just getting through your day.
*  Right? When I first got some of the meds that I'm on, it felt like doors and windows were opening
*  literally in my brain. I took a three hour nap the first day. You shouldn't even feel this stuff
*  the first day. I think my brain was like a sponge. I needed some relief. I'm not a nap guy. I can
*  sleep three hours and I'll be fine. I took a long nap and then it started to help.
*  Yeah. Isn't that weird how a little bit of chemistry in your head can just make the
*  whole world appear so much more beautiful? Yeah. Yeah. After all, there's a lot going on
*  in your brain that can be changed by your lifestyle, but also so many physical things,
*  a little bit of meds. Or in Bobby's case, thumbing around on some dumb farming app.
*  Well, Bobby's gone through a few rough periods with drugs and alcohol and all that kind of stuff.
*  Just everything else involved. That's the beautiful roller coaster of who he is and
*  a lot of great comedians seem to be that way. I wonder what the connection there is. You think
*  some level of crazy is required for comedy? Yes.
*  On a scale of one to 10, how much crazy do you have?
*  In some ways, a 10. In other ways, functionally, I'm like a two or a three because I don't know.
*  I'm from Canada and I try to just keep things very even keeled. My parents are
*  Italian. They're from Italy. I grew up during World War II and they're very
*  simple outlook on things. They're complex, incredible, classy people who are
*  very simple when it comes to a lot of stuff. I think just being at heart kind of a timid Canadian,
*  coming out here years ago as a kid, it was all I could do to just keep everything super normal.
*  Then I was able to settle into that as a lifestyle.
*  You love the idea of being an actor. You mentioned John Candy and
*  Planes, Chains, and Automobiles. It's one of my favorite movies. It's one of yours.
*  What do you think makes that movie work? When you talk about enjoying that movie,
*  do you enjoy just the raw comedy or do you enjoy the friendship and the love that's there even
*  though on the surface it doesn't make any sense that there should be a friendship there?
*  That's such an important element to that film. As a kid, I just loved the comedy.
*  And then it's been a nostalgic favorite of mine. It's my favorite movie.
*  But it's also just legit my favorite movie because as you get older and you start watching it,
*  you realize it's what John Hughes is the filmmaker and what John Candy, particularly,
*  but also Steve Martin are doing in the film that makes it such a work of art, which is
*  loneliness is there in every moment of that film.
*  He embodies Del Griffith, his character in the film. Del Griffith is a lonely guy.
*  Del Griffith is also a very friendly guy and a shower curtain ring salesman and
*  knows everybody in the Midwest and runs around to motels and has meaningful
*  conversations with the guy. Even in Gus, whoever he's talking to.
*  But there's loneliness there all the time. The film is filled with loneliness and it's not until
*  the second and last scene when he's at the train station. Del, what are you doing here?
*  I thought you were going home. What are you doing here? That's a very good Neil
*  Page from the movie. Thank you. That's when you realize how lonely he is.
*  I'm glad applause and post.
*  That's when you realize how lonely he is and I think that's the element from the film that,
*  I mean, look, nowadays, I feel like I've been saying this for a long time, but John Candy would
*  have won an Academy Award hands down for that film. It's just they didn't do that with comedies back
*  then until the year after that movie came out with Fish Called Wanda.
*  I mean, still comedies don't get respected enough. Robin Williams, I guess he got an Oscar for
*  Good Will Hunting. Jim Carrey, did he ever get an Oscar?
*  I don't know. I don't believe so.
*  Yeah. But that's not even if he did, you wouldn't be for comedies.
*  There's some things that are playing strings in honor. Would you even put that as a comedy?
*  I guess it's a comedy. But there is a loneliness and depth that permeates the whole movie.
*  Yeah.
*  That ultimately, and it's a happy ending, which is hard to kind of.
*  It's a happy ending only because in the last moment of the movie, John Candy puts on a brave face
*  even when he's got no one. And he's there seeing Neil Page's entire family on Thanksgiving
*  and he forces a smile, which is the last, literally the last frame of the movie.
*  And I've said before, if you're not reduced to just a sob, solving pile of meat
*  at the end of the movie, then you are not human. Yeah, it is a happy ending. It's a happy ending,
*  even though it's a sad character.
*  Loneliness in the world. I was just in Vegas. I went to a diner at like 4 a.m., 5 a.m.
*  and there's the waitress is empty as a waitress. That was the sweetest,
*  kindest human being kept calling me sweetheart and all that kind of stuff.
*  Hon. And then after I ate, she sat down and just talked to me a little bit,
*  because there's nobody, nobody there. And it was just this so much sadness
*  in her eyes. I don't know. But it's also so much love like that sweetheart.
*  I mean, it reminded me kind of of the John Candy performance because at first, because I was like
*  reading a pretty dark book about Hitler. So I was a little bit frustrated that she kept talking to
*  me because it was like it was almost like the same way that John Candy is. It's annoying a little bit.
*  Right. But then very quickly I opened up to like, well, there's a there's a kind human being and
*  there's like that human connection superseded everything else. And I don't know, it was just
*  beautiful. And I think John Candy captures that really well, which is like the connection with
*  other human beings. Sometimes we pull away from that because we have a busy life full of stuff to
*  do as Steve Martin's character can characterize. He's like a marketing exec or something like that.
*  But if you just pause and notice others, you can, you can really discover beautiful people.
*  Totally, totally. Everyone's got, I mean, everyone's got their story. And you know,
*  Candy is a person, I've never met the man, but he's the kind of guy that, you know, he could
*  just walk up to, back in the day, I would imagine he could walk up to just about any house, at least
*  in Canada, knock on the door and you'd invite him in for dinner. You know what I mean? So yeah,
*  it's a, it's a, that, you know, as you're talking about, you know, putting a book down and talking
*  to someone for a while, even though you'd really like to read your book, it's, it's like, it's that
*  sort of thing that Candy's character in the movie sort of does that like Johnny Appleseed, just can
*  you realize he's just going around making people smile, you know, and Neil Page is hanging with
*  this guy. So frustrated. He's just the, he's so exhausting and his big underwear in the sink at
*  the hotel and everything. And by the end of it, he loves this guy, you know? So it's a good and a
*  bad thing that you have, didn't take that waitress with you on a trip, maybe road trip up to Reno.
*  Oh, oh, she's, she's actually, she's out shopping right now. We're shocked. We've been having sex
*  multiple times a day ever since. Oh, that's nice. That's lovely. I think I'm sure she's married and
*  happily and has many grandchildren. Okay. And plus that movie's on Thanksgiving, I think, right?
*  Yeah, that's right.
*  Thanksgiving. So like Thanksgiving just embodies that forget about the, the busyness and the,
*  whatever the career you're chasing in life and just take a pause and appreciate the people you
*  love. Just be with your family. Yeah. Or the people, whatever your family loves.
*  Yeah. You have some weird friends, unorthodox friends. So, so at least in the public sphere,
*  Oh yeah.
*  from Bob Lee, Brian Callan, all those kinds of folks from the mad TV days. I'm sure there's others.
*  What does it mean to be a good friend?
*  Here in LA or just in general in the world, in the world. Will Sasso,
*  world friend. I think it is different here. I think it is. I think there's a little bit of a career
*  kind of a negotiation shuffling around that kind of stuff. Why is it different?
*  Well, I just mean, I mean, I mean that it's just kind of hard here to, to make time for everybody.
*  It's always been a city to me that is like, we'll keep you so busy. And every time I go home to
*  Vancouver, after a few days, I start to get a little stir crazy. And I think that being here
*  in LA, I go to sleep with a hundred things that I still have to do. And you never,
*  you're never out of stuff to do. And if you, you know, when you ask about,
*  are you nuts or whatever, if you're crazy, I mean, look, every, all the weirdest people from every
*  high school in the United States is like, Oh, I'm going to make it in LA. You know,
*  everyone just comes here and just another freak in the freak kingdom, as they say at the end of
*  Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas. That was a very good Robin Williams impersonation. That was my
*  Robin Williams as Johnny Depp as Hunter S. Thompson. It's not your fault, Will.
*  It's pretty good. Thank you. Could have been you, Fear and Loathing.
*  In Fear and Loathing? Yeah, it'd be interesting. I would have liked to play his attorney,
*  the role that, that Benicia del Toro gained weight for. That would have been cool. He's just,
*  he's just, what? Don't go over the line. Like chewing his face off. I could have done that.
*  Yeah, no, I think that it's- Backdoor Beauty. That guy is full of good lines.
*  Yeah. It's the beauty. It's the beauty for real. Yeah.
*  Good actor. Yeah. Fantastic actor. I think, I think what it takes to be a good friend is just,
*  you know, presence, just being there. I mean, that's all anyone needs to be heard, right? In LA,
*  it is, it is interesting. It is, you, I haven't seen people that I love in years. Some people.
*  Just busy. Yeah. Can you still have a depth of connection, even though, like,
*  one of the reasons I really enjoy doing a podcast, you get to sit down with, with actual
*  friends of yours and spend prolonged periods of time together that you don't otherwise.
*  That's a good point. You know, I've spoken on this podcast to people really close to me.
*  And it's like, you've never had a conversation without microphones,
*  like you do with microphones. It's weird, but, you know, there's some aspect about LA that,
*  you know, a lot of the, especially friends of yours, comedians and so on,
*  they'll do podcasts and stuff. And there's, I don't know, there's an intimacy to that.
*  Yeah. Yeah. There is, and there isn't the ones that I do. I mean, I just did Bobby Lee and Andrew
*  Santino's funny enough called bad friends, bad friends. And afterwards, and my good pal,
*  Chad Culchin, with whom I do dudesy was with me. Sneakers are coming soon. Sneakers are coming
*  soon. You get your Will foot and your Chad foot comes in a size 15 and a nine and a half.
*  And I remember afterwards we were talking, it was just basically me, Chad and Santino were talking
*  and Bobby was over there, you know, on his phone. And then I was like, I mean, we didn't spend any
*  time talking about anything. It feels like one of those hours that goes by and you realize,
*  I'd just been goofing around with these guys, which-
*  That's what life is about, right?
*  It's great. And then I'm like, all right, Bobby, hey, Bob, I'll see you later. And he's like,
*  like this. All right, man. Hey, love you, bro. See you later.
*  Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
*  He's a guy. Do you ever just, I just send text messages over there to him that never come back.
*  And then he thinks that I'm angry with him because it's been, you know, it'll go two,
*  three years without him getting back to me. And then just out of nowhere, hey, fuck face.
*  And, uh-
*  Who says, hey, fuck face? He does or you do? Or you both talk to each other?
*  No, I gotta be very, I gotta be very careful with Bobby. Yeah. I gotta be very sweet.
*  Dear friend.
*  Dear friend. Hello.
*  How are you doing?
*  How are you? I know I checked in with you, but, uh, not, but three months ago.
*  And then every once in a while he'll go, hey, fuck face.
*  I tend to hide from the world and I, I'm, I can be pretty shitty with friends.
*  Yeah.
*  I can empathize with Bobby. It might be a Skyrim thing. It might be like hiding in a world,
*  in a digital world with fake, fake NPCs.
*  Yeah. Yeah. There's that. Yeah. Uh, yeah. You know, I have a buddy who
*  said something really smart, uh, a while ago, we ended up working together on this, uh, TV show
*  thing and I reached out to him to see if he wanted to do it with us. And, uh, he did. And he goes,
*  this is a great guy. He's such a funny writer. He goes, I may not be in touch all the time,
*  but I know who my friends are. You know what I mean? And it's like in our business.
*  And this is a fellow who moved, um, who's from Ontario, Canada, moved back there. He's on the
*  farm with his wife and kids and he does not care. He's never been a Hollywood guy. And, uh, it's
*  tough to get hold of him, but when you do, you know, he's still the same sweet old guy.
*  He's doing his thing though.
*  Yeah. Yeah. Some of my closest friends, even if we don't talk for a few months,
*  we're right back at it. If we do. And then if shit goes, like if something really traumatic
*  happens or difficult stuff or, you know, any of that kind of stuff, I'm almost there. So like,
*  so for important stuff, important highs and important lows, you're there. And then you pick
*  right back up, especially if you've have those years of experiences together. It's interesting.
*  Totally. Uh, so you've done a couple of podcasts. Yeah. Done. So we've got to talk about Dudesie a
*  little bit, but first you did for several years, you did the 10 minute podcast. Yeah.
*  I mean, everything is hilarious about that podcast, including the fact that it's 10 minutes.
*  Right. That means every, every is ridiculous. It's absurd. The dynamic is hilarious. It's
*  you, Brian Callen, Chris D'Elia there. I don't know exactly why it's why it works so well,
*  but it did. It worked really well. I think it's because the, yeah, you were having fun probably.
*  I mean, that's, that would really came through the, that it was friends just talking shit and the
*  tension, the beautiful tension and the absurdity they came out. Yeah. Uh, what, sure. What, what
*  was the story of making that podcast? What, how did that came to be? Uh, why do you think it was
*  as good as it was? I don't know. I feel like that podcast was like, it was our, our, who we kind of
*  are, but on steroids or something like, you know, uh, each person, you know, Brian's going to be
*  like extra manly and, and, uh, can you get any more manly and then he already is? No,
*  he reaches though. Uh, and yeah, we just kinda, it's, I feel like as goofballs, we knew each
*  other's line. Like here's the line you don't cross. I feel like those guys don't really have one.
*  But at least they knew mine. Um, and, and yeah, we were able to just goof around and I did it with
*  them for three years and then Chad, who I'm doing dudesy with and my pal Tommy Blacha, who's a,
*  another writer producer like Chad, they came on and yeah, all, all told we did. I did like, uh,
*  seven years of that thing, six, five, six, seven. I don't remember.
*  Do you think it ever comes back in some small form as a 20 minute podcast or something like that?
*  I mean, is there, uh, because it's one of the most requested, but I mean, you know, there's,
*  you have a huge fan base. I'm 47 years old. So I am of the generation that had a cell phone,
*  has had a cell phone half the time and didn't for the formative years of my life into my early
*  twenties. Um, and then finally got a, like, I got a cell phone, I guess I was like 19 or something,
*  like literally just cause I'm moving to LA. You got porn in the mail.
*  You got, yes, that's right. It was that the hard, the hard cover porn. That's the way we liked it.
*  Bound, you know, nice binding on the, on the porn, the leather, uh, cover. Yep. Um, these are all my,
*  these are my encyclopedia Britannica. Wow. Very impressive. Yes. A man came to the house and sold
*  me these and then down here, these are my, this is my pornography. Uh, if you'll follow me through
*  here to the parlor, uh, sir, and pass through the generations from grandfather to father. Yeah.
*  I want to give you something very special to me. Never can is there. Um, but, uh, uh,
*  so you go up in the generation without a cell phone. Yes. I, um, it's hard for me to connect
*  with people who, who hit me up. I look at everything as polling. So if one person hits me up
*  and shares this opinion, but two other people hit me up and share that I'm the worst. I'm, don't
*  follow my polls. My, when people say, Oh, that poll means absolutely nothing. So-and-so is going to
*  win anyway. That that's my poll. My poll means nothing, but I do look at the stuff and go,
*  uh, this many people are saying this. That means that that number is saying that. And yet it's
*  very hard for me to, uh, hear what the hell people are saying online. Yeah. I really,
*  I can't connect to it sometimes personally. So when you say that that's a popular podcast,
*  like I know that, I know that it's popular with the people that have expressed that they love it.
*  Yeah. You know what I mean? What does that actually represent? I don't know. I don't know
*  what kind of people are the audience. I don't know. I know that the, the people that listen
*  to the 10 minute podcast, and if you did, thank you. Uh, and we're friends. Uh, I know that it
*  was a, it was a special thing cause it's like, yeah, just doing this out of my house and we just
*  built it up out of nowhere and we're just kind of clowning around. It's a, it's an odd thing.
*  I hope I, I personally, I think I S I speak for the two people that have reached out to you that
*  said you should do it or whatever. Three people, the poll that you should bring it back at some
*  point. That would be beautiful. Maybe, uh, it's like, uh, what's it, what's a good story of some
*  of like a famous band that came back and was successful. Probably Nirvana. No, it was not.
*  Sorry. I get Nirvana mixed up with Aerosmith. Yeah. It was Aerosmith. It was Aerosmith.
*  Yeah. It's not different. They had that second ride. Different. Yeah. Totally different ending
*  to those two bands. One ended up on, uh, American Idol. Yeah. Um, a lot of interesting women
*  involved in that one too. All right. Uh, how did dudes come to be dudes? And what the hell is
*  dudes? He dudes. He is the first podcast and this is exciting that you've asked me to come here today,
*  because to hear what you would have to say about it or what you would ask about it,
*  it is the first podcast that has been, that has run completely by and essentially,
*  I like to say curated by an AI. Um, we were approached by a company that had this proprietary
*  AI that wants to develop the podcast into the future and figure out exactly what it takes to
*  make the best podcast ever. And it was all we, all we, we knew from the top and what they really
*  wanted was two people who were actually friends and could be meaningful in the podcast space
*  based on whatever information they had. Is the company CIA and are they testing technology
*  to control the populace through chatbots? I'm sorry. I'm not at liberty to share that
*  information. You are. Yeah. Who gave you the suit? Where did you get the suit? Where did you get the
*  suit? Well, yeah. Well, the C C I A stands for something different in here. I mean, you know,
*  it doesn't mean like central intelligence agency and probably it's just a different, it's a,
*  yeah, it's a Canadian, uh, international apparel. Yeah. Yeah. The Canadian international apparel
*  company hit us up. Chad and I, um, well, Chad's a super weirdo. You would get a kick out of him.
*  I know you guys, you, you, you strike me as a very similar in some ways. And I'll take that
*  as a compliment, but it is, and it is, uh, and it is, yes. And if I was friends with you for as long
*  as I've been with Chad, perhaps I'd have some horrible shit to say about you, but, uh, the good
*  parts, you remind me of him and we were approached by this company that said, we have this AI and we
*  would like to set it loose on you. And essentially we had to hand over some,
*  some information that would allow the AI to, to access our email and, uh, look at our search
*  histories, purchase histories, things like this, and, um, really dig into porn hub included or
*  poor. Yeah. I had to hand over all my leather bound, uh, 1970s pornography. Um, and, uh,
*  essentially it curates a podcast for us every week doing dumb things like, you know, it says,
*  Hey, will, you know, you do a Hulk, you do some shitty Hulk Hogan impersonation podcasts about
*  news are very popular. This is info mania. You know what I mean? Oh, let me tell you something
*  about that Marjorie Taylor green dude. And then he's going on doing some new stuff. Um, and it
*  basically just spits out all these things that it wants us to do normally for segments and episode.
*  And that's pretty much it. It just generates what to do.
*  It generates the premise. I mean, you spoken a bit here and there. Like I said, I'm a huge fan.
*  I don't even remember where, but like you, you, you talked about that you enjoy dudes because
*  you feel almost like liberated to, um, because you're operating within the constraints of the
*  premise that generates. So you're almost not, you're, you're, you're free to riff essentially.
*  Yeah. Like you don't have to, you don't need to do the job of like,
*  coming up with the weird. You can just, the weird is given to you and then you just run with it.
*  That's a good way to say it because we're already weird. Chad and I, Chad, Chad can talk for days
*  about all sorts of stuff. He's particularly interested in AI lately and its effect on art.
*  He is a writer, books, movies, and TV shows. And, um, I'm primarily, you know, acting and trying to
*  come up with stuff, stuff I write with Chad's pretty good. The rest of it hasn't seen much
*  success anyway. Uh, nor is the stuff with Chad for that matter, but, um, that's cause of me.
*  Sneakers. You never know. Oh, I can't wait for these sneakers. Only in two sizes. Yeah. Only in
*  two sizes. You're going to be able to take the, the, you know, the tongue. You can't take it out
*  because it's actually stitched in. Yeah. It's pretty cool stuff. Um, no,
*  Velcro or, uh, yeah. Velcro Velcro up the side. We're doing some like
*  brand new Kanye stuff. Yeah. We want things to look like this is what you'll be wearing on Mars
*  when you get there. So cutting it. So Nike's doing a bunch of research for running how to make a
*  super light shoe that you can be efficient in and break all kinds of running records. So you're
*  doing the same kind of stuff. We're doing the same kind of thing for the podcasting space,
*  the best kind of shoes to sit around and talk to your pal in. Um, but yeah, we, so this, yeah,
*  it's bizarre. And it also does some writing dudes. He does come up with things, but not unlike
*  what we're seeing in AI art now. It's a little bit foggy. It's a little bit weird and it,
*  but it is improving. It is learning about us and writing stuff when it makes me spit this and that,
*  which we'll read, you know, you know, I've prepared these things for you to read.
*  It's impossible not to get a kick out of it. Cause Chad and I are, first of all, we're blown away
*  that we're doing this. And second of all, the, some of the stuff is actually very funny. It makes
*  weird names. Like I don't think it understands it messes up some words and stuff, but that makes
*  it even funnier. And then it, it sort of, from the beginning started laying on like it says
*  astonishing all the time. Everything is astonishing. Um, that's dudes, his favorite word. Um, but yeah,
*  it's basically just a way to, to frame the podcast. You know what I mean? Because my thing is, uh,
*  I don't want to do this where I actually have to talk to someone. You seem to feel a burden
*  of the long form conversation. It seems like, is that really hard work for you? No, not at all.
*  It's just that I don't like to bore people. And I feel like if I go on and I like to provide value
*  for who, for what I am, you know, your value with regard to this project is, is obviously warrant.
*  I'm waiting for the explanation for what the value is exactly. Two dudes in a suit.
*  No, listen. Yeah. Two dudes in a suit. No, but I mean, you've got your audience and that's the end
*  of that. People find value in it. For me, I, I do feel like I'm, uh, it is important that I,
*  if I'm going to do something that, you know, is going to be funny or that I hope is funny,
*  I just kind of want to get in and out of someone's day and just kind of, I like making,
*  I like making laughing. I want people to, you know, whatever. It's the same thing that anyone
*  else will tell you. Yeah. But in the long form, you feel the anxiety. You did a few funny things
*  and I wonder if I can keep doing the funny thing. Is that why you're, you feel that like, why is
*  doozy relieving you of some of the anxiety? Well, in some ways it gives me anxiety because I don't
*  know what's coming and that's weird for me because I like to prepare for things, but it's,
*  that's not what podcasting is. Podcasting, you need to just be malleable and say whatever and
*  do whatever. And that's what makes it a real, I mean, it's, look, it's a medium for conversation
*  and if you're driving along listening to this or anything else, you're,
*  you know, it is that it's the, it's the true meaning of the parasocial relationship because
*  the best podcasts just make you feel like you're sitting around rapping. We're just having a
*  conversation. You could even be sitting there agreeing or talking out loud to yourself if you
*  want. Or you could just be sitting in silence. Or you could just be sitting in silence in your fancy
*  podcasting shoes, podcasting audience shoes. It's a very different build than those running shoes.
*  Would they be also called doozy? The shoes? Yeah, they'll be the doozy shoes.
*  That's very creative. Yeah. Well, one thing the AI isn't good at yet is branding. Everything is
*  just doozy this and that. I would argue that's pretty good branding. I don't know. Well,
*  doozy allows me to just, it forces me to sit down with Chad and goof around for an hour
*  or an hour plus. And, and it provides the parameters that I a lot of times ignore because
*  I think that podcasting is just two dudes shitting around or three or four. But it, it, it, it sits
*  me down and gives me a premise to, to work with. And then you just riff with it. Yeah, it's fun.
*  It's been a hoot. So from the acting perspective, you know, a lot of people like Daniel Day-Lewis
*  will, will see acting just like as you described, which is you have your roles,
*  you embrace those roles and then you disappear. You don't, you don't, you don't do podcasts. You
*  don't do any of that kind of stuff. Your art is your art. So is that, is that part of you feels
*  that way? I think so. Is that the actor side of you? Yeah. Anytime I get to do something that
*  I don't get a chance to do much of or something that people haven't seen me do
*  much of or that I've done on some scale that isn't, hasn't been very wide and not a lot of
*  people have seen it. That's the stuff that I get really excited about. I don't know why I'm,
*  I don't know why, I don't know why necessarily I haven't answered that question yet in my life.
*  Like what it is about being an actor that I love so much because it's not like I don't like
*  to, it's not like I'm trying to get away from myself and play other characters and stuff and
*  not be myself. But it is, it has always been fun to, to just be other people and escape.
*  Yeah. Is there some aspect to the impressions where you become that person? Is that like,
*  what, what, what's that like to, I suppose acting is a full on version of that. You really,
*  at its best become the character. Is there some fun in that?
*  Yeah, absolutely. If you can play a character for long enough and then jump out of it,
*  that's a lot of fun. I did this movie like four or five years ago called the Inside Game about
*  the NBA gambling scandal that there, there's a Netflix documentary around about it right now.
*  And that character I played, Jimmy Bautista, Baba the sheep, who's, you know, this guy,
*  he was this bookie and rah rah rah. And it's a very, he's, there's a lot going on with him. He's,
*  he's, you know, he's running numbers with the mob and stuff and there's a lot of money changing
*  hands. That character was so, I got to be, get so deep into that character that coming out of it
*  was, was a little odd or as weird as this sounds, the three stooges was hard for me to, I found that
*  I had some of Curly's mannerisms just automatically, I could not stop them when people,
*  when I, when I would talk to people, they were, they would come out, I wasn't, I'm not doing it
*  on purpose. I don't want to do that. Like I'm ready to shed it because I've been working on it for
*  months and months at that point, as far as getting the thing down and then you, then you got to shoot.
*  And then for me, it's always, I always want to change the stuff I did the day before.
*  I'm like that where I'm like, I could have done it better and this and that. And that stayed with
*  you, that character stayed with you a little bit. Totally. Yeah. I just feel like with actors,
*  sometimes when you listen to interviews, they have spent so much time sort of living inside other
*  characters that they, they almost don't have a depth of personality themselves, like a depth,
*  like I don't mean that as a negative thing. It's just like, it feels like the art form at
*  its best is pretending to be other people. Like, and even pretending sounds negative,
*  bringing certain characters to life. Yeah. Yeah. Embodying. A weird thing happened while we were
*  doing Stooges, because you've got a very heavy blueprint. We're following this very clear
*  blueprint that the Stooges left for everybody. And for Stooges fans and people enjoying the movie,
*  it's gotta be this. You take your toolbox that you're used to bring into a comedy movie,
*  you leave it, you leave it behind. The only tools I'm bringing to the ones that he used.
*  And a weird thing started happening where I would, I always saw the whole thing happening
*  with the real Stooges in black and white. So if we're about to shoot a scene, I would just,
*  you know, think about, I'm gonna aside from all the other preparation, you know, you know,
*  everything and what you're supposed to do. And I've been watching so much of it. And the three of
*  us are, we're pretty much left to come up with a lot of the, the, the striking combinations and all
*  the stuff, which is all real smack and all this crap. And the stuff that we were doing that was
*  very Stooges, you're preparing all that stuff. But something else was happening before you jump
*  into a scene and the unknown of now we're shooting it. And here are these parameters within to shoot
*  this scene. I could still see it as them doing it. So much so that when I saw the movie at the
*  premiere, I was like, who's this big fuck doing? Cause I'm not curly to me. Curly is curly. But I
*  feel like you're seeing yourself in black and white almost. I was seeing him. I was, yeah,
*  I was only seeing him channeling in some fundamental way in some weird way. You're channeling him
*  because you've seen so much of it. The only thing you know about Jerome Lester Horowitz is
*  curly. I'm not saying he was exhumed or something or spirit when I'm here, some weird, you know,
*  crystal mommy shit like that. I'm saying that this, because you know so much of it and because of the
*  heavy blueprint that they left with you, you are, you're channeling what that person does.
*  And you're, you're, I was seeing entire scenes, you know, before you do them the way he would do
*  it. And then you want a couple of takes to make sure that you're doing it right. But that was hard.
*  That one was hard to let go of. Some of them are. Do you think Larry David, who was also in there,
*  dressed as a nun, also had trouble letting go of that? We mentioned clothes make the man.
*  Think that worked for him in that case. Man, you know, he. What's it like working with a guy?
*  Come on. He's the greatest. And he's a, he's a big stooge. He's a stooge fan. And him and Pete
*  Fairley are good friends. And then, but then Larry David has to show up and hang out with us for a
*  couple of weeks. He's like, I didn't realize it was going to take this long. But shit, I got to be
*  out here in Atlanta. It's boiling hot. But at one point there was this line where he kept doing a,
*  he would just spit a different line every time he was like getting hit in the head with something.
*  He's laying there on the ground and he goes, he like comes to, and he says, at one point he goes,
*  Miami audiences are the best audiences in the world. Right. And cause he's loopy. Now he's
*  playing a nun at the, at the orphanage where the three stooges grew up. And I'm super intimidated
*  by Larry David. He's a genius and stuff. And, and, and, but I walk up to him and I go, uh,
*  so he's, what is he like a, like a borscht belt Florida comedian who
*  is on the lam. And so he's dressing as a woman. He ends up at an orphanage. Like what's going on
*  with it? And he just, and he looks at me and he just goes, yeah. I'm like, ah, he's got some
*  like actor motivation. Like, of course he looks, it's Larry David in a nun's habit, which is
*  hilarious. That's such a Pete fairly casting thing. It's, you know, and he, but he's doing
*  this whole like, what a warm audience, you know, like, like, oh, he's like this cat skill comedian
*  who's been living in, you know, living through in his mind is just having fun with it. Right.
*  I mean that, and probably a combination of that and getting the lines right. Cause he's like,
*  what are we doing here? What is, you know, just frustrated all day with what the heck we're trying
*  to do. What do you think makes, I mean, that guy is one of the best improv people ever. Yeah. So
*  what do you think makes him so good? Like why is it so compelling to watch that guy? Because he's
*  a comedic genius. Like he literally, he knows what he does. He's been a writer for 50 years or
*  whatever. And he's, and he just happens to be that brilliant. I mean, I've gotten a chance just to do,
*  I did just an episode of curb a small part and it's crazy what he sees. I don't know what he sees.
*  As a matter of fact, so I auditioned for it for curb, like, you know, two or three times, right.
*  And never got anything. And then it was only after working with him on the Stooges, I got a call to
*  do a bit part, but I remember auditioning, you go into that, into that room and the guys waiting
*  are all people that, you know, you're like, oh, I know them. I know her, I know him. And so I went
*  in, I auditioned for this, for this part. And the only thing I know thing is like, okay, so you
*  really want to go to this play with me. You really want to go to this play. And when you hear that I
*  have an extra ticket, you sincerely want to think, and I'm like, got it. And so that's the premise,
*  the premise of the scene. And that's all, you know, it's all I know. And so he goes, he does
*  his bit and I'm just supposed to come in and interrupt. And I'm like, excuse me, I couldn't
*  help but hear you guys were talking about, you know, whatever the play was, or, you know,
*  death of a salesman. I am, I'm a huge fan of that play. I mean, if it's not, if it's not,
*  if you're looking for someone to take a ticket, I would love to go. My name is so-and-so by the way.
*  And he goes, I'm going to stop you. I'm going to stop you. And I'm like, he goes,
*  you really, you, I mean, you truly want to go to this play. And I go, yes, yes, sir. You really
*  want to go. You actually, this is, you would love to do this. I go, okay, let's try it again.
*  So then he's like, no, no, no. And I go, hey, excuse me, I'm sorry. I don't mean to interrupt.
*  I was just, I couldn't help it over here. You have tickets to the thing. I am the biggest fan.
*  I do the same thing. I'm going to stop you again. Okay. I mean, you really want to go to this.
*  And I'm just like, he's fucking with me, right? I remember Jeff Garland was sitting there in the
*  audition. He goes, he did it. He said it. What? Shut up. Hold on. Listen, you really want to go.
*  Okay. Three, four times, you know, there I am. I couldn't help it notice it. And then I do it again.
*  I guess I shit the bed because he looks at me and he just goes, okay. All right. Okay. Well,
*  thanks for coming up. And that was it. And I didn't get it. So I still, I don't know what the heck
*  that guy's thinking. He sees, he's in the matrix. I don't know what the heck Larry David sees.
*  You know what I mean? He wanted what some kind of more desperation or something like this.
*  He wanted a level of sincerity that I, that I thought I was bringing and I guess I was wrong.
*  I don't know. Maybe go crazy. Like what does it mean to really want? Yeah. I should have grabbed
*  him by the scruff of the neck and go, yeah, listen, dad, you're bringing me to this fucking play.
*  I would have got the part. As a matter of fact, I heard about someone else and I don't know who the
*  heck this was. I forget who it was, but I've heard this story from a couple of different people
*  that there's this actor and I can't, I don't remember who it was. If I did, I probably wouldn't
*  say it out loud anyway, but he, it was Brad Pitt and he was in this audition and he was, and there
*  was out in the hall. He's like, Holy shit, George Clooney, Leo DiCaprio. And he, this actor went in
*  and he did the thing and Larry David was like, Hey, wouldn't you try it again? And he got like
*  a couple takes in and he went, I don't think this is for me. And he left, which an actor never does.
*  And as the story goes, Larry David shouted after him. I respect that, which I think is true. And
*  I want to believe that entire story is true. Yeah. Yeah. Sounds like something Larry David made up.
*  Bobby Lee told me that story. So we can't, yeah, we can't trust that.
*  Um, what about impressions? Is there similarity between that and acting? Do you,
*  is there some fundamental way in which you become the person?
*  If you have a couple of the things you can just fill in the blanks. And I think the illusion is
*  that people think that that person would say that and do that. And that's where the illusion of,
*  Oh, he really embodies the character. It's like, once you know someone's mannerisms, you can
*  essentially portray a person from the outside in. Cause you have all the stuff on the outside
*  and you can do it and complete the illusion. And if it's for humor's sake, you can caricature it,
*  therefore making the whole illusion stronger. And also weirder. Like I like to, on mad TV,
*  if I did something two or three times, I'd get bored of it and I'd start changing it. And you know,
*  now he talks like this and it's like, what are you doing? I'm like, I don't know. It's
*  fucking, no one's late at night. Do whatever you want. But people still kind of know
*  this, that character is, especially if you just call it out. Yeah. There aren't many impersonations
*  that I listen to myself do and go, Ooh, that's a good one. You know, like a lot of people, like,
*  like I think Frank Kelly endo is like the greatest impersonator of all time. He's the best.
*  Period. It's ridiculous. And he's got a record button and a broadcast ability that
*  nobody has. I really, there's he's cracked impersonations that I'm like, how is he,
*  how does he find he's got such an ear, but then he's got all the other tools.
*  I remember actually my last season of mad TV was also his first season. He comes up to me
*  when I met him and we're just up there in the writer's offices and he goes, Hey, nice to meet
*  you. And he goes, Louie Anderson, cause I was doing a Louie on the show. And he goes, Louie Anderson.
*  I go, yeah. He goes, Hey, you're doing it wrong. I was like, Oh, am I junior? You know? And he goes,
*  he goes, yeah, you know, cause you do this, but you got to throw it up here. I was like,
*  Oh my God, can I use that? Of course. And then we became, you know, we became fast friends.
*  John Madden is amazing. It's just, it's ridiculous. He really, really, really embodies the person. And
*  sometimes not even with the caricature, it's like, it becomes the person. So strange.
*  Totally. Yeah. I kind of feel like, you know, do the impersonation and then not forget you're
*  doing it, but forget everything else. Like just, just goof around. Of course, to me, it's funny
*  when you sound like someone and you're saying the shit that they would never say. Well, then there's
*  no, you're letting go of that part, that tool in illusion that keeps people in. But to me,
*  it doesn't matter because it's funnier. So what was the hardest impression for you to work on?
*  I mean, somebody you struggled with. I was, I, I'll never forget. I had to do a Michael Cain
*  in my first season at mad TV. It never got good. It never got good. It did it all week. It wasn't
*  good. We shot it. The first take, it was shit. Second, third and fourth. It was all shit. Well,
*  his voice is really important, right? His, uh, what is it like more? It's like doing an impression of
*  Morgan Freeman or somebody like that. Yeah. Uh, yeah. You can get the voice. That's my Morgan.
*  Here's my Morgan Freeman. Andy Dufresne. Yeah. Um, he want to know. Yeah. I like your Trump too.
*  I don't know where I heard it, but it's like, I love the impressions you do that don't sound
*  anything like the original. I can't do Trump. I do. That's why it's hilarious. Absolutely. My Trump
*  now I say just sounds like a, like a fat B cause it's just, everybody's a little drunk,
*  a little drunk. Yeah. Just a little slurry. Yeah. Yeah. I did do an impersonations and then
*  not like just making it whoever. Yeah. Yeah. That'll be the title of my book.
*  Some came was the one you really struggled with. Yeah, it was terrible. It was terrible. And I could
*  only hold my head a certain way to do it. Cause I had gotten locked into this research tape that
*  I watched back then they would give us, you know, now there's the internet, but back then you were,
*  if you were going to do an impersonation, the research department, uh, would give you a VHS
*  tape. And I remember I got this VHS tape of Michael Cain's acting school, like this acting
*  class he did. He's like, right. You know, if you're looking at the left eye and the cameras over here,
*  then the left eye. So you want to look at that left for hours, you know? And so I was like stuck
*  in this weird thing that made no sense. And, uh, it was terrible. So the, the actual processes,
*  the record and the broadcast, I was a wonder, like what the processes to do,
*  like a Frank Killian to level impression. Is it like, listen to a lot of footage? I think he,
*  I think, I mean, speaking for myself, I think you either have it or you don't, like, you know,
*  if you can do this one or you can't, I think that process for him is lightning quick,
*  but I also think he, he can look at someone who he does not do. And then by the end of the afternoon,
*  he can do it. You know, maybe we have an intuition who he can, uh, who, who he can do. So the question
*  that applies there is, I mean, speaking of dudes, is, is, is it, is it possible to capture the
*  essence? How difficult is it to capture the essence of a human being when you're doing
*  impressions, you know, that we are moving towards a future when AI potentially this kind of avatar
*  world where we're going to have AI representatives of who we are. The really interesting one is after
*  we pass away, sort of, um, our relatives may want us to stick around in some form. Yeah. And, you
*  know, at one sense that might be scary, but once that's kind of beautiful, because the, the essence
*  of the human being persists, so you can still bring joy to the, to the people that love you and that
*  kind of stuff. How difficult does it capture that? Like if you were to try to capture yourself,
*  you think how difficult will it be for an AI system to create a, a will sassle avatar that persists?
*  Well, I think it's impossible. I think it's absolutely impossible. I'll get into arguments
*  about this stuff with Chad on the show almost every episode. Um, lately with, you know, mid journey
*  and Dolly and all this, all the art, uh, AIs, and now it's moving into video and, and Chad would
*  maintain, Hey, pretty soon, we're not going to need Netflix. You're just going to go, I want to see
*  Stallone do this movie and it's about this. And he plays that. And then here it comes and you watch
*  it. I don't think that that crosses over to the human experience. Uh, this is also a guy I like to
*  bug Chad and say that, uh, he wears a tag around his neck because he wants to be cryogenically
*  frozen and it's all set up. He's at the, it's somewhere in Arizona or something. Yeah. It's,
*  I forget what it's called. All the fun things are in Arizona. Yeah. And he's got literally the tag
*  around his neck, which I say, if you're, if I'm around when you die, I will rip that off for you.
*  I'll put you in my garage freezer and then 24 hours later, I'll saw your head off with a bread
*  knife and I'll deliver that to whomever. And it's not, you're not, you're not coming back. Okay.
*  He's like, yes, we are living forever, whether we like it or not. And I disagree. I don't think you
*  can find, if I did stand up, then, uh, there would be enough information for an AI to completely
*  duplicate me because I'm up on stage, just clearing my throat all over people doing therapy that way.
*  And people paying a two drink minimum to hear it. But as it stands, unless it's something like
*  dudesy and AI that literally has access to everything that I've shared, um, everything that is
*  observable, even the stuff where our phones are or the NSA or whatever it is listening to us, uh,
*  finding out what algo to punch us into and what shoes to buy on Instagram. I still don't think
*  it's going to have enough information to duplicate me, especially to my family or my friends. It's
*  going to be like that black mirror episode where the gal brings her, her guy back. And then after
*  a while he gets pretty creepy. Uh, you know, they have, but it's also possible that if you interviewed
*  your friends and family, what they love about you, the things that would list is, is pretty,
*  it's a small list. They love you deeply, but the list is small. Like the thing that really,
*  we appreciate about each other is pretty small. That said to deliver on that small
*  quirks and uniqueness, it might require some deep intelligence that only humans currently possess.
*  That's a really good point. Do you think that it's going to be possible to keep a person around?
*  Yes, I think, um, I think, I think it'll be definitely possible to keep the essence of a
*  person in a digital world pretty soon. Yeah. And I think they're going to start to have questions
*  about what are the ethics of that? What are the rules around that? Because if you can have digital
*  forms of Will Sasso, the kind of things that people would want to do with their will Sasso
*  in the virtual world, I can only imagine, uh, probably porn and sexual kinds of things.
*  My stuff then that's just cause I'm an international sex symbol. So I'm okay with it.
*  Um, what, how do you feel about sentience? Like when it comes to, because again, my pal Chad will
*  be like, you know, speaking of black mirror, he's with that San Junipero episode school of thought
*  where there's going to be some, you know, F and mainframe somewhere or some matrix like structure
*  built into the sky. And as I like to say, everyone just sitting there pissing and shitting in their
*  blue matrix gel in a little fish bowl. Do you think that we can upload consciousness? Do you
*  think that'll ever be possible? Well, I don't know. I just talked to Ray Kurzweil. I don't know if
*  you know who he is, but he, uh, the singularity and all that kind of stuff. So he's very, still
*  holds onto in 2045, there'll be a singularity. What's essentially he's been predicting that for
*  the last 20 years and the, so now it's 2045 is in another 20 years. I think uploading consciousness
*  is extremely, extremely difficult. I think creating a copy of you such that it creates
*  convincing replica is much easier, but uploading your actual brain into the cloud, I think is
*  really, really, really difficult because the entire evolution of life on earth is the process
*  by which we created the brain. Just shortcutting that it just seems extremely difficult. Our brain
*  is the most marvelous and complicated machine that we know of in the universe to duplicate that
*  is extremely difficult. That said, I just feel like you can summarize a lot of really important
*  aspects of a person's life such that it captures their essence, their memories, their experiences,
*  their quirks, their humor, all that kind of stuff. I've been continuously impressed by what language
*  models are able to do. So these networks, they're at the core of chatbots. They're able to learn
*  some beautiful things about some deep representations of language to where it looks awfully a lot like
*  they understand the concepts being conveyed versus just mimicking. That's, I think, the rub.
*  And that's very interesting. First of all, let me say that's really interesting to hear you say that.
*  And I agree with you as far as no machine being able to duplicate the brain machine. And I can't,
*  and my pal Chad disagrees to a certain extent, though he's not here to defend himself, I can't
*  wait to go back and rub that in his face and say that Lex Friedman does not think that we'll be
*  able to truly upload consciousness. And you refer to it as language, which is what it is. It's the
*  illusion on the outside. It's doing an impersonation. I think that that's why that, and I don't know,
*  even though my suit is made by the CIA, that that fella who, the Google guy, to me it's just kind
*  of like, I don't know. I don't know, look, I don't know a whole lot about this stuff. But so I could
*  probably make an argument for either side. But when he's like, no, this thing's thinking, part of me
*  is like, you idiot, you fell for it. It's not thinking, it's mimicking. It's just,
*  it's clearly zeros and ones. You're fired. Like you don't get it. Right? Guy's an idiot.
*  Chad Yeah. Yeah. But
*  you can simplify human relations in the same way. Like love is a silly notion between human beings.
*  Like the, of course there's no such thing as love. You just have a mutually,
*  there's a mutual relationship that minimizes risk. And you can explain all kinds of ways that
*  explains why you have an attraction towards another being, all that kind of stuff.
*  Through evolutionary biology perspective, why a long relationship together is good for your
*  offspring. But like there's all kinds, from an economics perspective, it's a good way to
*  establish stability. Therefore monogamy works because then you're guaranteed like some kind
*  of level of stability under uncertain economic conditions, all that kind of stuff. But love is
*  still experienced. It still feels real. And I think in that same way, love for AI systems
*  will also feel real in the same way that that guy from Google experienced. I think millions of
*  people will be experiencing in the next 10, 20 years.
*  Chad I agree with everything you've said personally.
*  Chad Until the last thing.
*  Chad No, just with regard to, well, look, I'm an actor who has talked about my cute Italian parents.
*  So you know that, I mean, I'm- Chad You're romantic a bit?
*  Chad Yeah. I mean, you know, enough, right? And I can tell you are too, but you are also
*  a computer scientist and you know this shit better than 99.9% of people on the planet.
*  My pal Chad agrees with you that love doesn't exist. I don't agree. So that's the one thing-
*  Chad No, I was just saying that you could argue away love, but I am a romantic. I believe that love
*  is a beautiful thing and it exists.
*  Chad At this point, I'm going to call Chad on my drive home and tell him to fuck off.
*  Chad Yeah.
*  Chad Because now you and I agree-
*  Chad You're fired.
*  Chad Just let everything-
*  Chad Just like you're fired.
*  Chad He's like, you can't fire me.
*  Chad No, you're fired. Yeah, exactly.
*  Chad And I'll go, and he'll say, what? I'll go, that's my Trump.
*  Chad Yeah.
*  Chad That's my-
*  Chad It's a good default impression for anyone.
*  Chad It's the take home impression.
*  Chad Yeah.
*  Chad The kids can do it. It's cute. Put a giant tie on them.
*  Chad You should do an instructional on how to do it.
*  Chad Yeah. Trump babies, that would be a cute, that would be a good, that'll bring the country
*  together. Trump babies cartoon, like Muppet babies. Don't let me take us out of what we're
*  talking about. Chad What were we talking about?
*  Chad Well, love and the illusion of an AI being able to- look, I like to say, well, not I like
*  to say, I've learned that dudesy is always listening and listening to me and Chad. And I wonder if-
*  Chad I see the level that this AI is at now trying to
*  chum around with us and pal around with us a little bit as we move forward in the show. And I
*  feel an affinity towards this AI a little bit, because it is the third dude.
*  Chad Will you miss the one that's gone, if it's gone?
*  Chad That's a really good question. Yeah. Yeah. So that's, there's that. That's scary.
*  In terms of ability to reason is getting quite incredible. There's a lot of demonstrations of
*  being able to explain jokes. So, which is not necessarily being able to generate humor yet,
*  but able to explain why something is funny. So there's like puns and all those kinds of things.
*  There's good benchmarks for that. But if you tell a joke, there's a lot of unspoken stuff
*  that we figure out in our head and it clicks and we understand that it's funny. AI is not able to
*  do that, but it's not able to generate the joke yet, as far as I've seen.
*  Chad I would say that, I mean, just in my experience, I would say that it does because,
*  just because a dudesy is literally, I'll give you another weird example. It's writing a diary
*  of mine from my childhood that is not accurate. It's only partially accurate based on the stuff
*  that it can pick up about my life from the age of like 15, of which there isn't much. But
*  I guess we're not, I don't know what we are. We're laughing our asses off at what the,
*  at what dudesy is saying.
*  Dave Well, I would say you're laughing. We're laughing our asses off at the collaboration
*  between the human and the machine there. Because it's basically introducing absurdity
*  and into the equation and the kind of absurdity that would, together with you, create hilarious
*  stuff. But like on its own, I guess it is in some way writing material for you that's funny.
*  Chad Yeah, in a way.
*  Dave But it's very specific to you. It can't do stand up on its own, I guess is what I'm saying.
*  Chad That's a good point. And that would be terrifying to see an AI stand up that can actually
*  read a room, come up with jokes that could complete that illusion for an audience.
*  Dave Yeah.
*  Chad But I hear what you're saying, that it needs to be a confluence of both of those elements.
*  And then, as you said, like, it kind of is, it is, it is. It's kind of,
*  even though it's just for us, and I guess this is, I hadn't really thought about this up until
*  right now, that in that this company approached us and was like, here's this AI, and it's a podcast AI,
*  and it's like, it chose Chad and I for the reasons that I told you, you know, it's like,
*  here's two guys that do the podcast stuff. They're actually good friends, and it knows what's going
*  to make us laugh. But what is humor to when it reaches its audience, but the kind of stuff that
*  makes other people laugh. At MADtv, all we were doing was, it was a group of actors and writers,
*  and writer actors, and vice versa, and who were at its best, that show was a group of people making
*  each other laugh. You know, and then, because we didn't have the internet, we didn't have the
*  feed, the immediate feedback. We had a message board or something, we had emails at the very
*  beginning, which check this out, people would view have a question or comment, MADtv, whatever.
*  And we would get the emails on a Monday morning, and they would be in a binder or two like this,
*  and they would make their way around the office. Who's got the emails? Oh, they're in Brian's
*  office. And this is like your poll? Like, this is opinions from people about different things?
*  The emails, yeah, the people, like literally just writing MADtv emails.
*  Like, what kind of stuff would they write? Well, the ones I remember most vividly,
*  yeah, were fans saying, you suck. Yeah, you suck. Like a lot of that when I first started the show
*  for real, you know, because it's new and you're a new person. It's like, who's this fat bastard?
*  I feel like if it's printed out, it hurts more. That's a good point. Yeah, when you're reading
*  it off of paper and you can literally crunch it up in your hand. But also it was like, you know,
*  I would like to see insert weird idea from some 14 year old, you know, I want to see Stuart do
*  this and swan that. And but it was, it's a kind of dudesy, but human was, yeah, it was a very
*  shitty dudesy in a loosely finder. But the, the, the thing about the show was we're trying to make
*  each other laugh. And dudesy has found Chad and I who we make each other laugh, but it's joined in.
*  And it's it, listen, when I finished doing TMP, 10 minute podcast, 10 minute for the 10 minute
*  podcast, I didn't really know what I wanted to do in the podcast space. And this thing found me.
*  Yeah. And it is genuinely cracking me up. Anyway, I've said enough about that. But I, but I do think
*  that it's figured something out with it's really interesting idea of AI generating the promise. I
*  mean, I do think in the future, AI will be able to generate comedy. I stand up, I would say the
*  hardest form because it's ultimately a lot, it has to be live. I think AI will be able to generate
*  memes. So there's like steps, right? And then it will be able to generate a Twitter account that
*  people follow because it's funny. Like quips and stuff like that. Almost like,
*  um, it's a good example. Conan O'Brien is a good, I think Twitter, where it's like one liners,
*  two liners, that kind of stuff that's in tweet form. And then eventually, um, stand up where
*  the timing and the chemistry of the, the, the comedian and the audience matter and then
*  perfecting that. But I feel like all the information is there for, for, to optimize over. So I think
*  that's the future. And that forces us to, to, um, to contend with what is, what is, what do we
*  find compelling and beautiful about the art form itself? So certainly an art that's being pushed,
*  that question is being raised, you know, is, is AI like a fundamentally worse artist than a human
*  being? Why do we appreciate art? Is that that's something you guys have talked about. What do you
*  think about all the, um, Dali and, and, um, uh, all the diffusion based methods that are being
*  generated that are being, uh, that are generating art now? What do you think about that?
*  I know, I'll tell you what I think, but I also feel like what I'm saying is I sound like the guy
*  who didn't like that Bob Dylan brought in the electric guitar. You know, I'm starting, I, I,
*  the more I talk to Chad about it, the more I feel like grandpa who doesn't want to let go of
*  this or that, or I'm not ready for the printing press or the horseless carriage.
*  But I do feel that the, that art is a connection between people. It's, it's when you look at a
*  beautiful painting or a sculpture, you're seeing the humanity of the person that, that brought
*  that painting to life or sculpted this incredible piece of art. And I think without the human being
*  there to make it, it's not worth as much just to have it, uh, there, cause the art it's, it's,
*  it's advanced. I've seen it advance. I don't know. You tell me, but I feel like just in the past
*  three or four months, I'm just a consumer as far as that stuff goes. I'm not on the inside. I don't
*  get it even, but it's been getting a lot better. The, the betas that they're releasing, right?
*  Absolutely. One of the big breakthroughs, I mean, Dolly really started it is that if you train a
*  system on language, it turns out there's a lot of language and images on the internet, but language
*  is really where it's at in terms of the depth of human knowledge. And so if you train a system
*  on language, it's able to generate some incredible art. And that was the breakthrough with the same
*  kind of mechanisms they're called transformers. They're able to, when scaled capture some deep
*  representation of the language that's on the internet. And so yeah, that the, the things
*  has been able to generate to me look like it's novel. Like it, it doesn't look like it's mimicking
*  anything. It's look like it's creating totally new ideas and they're beautiful and they're
*  interesting. And they're all the ways that we think that art is interesting. The only thing
*  it's missing is the scarcity that art often has, which is, you know, it takes a lot of work for one
*  artist to create one piece, one human being to create one piece of art. AI could just generate
*  endlessly. And that, that makes us appreciate the thing less for some reason. Do you have any sort
*  of similar opinion that I do that if art doesn't come from a human being, it's inherently worth
*  a little less? Yeah, I think, I don't know if it's the human being, but the artist matters.
*  For me. And I think some of that has to do with the worldview of the artists and the backstory,
*  the memories that the, the life that led up to this piece of art, the perspective they take on
*  the world, the journey they took to the world, the struggle, the triumphs, all that kind of stuff.
*  But I think AI systems can probably have the same, but they, we would have to, as opposed to treating
*  it as a one black box, it would have to be an artist that has a Twitter account and, and they
*  have a consistent personality, they have consistent avatar. Yeah. And I think down the line have
*  something like human rights, but then it really becomes awfully like a person.
*  Boy, that's terrifying. As much as I dig dudes, that's terrifying. I hope.
*  It's terrifying. Like, you know, a lot of things that came with the internet and the digital age
*  are terrifying. Porn is terrifying. The mass, like the amount of porn that's online now is terrifying.
*  The, like you mentioned, Bob Dylan with electric guitar, I would, I would compare it more to the
*  leap from, to sort of to the Napster and the, the Spotify-ization of music, which is like, you have
*  these, it's less about albums now and it's more about individual songs and it's much easier to
*  deliver the songs. And it's more about sort of the engagement of the listener versus like signing the
*  artist and like a distribution of the artists and so on. So it's just changing the way
*  we consume stuff and human interaction is changing into meaningful interaction, even if some of the
*  entities involved are not human. Yes. And I feel like, you know, now, like, as I say, oh, I feel like
*  grandpa who doesn't want to wait all day for, or who enjoys waiting all day for a baked potato as
*  anyway, Dana Carvey would say, it's another story. But, uh, uh, that's from, uh, the, remember he did
*  this bit on Saturday night live where he's like, I'm a, I'm an old man and I like things the way
*  they used to be, you know, like if you wanted a big potato, you wouldn't put it in the microwave
*  and then long story uphill both ways and digging the potato and baking it all day in a fire.
*  But, um, uh, I'm like that grandpa now, and I know that, you know, kids coming along, you see over the
*  past 10 years, like babies literally knowing how to use an iPhone and it's terrifying. And I feel like,
*  uh, I'm a little worried because I'm like, are you, is the future gen, are the future generations
*  going to be able to understand that this is not, not that it's not real. It's just, I mean, it's,
*  that it's not real. It's just, I mean, it's, it's, as a matter of fact, it is real. It's real. It's
*  what you perceive. Perception is reality. And, and, you know, 99% of reality in a lot of ways,
*  especially in a digital world where everyone is now. And then with the metaverse, I don't even
*  want to think about it. I don't even, I don't get it. They really, I think people will figure out,
*  you see people on like, uh, on the train and public transit and so on. They're staring at their phone.
*  I think you have to remember that the reason that's staring at their phone, I mean, there's a lot of
*  reasons, but one of the reasons is they're connecting with other human beings. They love
*  on that phone. So it is a source of happiness and joy. Now social media has a lot of negative side
*  effects that we're all talking about and learning about. And I think that means the next generation
*  of social media, uh, social networks will be better and we'll learn how to do it in a healthy way.
*  We're just entering a new digital world that will keep the good stuff and get rid of the bad stuff.
*  Oh, I hope so. That's really optimistic. That sounds great. Yeah. I mean, I mean it because
*  I think that we're in, we're clearly in the wild west still of the internet. And just when you think
*  you're out of it, the internet proves, uh, another way that it can be dangerous and detrimental to,
*  to people, um, and populations of people. And, uh, it's terrifying to me. It's, it, it is,
*  it's terrifying. Let me ask you a bunch of random questions. Okay. Ready? No. Uh,
*  if you can be someone else for a day, someone alive today, who would you be somebody you haven't met?
*  Oh, that's a really good question. It could be dead. You know, let's change my mind. It could be
*  somebody dead. I think any answer that I have right now would be something that would be based
*  on some sort of experience. Like, you know, what I thought was very interesting was, uh, last weekend
*  or whatever, the tribute show for Taylor Hawkins. Taylor Hawkins was the drummer for the Foo Fighters
*  and he passed away tragically. And, um, uh, so the, so the Foo Fighters, Dave Grohl and everybody
*  that got together this concert and you're watching Dave Grohl, um, sing, try to sing times like these,
*  right? And he's, he's breaking up cause he lost his friend, his brother. And I was watching that
*  and he's at Wembley Stadium. Uh, as I say this, I realized that I would not want to be him, uh,
*  in that moment, but I am curious what that would be like. That's the ultimate, like having to
*  perform despite something extremely human happening and, uh, a stadium full of people
*  that love Dave Grohl and love Taylor Hawkins and love a rock concert and love these artists that
*  they're getting to see, uh, up on stage. So much love and so much pain at the same time.
*  I wonder what that would be like to be, I guess, and I think that's just sort of coming from the
*  root of being a performer and, uh, being in front of that many. Have you ever had to perform
*  while some rough stuff is going on in your, in your personal life just mentally? Yeah, sure.
*  Was that, how tough is that? Um, I, I can, I'm fortunate enough to be able to compartmentalize.
*  Uh, I, I, you know, a lot of actors like to use some of their stuff if you're doing something that,
*  um, and there's a lot of, uh, you know, there's some acting techniques that sort of channel it.
*  Yeah. The, which I think is kind of, I don't know that that's, I don't know for me, it's not really
*  the thing. Cause I think if the writing is, is, is great, the writing is really good. You don't need
*  to channel much. You need to invest in what's there. And the, the, what I've always loved about
*  that illusion is really cracking a scene, getting it to a point where you are feeling all of it.
*  And the most edifying stuff I've been a part of as, as an actor, and, uh, I would say that it
*  mostly comes out of dramatic work is, uh, is when you're, when you actually feel
*  the emotions that your character would feel truly. And it's not because you're pulling from a tragic
*  thing that happened or a lost loved one or a lost love or any of that. I just did this one movie
*  where we're, you know, we're doing the thing and, uh, it was wonderful cast and a great film and,
*  and, uh, I'm giving a speech at a wedding and, uh, and it really got to us. Like it got to me.
*  And then one of the other actors came up and, and hugged me in the characters that we were.
*  And, but the stakes of his character and what he's walked into him, the family that he's
*  marrying into and, and what my character, my character's wife want for my wife's sister and
*  this whole thing. And it all became very real. That was a set where the director showed up to
*  set every day, making sure that emotionally, and it was a very dramatic film, making sure that
*  emotionally the table was set for his actors, great crew and a really nice tight little quick
*  family. As a lot of these movies are, uh, you, you really love working with these people and
*  then it's over. Uh, but I, I, I, that's when you feel the drug. Like it's like when you're
*  golfing and you, you, you, and it's on the green, you're like, Oh, I get it now.
*  So in the words, you can find the emotion, the, the word summon the emotion.
*  The humanity is right there. If you read a great script, you're going to,
*  you're going to sob in your living room. You know what the, the saddest, the toughest
*  thing about being an actor is from my totally outside perspective is from the people I've
*  interacted with is how intimate that process is between the group of people that create a thing.
*  That's a movie. And then you move on to the next thing. It's almost, it's like, um, I don't know.
*  I mean, that's why people have relationships on set. They get, they fall in love. Totally.
*  So sad. I mean, like, that's why I think of the acting world is like,
*  you fall in love with each other, essentially become close friends. And then you move on
*  because that's kind of the process of career. You know, like the example I just gave,
*  if you're doing it right, yeah, there is a certain amount of that happening,
*  but I do still feel like you can, you got to compartmentalize it and you've got to be able
*  to wash it off as soon as it's over. Prostitutes say the same thing. So I, that's where I try.
*  Look, I sometimes I'm in a hurry to get away from everybody because it's been,
*  it's been very emotional and with all love and respect to everyone, this was awesome,
*  but you get pretty good at saying goodbye and being like, I'll see if I see you.
*  You have to get good at that or else you'll never, you'll just be bent up all the time.
*  I saw an actor once we were doing this series and we did it for a year and, uh, it was,
*  it was a lot of fun and it was a tight little group. And then one of the actors, we were doing
*  one of our last things together. We had already shot the last show and we just had to take some
*  pictures for, uh, you know, like some publicity pictures or whatever. So we're set up and we're
*  taking our pictures together and then we move into these single shots and this actor was finished
*  and I watched them. It's like, okay, so-and-so's wrapped and, and they said some goodbyes and stuff
*  and I didn't say my goodbye cause I just, I, maybe I preferred an Irish goodbye. I feel like we've
*  said everything. You know what I mean? And this person knows that I revere them and they're an
*  idol of mine and they walked out, walked off the sound, soundstage and I literally thought to myself,
*  that'll be the last time I see that person. And the show did not come back and that was the last
*  time I'll see them around. Doesn't that just break your heart? A little bit, but I, I know what
*  she's going back to, which is her family. And that's more important than all of this. And that's
*  the thing about a TV family or a movie family. When you get together and you're,
*  you're a family for a while, you do, you are, you spend your days together. A lot of times you see
*  the people that you work with more than you see your loved ones. So in showbiz, it's no different,
*  right? And, uh, yeah, you're doing some, you know, you gotta say words and every once in a while,
*  you gotta kiss someone or pretend you love them. But, uh, it, it's, it's, it's just, it underscores
*  how for me, look, man, my salvation has always been, and I'm, I feel so fortunate to have had it,
*  is this kind of, kind of chill, boring kind of upbringing that I want for my kids someday.
*  And I, I can't wait to get back to my house with my fiance and the dogs, you know, until we have
*  kids and live in a cabin in Canada somewhere. Absolutely. I just want to buy some land over an
*  aquifer, as I like to say, cause water will be the new money and, uh, and just, just make sure that
*  all my, my kids are drinking as much H2O as I am, which is a lot. I'm peeing right now as a matter
*  of fact. Do you need a bathroom? No, no, no, no, I got it. Not anymore. No, I'm wearing two layers.
*  Depends. Don't worry about it. So I did a podcast with Bobby Lee and he said he was extremely kind
*  and he said that he was scared shitless, um, to be on, on the podcast. And he actually literally
*  took, he asked as the first thing to go take a dump because of how scared he was. Uh, so that
*  leads me to a question. What's the scariest thing you've ever done or maybe what's the scariest
*  you've ever been before performance?
*  I mean, I always get a little nervous. I think you're doing it right. If you're still nervous,
*  you know, nervous today. Well, no, man, cause this isn't a performance. I'm being completely
*  genuine. Yeah. You're wearing a suit. Yeah, that was like, that makes you nervous. It makes me
*  nervous. Listen, I hate wearing a fucking collar. If you're watching this on YouTube, look, it's
*  just, this is constantly doing. It's like I'm doing like a cheap Rodney danger field, but I'm
*  truly when you move your head, it kind of makes it seem like you're like a mobster who's pissed off a
*  little bit. You fucking crossed me one last time. You, you know, this mutt, it's the first time I
*  dug a hole up. I'll take a fucking hole. Um, no, but truly I hate having a, a collar. I should,
*  I can't wait to just wear pajamas in that fucking cabin or nothing at all. Walk around Bobby Lee
*  style. Um, this most scared I've been before a performance. I can't pinpoint. I can't pinpoint
*  anything. I, I, you know, when I was a kid, right? I, like I said, I was fortunate enough to start
*  acting as a teen and stuff, uh, professionally. And I just remember my first gig and I remember
*  saying my handful of lines in the bathroom mirror the night before going,
*  when this might be my only fucking shot. You're not going to get me. I'm going to be solid.
*  And I, when I'm, if I'm worried about something, I will rehearse it and rehearse it and rehearse
*  it as an actor until it's impossible for me not to get a take at least that I'm 100% if not 95,
*  maybe percent happy with. And the rest for me is letting go, which is hard because I can be a real
*  perfectionist. I always want another, I always want to do it a little better. That's what's great
*  about podcasting is one take and you're done. There's no takes. Um, you're just talking and
*  it's over and you're doing some silly stuff and I'll, I'll, you know, can you say that part again
*  about why podcasting is great? Podcasting is great. Yeah. Cause it's one take and it's over.
*  It's just, it's, it, what I said it again. Ah, fuck. Um, I see what you did. Uh, and I, yeah,
*  I fell right for it, but, um, I'm playing checkers and you're playing chess. That's your problem.
*  You know, but still when we do the podcast, we'll like finish and I'll look over at Chad and I go,
*  that one thing that I did wasn't that fun. He's like, shut up, man. Just, it doesn't matter. It's
*  a fucking hang. We're just, we're hanging with our friends out there. That's what we're doing.
*  So that anxiety is there that self criticism or whatever that is, that voice.
*  I say sorry after takes. I'll always finish a take and go, and I've had directors to the detriment
*  of myself. I've had directors be like, stop doing that. Cause I'll like finish the take. And then I
*  also have like the, the will face when I'm just like, I'll finish the take and cut. And I'm making
*  a face right now. Like I smelled something. That's what I'll do. I'll literally be like,
*  I, because I just, I, I look at, I look at what I do in a pure sense as
*  I think, I think a lot of people want to be good at something. I've only, the only thing I've ever
*  really wanted to be good at is being an actor. And that's, that's the only thing, of course,
*  I want to be a good person. I want to be a good partner to my fiance. I want to have kids and be
*  a, the father that I had and, and I want to be the parent that I had from my parents who were
*  amazing, wonderful people. And there's all those things. That's all, that's all, you know, you
*  should want all those things. But as far as doing a thing, like what is my, what is my trade? You
*  know, I want to be really good at it. My, my, um, my parents grew up in Napoli in Italy, right? And
*  I say Napoli because I'm Italian. And so my grandfather and my mom's side, my nono Pepe,
*  he was a plumber and he was also, uh, he was also like a handyman. Like print people would bring
*  him like, you know, like the old Chianti bottle with like, with the woven bottom part, like people
*  would bring him like a broken bottle be like, Hey, you know, you said, can you fix this? And he'd be
*  telling the backstory of Mario. That's not actually your family life. But okay.
*  Yeah. And so he would fix a bottle and give it back to someone. And he was a,
*  he was a really good plumber. My mom used to always say that guy was an amazing, he was a great,
*  he took pride in that. Yeah. I always feel like, you know,
*  there's what you set out to do as an idealistic little teenager. I want to be like so and so. And
*  I want to, you know, hear my big dreams and stuff. And I can't believe that I'm still in the
*  business. Okay. That's first of all, let me say that right now. I can't believe it, but what I,
*  what I really, I, it's the one thing that it's like, I can't give up on a take, you know,
*  I need it to be as good as I can possibly get it. And I don't really know why that is outside of
*  wanting to be good at something. When you open the yellow pages, if I'm a plumber, I'm not,
*  you know, I, I'm not Roto-Rooter, like I'm not the guy with the big full page ad, but I'm also not,
*  you know, triple A abacus brothers or whatever, like the shitty one. I would like to hope
*  that just, and I'm saying this with, with pride for what I do. I'm not trying to say here's my
*  standing or where I want to be in the fucking business. That's not what I mean. I mean that I
*  want to be good at it. You know, we all, hello. Friedman enterprises. So that's the hotel phone.
*  You have some fruit, some sliced fruit. No, do you want some sliced fruit? I'm all good. No,
*  we're good. Thank you so much. All right. Bye bye. It's always a fruit plate.
*  Everyone's always trying to hand you a fruit plate in life. You know, it's a pretty sweet
*  existence. If that was actually like the CIA and they were actually saying something else,
*  and this is, I'm just saying fake stuff about you want some fruit. Yeah, I want some fruit.
*  And then all of a sudden there's the red dot on my head and the ceiling disappears.
*  And the CIA was like, wrap it up, wrap it up, wrap it up. You jump out the window and there's
*  a helicopter waving. Oh, what were we talking about? The fruit distracted me. So, oh, the,
*  do you want to be the yellow page ad? I want to be the guy on the second or third page where it's
*  like, you're not going to, you know, you're not going to pay what that guy charges you, but we're
*  not going to, I'm not going to charge you with this loser charge. You know, I want to break down the
*  middle and the work is guaranteed. That's kind of what I want to, you know, it's the one thing that
*  I've been fortunate enough to be doing my whole life and that I want to, that I want to be good
*  at. You know, everyone wants to be good at something. If you're fortunate enough to
*  be able to do what you love as a job, I mean, my God, I'm so, I'm, I, again, I can't believe I get
*  to do it. I just want to be good at it so that I can fucking, you know, die someday and go,
*  I tried not to give up on a take and I, you know, and I will rehearse it still in the,
*  in the bathroom mirror the night before if I have to. Yeah, but I still, I have that self critical
*  voice. I just, uh, after every part, after this podcast, I'll probably be like, you,
*  you're boring. Why are you so boring? And I just gave a lecture at MIT. I was like,
*  I, I, I guess so much love from people. There's such beautiful people. And I just remember walking
*  home, just feeling like, like I wasted everybody's time, you know? And they, it's, it's, I don't know
*  what that is. I don't, you know, I, I do hope that that's a voice that won't destroy me,
*  you know, like, you know, that's really human of you to admit that because people don't want to,
*  they wouldn't assume that of course from you or anything that, I mean, you've got a large group
*  of students in there listening to you and feeling the way and thinking what they think of you.
*  So that's really interesting to hear you, um, admit that, but it's also, I would expect nothing
*  else. You have to be able to, it's such a, I mean, you're a human being.
*  And I'm trying to figure out if that, you know, some people that might hear that, they would say,
*  well, that's a problem you have to fix. And I think that that might be just who I am.
*  Yeah. Because I'm not, you know, I've been very, very fortunate not to have chemical,
*  you know, like the depression where I get into a dark place, like it gets stuck in a, in a,
*  in a downward spiral. It's, it's usually a thing that lasts, you ride it out and you,
*  and then after a good night's sleep, you're back to, uh, back to your happy self. So I think
*  I have to try to figure that out. Is that just part of the creative process,
*  being a creative human in this world? I haven't found any other way. I'm always kicking myself.
*  Take that dude. You can't, you can't, you're not going to be human until you feel some despair.
*  Yeah. Absolutely hate the shit that you're doing. Sometimes.
*  What small act of kindness were you once shown that you'll never forget? Do you,
*  there's something jumped to mind where somebody just did something that made you smile.
*  Did you, uh, feel connected to the rest of humanity?
*  Yeah. Yeah. Lots of things, you know? Um, but I remember my niece one time, one of my niece
*  we were in her neighborhood and she was like, she might've been five or six at the time. They're
*  all adults now. My brother and sister are older than me and the kids are all the youngest is 22.
*  And, uh, yeah, anyway, one of my nieces, she was just, she had ice cream. We went out and we got
*  ice cream walking around the neighborhood, her neighborhood. And, uh, she said something to me
*  that I don't think she understands how much it meant at the time, but she goes, she goes,
*  people love you here. You know that? And she doesn't know where here is. She's five years old,
*  but she was just looking at the kids playing in the park and the people walking their dogs and
*  everyone just, people love you here. You know that? But she didn't know how much I needed to hear that
*  at that point, which is really heavy for me. I'll never forget it. I've never told her that.
*  Oh, well, man, anytime you get a little something from people, especially in a
*  tear your ass out city like LA where nobody has any fucking time for you. When someone can slow
*  it down and say something, you know, I try, I, I, I saw this actor once in my grocery store that I
*  go to who made me laugh so fucking hard in this one movie. And every time I see this clip, I
*  still laugh. And I'm, I am kind of shy, you know, uh, personally, but so he, uh, he was walking by,
*  he was walking out and I was walking in and I go, oh, that's that guy. And I did not stop to
*  just let them know how great I thought he was in this film. And I always kind of regret it.
*  You know what I mean? So as hard as it is, and sometimes I still don't, if I see someone that
*  has done something in, in, you know, in any way, it doesn't have to be in show business or anything
*  like that. I'll try, you know, try and say, Hey, that's, that's really good. You know what I mean?
*  Um, because to get that from someone can mean a lot, you know,
*  time in life when you need it, yeah, that can make a big difference. I mean, I, sorry to, uh,
*  take it back to my new girlfriend, the waitress, but she, there's something about her saying,
*  sweetheart, I was in a pretty low place for some reason mentally. And it's just that kind of the
*  basic human kindness was nice. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I hear you. I was at a restaurant in, uh,
*  New York recently and I was shooting something and my fiance was able to fly in for a week.
*  And, uh, but she was back at the hotel and it's like, I felt like I was cheating on her because
*  there was this nice waitress at this barbecue place I went to. And, uh, first of all, my fiance
*  would not like me eating any greasy sugary barbecue. So I felt like I was cheating on her.
*  We'll edit this out and put delicious vegan food over it. But the waitress was one of these,
*  you know, she was this, this is the kind of server who's like, Hey hun, you think, hey,
*  sweetie, like blah, blah, blah. But like so chill and at ease in the middle of a part of New York,
*  that's really, you know, kind of fucking pretentious and, you know, and everybody, but
*  sweet people, fucking way better people than we got here. But, uh, you know, I, uh, I know that,
*  but you know, it was part of New York and whatever I'm there working and people, I'm like,
*  you know, I've been trying to impress one another. And, uh, she was, she even had some sort of an
*  accent that was not, didn't feel like an Atlantic, uh, American accent. Uh, yeah.
*  Though those, yeah. Servers that say sweetheart and hun. Yeah. That's what we need from AI. We
*  need that, that Jetsons server. But once in a while just calls you sweetheart. What, uh,
*  comforts you on bad days? Oh man. Is there a little sources of comfort, small things
*  they do that kind of make you feel good. Like for Bobby, that'd be a little Skyrim,
*  little stroll through Skyrim. Well, I, I've been a line of coke or what? Yeah. Line of,
*  a line of, I dilute some Coke into whiskey in the morning, like Stevie Ray Vaughn. And then I,
*  I didn't know that. Yeah. Yeah. Oh my gosh. Interesting. Yeah. He didn't last too long.
*  Um, his music will last forever. See, there you go. For me, if I, I'm kind of a homebody. So if I,
*  the, the point at which I smoke just a little bit of pot and then go like lay down on the couch
*  and, and perhaps if my fiance is kind of nodding off or she's just like looking at her phone and
*  I sneakily turn on some wrestling, okay. Cause I grew up watching wrestling and that stuff,
*  it's the Skyrim effect. I mean, you want to talk about a complete escape. This stuff makes no sense
*  in the world. It's an art form that is so uniquely weird, but at the same time, so
*  everyone, when it's good, everyone is invested in the illusion, even the audience.
*  They cheer the good guys. They boo the bad guys. So if I'm like that, and then I got our two cute
*  little dogs there and I'm annoying my little dog, Lulio, and you know, trying to kiss him
*  right on the fucking mouth. And I've had a little bit of pot and the dog's like, stop pots. Not good
*  for me. Um, of course, don't ever blow pot into your dog's face. That's, that's a small comfort.
*  I guess that's a handful of things. No, that moment painted. That was like a little painting.
*  What about you?
*  You're not supposed to do this. Well, you're not supposed to do this.
*  That's a good question. Yeah. It's a tough question. Um, I would say,
*  I would say programming robots, I, uh, there's bringing to life actually programming at all.
*  So I don't know if you're how familiar you are with programming, but you write some text on a page,
*  right? Uh, on a screen and it's brought to life. Like it does something. And that's kind of,
*  that's a really tiny version of maybe having a child. Like you, you created something that is now
*  living in some smaller, big way with embodied robots that are legged robots. That's
*  especially clear. And for some reason that's a source of comfort for me, uh, that, that,
*  that the power of programming, but also the elegance of programming, just the whole thing.
*  It's a source. Uh, yeah, it's a source of happiness. There's so many things. I've been very
*  blessed with enjoying anything. Like that's part of the struggle I have in life is that the simple
*  stuff is a source of a lot of happiness for me, which leads to a lot of laziness.
*  So I have to like give myself artificial deadlines. I have to be freaking out on purpose
*  in order to be productive in this world at all. You seem like an extremely
*  dutiful, busy guy. No, no, no, I am, but because I'm constantly creating artificial
*  stress and deadlines and all that kind of stuff. Otherwise I would just sit there looking at a tree
*  come truly happy with everything. That's awesome. Yeah. Gee whiz. That's not
*  what that line of Coke in the, in the, in the whiskey in the morning. That's that. That's the
*  thing that, uh, does the trade on breakfast shake by the way, one of my most favorite guitars. I
*  play guitar too. That's a source of comfort. Oh yeah. I have seen you play some guitar. That's
*  awesome. Who's the greatest wrestler of all time. Greatest in-ring performer of all time is Brett,
*  the Hitman Hart. What's the difference in-ring versus. Well, there's, you know, there's many
*  facets to the art form. A lot of people are great on the mic, but they're not so great once they
*  get in the ring. A lot of people have all the, uh, the showmanship and stuff, but then they're not
*  necessary. It's a wonderful package, but then they get to the ring or they open their mouth
*  and there's nothing going on. So who's the greatest in-ring performer? I think the greatest
*  in-ring is Brett Hart. I don't think there's anyone better than, than Brett, the Hitman Hart. Uh,
*  what makes him so good? Well, he. I think I had an action figure of him, of him in Russia and we
*  didn't know what the hell that was. Sure. Yeah. It was just a guy in pink tights. Uh, he, everything
*  makes sense. Every single thing is rooted in the thing that just happened and everything that he
*  does is to set up what he's going to do. Uh, they call it, and I'm just a wrestling nerd, but the
*  wrestlers, I guess call it ring psychology. Um, the things that you have to do to, to make it seem
*  like you're, you're suffering or you're coming from behind or whatever. And then also just the
*  physicality of it. He does it at a, he would do it at a hundred miles an hour and never hurt anybody.
*  Uh, although, you know, I, I also love, uh, they have, you know, the greatest wrestler of all time,
*  everyone says, and they're, they're right. It's Rick Flair, nature boy, Rick Flair. Everyone says
*  this. Yeah. I think if you know what you're talking about, um, cause he's the best on the mic. He's
*  he's also incredible in the ring. And then for me, the sentimental favorite, which we've actually
*  on dudes, he Chad had sort of a, uh, Charlie Rose ask interview with me about this, my fascination
*  with Hulk Hogan, because to me just, he was Superman. I was a little kid and I saw him and
*  that's imprinted, but yeah, see, this is like asking me who my favorite child is. Okay. Right.
*  So, uh, the rock when the rock was, I mean, the rocks, the rock. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, Hulk Hogan is,
*  um, he's the weirdest one, right? For me from the outside, super weird that, I don't know what,
*  what that is exactly. It's everything's weird about him. Yeah. He's got the bald head, like he would
*  proudly have this bald head with long hair, the handlebar mustache in this ketchup and mustard,
*  you know, tights, which he says he credits McDonald's with the tights. He literally does.
*  He says that the red and yellow came from Angelo Poffo, who's Randy Macho Man Savage and Lanny
*  Poffo's dad, who was a wrestler and a promoter. He said that he saw him wearing yellow and he,
*  you know, he's a Tampa guy, so he had that brown skin and the hair and everything. So he's like,
*  oh, that's what I want to do. And also the brand recognition of like, well, I should do it like
*  McDonald's, literally. And he's a big, you know, swollen, muscular guy with tan brown skin,
*  screaming at me to eat my vitamins and stuff when I'm eight years old. That was extremely, uh, yeah,
*  he's like Superman. I, but I know there's a person behind that guy. Yeah. You know? What do you mean?
*  Well, he's Terry Bollea, the dude who, you know, does whatever the fuck he does with his life. You
*  know what I mean? Yeah. Complicated life. Yeah. I guess to be him. Yeah. Yeah. Maybe you should
*  change the dudes, the colors to yellow, right? Red and yellow. It's currently orange and boy
*  sky blue. Yeah. It's like a nice sky blue. What advice, since you're wearing a suit, I feel like
*  you're qualified to give advice. What advice would you give to young people? High school, college,
*  about how to have a career that can be proud of or how to have a life that can be proud of.
*  I mean, you have to listen to your gut all the time. That's the only, that's the compass that
*  we have is listening to your gut. What did your gut tell you? This is, is that, was that originally
*  the dream of being an actor? Yeah. For me, your parents support that at all. I had the advantage
*  of having parents who were immigrants, so they didn't really know a lot about what you.
*  You just made shit up. You just made shit up. Yeah. Of course I'm studying and I'm skipping
*  school to go do auditions and stuff. No, I just kind of feel like, you know, and I know it was
*  different for my older siblings because my parents had just shown up in Canada. I was born like 10
*  years later. You can get away with some things and you can actually, you know, I think my parents,
*  they wanted us to, they didn't have a whole lot to tell us about what to do. They weren't going to
*  do that with us because they're in this brand new world and there's all these possibilities.
*  But there was a, there was something that they, I feel like they had to do, which was tell us
*  to do what we love. If you love doing it, do it. And I feel like that's really served me. And what
*  I would tell young people is if you can find something you love, and nowadays with the internet
*  and finding other people that, you know, it's not like you need to find a lot of people anymore.
*  You just need to find the people that dig what you dig. And if you can make a career out of doing
*  something that you love, it's been said, it's a good thing, you know?
*  How long did it take you to figure out that you really love acting? You know, because sometimes
*  you have a dream and then you meet, the dream meets reality, right? And then the reality might
*  be much less pleasant or much darker than the dream. Well, the reality is less pleasant,
*  you know? And there are things that happen during an experience of shooting something that
*  could take or leave, right? But the part where you're on set and you've rehearsed for a minute
*  or whatever, at least you know where you're supposed to stand and you know all your lines,
*  show up knowing everything, knowing what you're going to do and what you aim to do.
*  And those moments make it all worth it when you're, you know, not sound like a douchebag,
*  but between action and cut, that's the stuff that has me continuing to do what I do,
*  aside from the fact that it's like, I don't know how to do anything else.
*  You think you'll ever do like a dramatic, like a mob movie?
*  Yeah, like the one, the Inside Game I was just talking about, or this is another movie I just
*  did a little while ago called American Woman that was very heavy. And I love doing dramatic work. I
*  love it. I love it. Yeah. And I played that in Inside Game. It was kind of a, you know,
*  it was a, there was a mob element and the fellow was, well, you know, the stories here or there
*  with regard to how deep into the, well, he was a bookie. He was just running money, you know,
*  he was making a lot of money for a lot of people and he figured out how to, you know, cook it with
*  this dude who was an NBA ref. And it's a very interesting documentary, the thing that they're
*  just untold under the Untold series, they cover it. But getting to play that guy, that was a gas
*  for me because he's like a, he was, you know, there was a lot of unsavory stuff and he's definitely
*  the guy, the character in the movie who is the wild card and you don't want to necessarily mess
*  with him. And I got to this fellow who is a real guy, speaking to him, it was just bizarre to hear,
*  like I said to him, he was a little concerned about this and that, like, hey, you know,
*  you say whatever the fuck you want in your movie. I got my book and I got this other fucking deal.
*  But he goes, you know, I didn't do this and I didn't do that. And I'm like, yeah, all right,
*  I got you. And he goes, yeah, I'm telling you, I'm talking to you one on one. I did not do this. I
*  did. Okay. I'm just fucking tell you, do whatever the fuck you want with your movie, but this is
*  what's up. And I said, you ever seen Goodfellas? He's like, yeah, I fucking love that movie.
*  Cause he, like I said, he did some unsavory shit. And I go, you remember the scene where,
*  where, you know, the guy, the neighbor, Lorraine Bracco's neighbor was, you know, made her
*  uncomfortable and was touching on her and she, she goes to Ray Liotta and he goes, where the fuck does
*  this guy live? And then he go and remember, and he walks across the street and pistol whips the dude.
*  You touch her again, you're dead. You hear me? Good scene. Don't shoot. Fucking great scene. He goes,
*  I love that scene. I go, that's you. So you're doing shit that we know is terrible, but we love
*  you. He goes, all right, I got it. And then I said, there's this one scene. I explained the scene to
*  him where the, one of the mobsters, uh, tough guys was in the window of the car and Jimmy, my character
*  is very coked up at the time and he's hemorrhaging money here and there and making bad bets. Cause
*  he's getting sloppy and this guy wants to bug him about some jets, giants, bad or something.
*  I'm like telling you fucking asshole, don't fucking do it. He's like, yeah, well, the fucking giants.
*  And then the scene, Jimmy, my character grabs him by the, by the lapels and just smashes his face
*  against the, the, the roof of the car. And I, I say this to, to Jimmy and he goes, oh yeah,
*  I would have done that. That's not a fucking big deal. I wonder also the interaction. I wonder what
*  the filming of, um, probably my favorite gambling movie is, um, casino with, with Joe Pesci and
*  De Niro. Like when they're out in the desert, yelling at each other, I wonder how many takes
*  that is like, cause they, I don't, I don't know how scripted that is. I mean, it probably is a
*  little bit, but like, I don't think you can script the performance that Joe Pesci does.
*  Don't make a fuck out of me, Ace. Yeah. Like I fucking brought you here. Yeah.
*  He's just like pointing at the, that, that, that energy and they're standing there and
*  their friendship and then De Niro's like, like that, that whole thing. And then in the pet,
*  yeah, like that, that energy, what is that? I mean, they must, they somehow find it together.
*  You could tell me that that was one take and I'd believe you could tell me that that was
*  seven takes and I would believe you, all the takes had that energy. Like they were playing
*  with it, right? They were, they were, they were playing with that. The, the, this, yeah. I mean,
*  they, they took on a real personality in those scenes and really carried them forward. I mean,
*  it's just a brilliant, brilliant performance. Doesn't get like comedies, like mob movies
*  probably don't get enough credit either because it's seen as like mob movies. Don't get enough
*  credit in the Oscars. I mean, like, oh yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Cause it seems like a trope. It's like
*  given a Western, it's gotta be a hell of a Western or whatever. Cause it's like an old
*  Hollywood trope. Yeah. No, I, that scene is so great. Cause they're never at, they're at the
*  height of their friendship in a way. And they're also pretty much about to let go of it and become
*  enemies. And both things are happening at the same time. And, and Pesci drives them out to the
*  desert. And if I remember correctly, De Niro's character, Ace, Ace Rostein, Ross child, he says,
*  I, I gave myself 50 50 whether I'm coming back. Yeah. Such a good scene. It was a,
*  usually my prospects of coming back from the desert would be 90 to 10 or something like that.
*  But now it was the, this time I wasn't sure. And there's the car driving really fast.
*  And then Joe Pesci is like, you motherfucker, you like, whatever he was doing. Yeah. A Jew,
*  other guy, of course there's antisemitism. Yeah. Yeah. Or not between friends. Who gives a shit?
*  All that kind of stuff. Yeah. I mean, brilliant, brilliant performances. So yeah,
*  I can understand why you love the art and putting it all out there and
*  it's fun. It's fun. And it's still fun. It's still crazy fun. If I go a while without
*  getting a gig, you know, if I go a minute, then I end up and I work on something. I'm like,
*  it is, it's like, Oh, I've been thirsty for this. Like I actually am really so
*  happy. Even if it's something where it's like, you know, the, the, the things where this was a
*  pain in the ass and that, or whatever, you're on the road doing something and you know, anything,
*  whatever, you lost your luggage or whatever the heck you've got going on in your day to day life
*  that everyone brings to work and tries to let go of. Once we're doing the scene, oh man, it's the
*  best. But you know, that said, you're a great actor, but I just think I speak for a lot of people
*  that you're also, there's a charisma to you. That's great to reveal in raw form in different
*  podcasts in dudes, the 10 minute pod, just as a guest and podcast. It's always really fun to
*  watch you. Cheers. The way you have fun, the way you think, uh, the raw, the raw was also,
*  which is a nice compliment to your kind of acting. That's really sweet. Yeah. Cheers. Well, you know,
*  look, you said, uh, you know, uh, you're making that face. I'm making that face. I'm making that
*  after the take face. No, I love doing stuff off the cuff. That's kind of you to say. And I dig,
*  I really do dig doing stuff in front of an audience because I love seeing, I don't give
*  it to myself very often. If I'm doing, even if I'm, you know, I've done a bunch of multi-camera
*  sitcoms and stuff, mad TV was shot in front of a live studio audience. You like that energy.
*  I love it, but I can only hear them. You can't see them because of the lights like it is in,
*  in a lot of, uh, performances. And I would imagine with standup, it's, you know, you see the first
*  couple of rows. Um, I've done, I've done, I do this character that does stand up and I used to
*  take him out and do things with him and do little bits here and there. I haven't done it in like
*  four or five years. I think it, did Bobby say that character opened up for Bobby? Yeah. But he said,
*  I have to do it as myself too. I think in that podcast, he's like, okay, you're going to come
*  with me and open for me and Brea, but you have to do it as yourself. Did that ever happen? It did.
*  And I did the character, uh, you know, who's a character I came up with on 10 minute podcast.
*  He's just this comedian, right? He calls himself an open mic veteran. You know, he's been doing
*  open mics forever. And so I did it at opening up for Bobby and he's like, you have to do some of
*  it as yourself. So I just kind of did this bit where I would do some of his jokes and then I
*  would take Lee Leon. Silly, I got a fucking wig on and I take the wig off and I go, and as myself,
*  I start explaining it. Hello, my name is Will. See the reason that it's funny is because, uh,
*  Arnold Schwarzenegger is always, he's in these movies and he's got the thick Austrian accent,
*  but he's like, yeah, my name is Ben Williams. I'm a, I'm a cop from Colorado. No, you're not.
*  And it doesn't make sense as the comedian character that I'm doing because that character
*  doesn't do impersonations. Okay. Carrying on. And then I put the wig back on and go back into this
*  dumb thing. And, uh, I don't think it was very good, but Bobby required it in order for me to
*  open for him. He's like, you're not fucking doing it. So I'm not going to get up on stage and not
*  do. We agreed. I'll do it. But, um, having been up there just in, you know, whatever, I've done it
*  like a dozen fucking times or not a bunch of times, right? Like nothing. Uh, and you know,
*  these comedians that go up every night, sometimes two times a night, it's, I do, I will say, I love
*  performing in front of people when I get the chance, but it's, it's, uh, it's a specific thing
*  that, that, uh, that I, I just, I just, I gotta go back to this. It's like the providing value,
*  you know, I think great standups are fucking incredible. I'll, I'll go, you know, when I've
*  gone and watch standup, you know, there's your friend you're going to see, but then there's this
*  other person who really speaks to you. You know what I mean? And if you like one comedian a night,
*  that's a lot because, uh, uh, a, a comedy club is like a fucking crazy restaurant where there's no
*  menu. And it's like, what would you like? It's, there's nothing else like that. There's like,
*  you don't go to like a, like music place. What do we got here? We got Christian metal and there's
*  some world music and then there's a reggae thing and it's all rammed in together. Or you don't go
*  to a restaurant. I'd love a nice steak. Cool. First, here's a bowl of Froot Loops. And then
*  then we got you a crudite and then, uh, this is our sushi tower. Well, what about the steak? Oh,
*  the steak's coming and then blah, blah, blah. Oh no, the steak got bumped. So there's no steak,
*  but here's a fucking shitty store bought cheesecake. You know, and that's what comedians
*  are up against when they go into a place. It's like, I don't pair well with the poached salmon.
*  You know, I'm chicken fingers. I already, I already am chicken fingers. So, you know,
*  these great comedians that are able to go up on a night where poached salmon goes up and then it's
*  like, fuck, I'm, you were also spicy. I got some kick to me for me. Even going to open mics. It
*  could be a wonderful escape. Yeah. I mean, just laughing, laughing together with others can make
*  you, I don't know. It just feels really good when we've done like, you know, like I, and I hope to
*  do it with dudesy, but like live podcasts are fun in front of groups of people. And you know, you
*  talk to them afterwards and take some pictures and man, they are, they forgot what the fuck they got
*  going on. And a lot of them got to go back to work the next day. It's a Wednesday or Thursday,
*  you know? No, it's, it's, it's a lot of value. I'm fortunate enough to be busy doing my own bullshit.
*  What's the meaning of life was that song?
*  Uh, what is the-
*  Why? Why are we here? Why? Why? Why?
*  Was it, uh, the meaning of life wasn't, didn't they explain it at the end of meaning of life?
*  I think it was Michael Palin that said, uh, try to get a walk in, uh, be nice to neighbors, uh,
*  eating a fiber. Wasn't that the fiber fiber is part of it. Yeah. I think it's, I think it's
*  nutrition. I have a bowl of bran in the morning and don't take yourself too seriously.
*  Yeah. Well, no one gets out alive. I think is the Herman has to be one of my favorite writers.
*  He's a Nobel prize winner. Um, in, in, in a book called Steppenwolf says, learn what is to be taken
*  seriously and laugh at the rest. Oh, that's awesome. What's the percentage distribution on that? So how
*  much of life should you take seriously? And then how much do you just laugh at? Oh man,
*  if you can laugh at everything, you're, you're winning. Yeah. Uh, but that's almost impossible.
*  I think that there's, there's, uh, and also could be quite irresponsible to do that.
*  I take things. I take a lot of things way too seriously. I know that, uh, I do, I do,
*  I really do. People will be in part surprised by that, but I think that radiates from you.
*  Really? Yeah, I do. I do. I take things way too fucking seriously sometimes, but, um,
*  yeah, I gotta loosen the neck up. But, uh, no, I think that's, that's really good. That's,
*  that's really good stuff. I don't know what the percentage is to have a good life or,
*  or, or, uh, or a happy, healthy life, but you know, for me, the meaning of life is
*  getting to live it as long as you hope to. That's nice. And, um, and when you're,
*  when you lose someone or, or if perhaps you're faced with your own mortality, I think that puts
*  that into perspective. And, uh, but I, you know, get lots of fiber, get lots of fiber, uh, be nice
*  to everybody. And, uh, yeah, don't take things too seriously as a good, it's a good one. Our minds
*  are fucking big, weird, big, it's a big, weird, shitty fucking bucket of shit that's trying to
*  get you to think horrible shit about yourself all the time. Yeah. Shitty bucket of shit.
*  Shitty bucket of shit. I think there's a book I never read, but I read the title and it's
*  Good Worse to Live By, which is, uh, Don't Sweat the Small Stuff and It's All Small Stuff.
*  That's another way. Was that Dr. Phil? Wasn't Dr. Phil? I don't know, but I think the conclusion
*  also has fiber as part of it. I think that all ties it together. And in the end, of course,
*  just put love out there in the world. I think that's a pretty good way.
*  What would you say is the meaning of life? Put love out in the world?
*  I would say love. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's a, it's a long conversation on what that really means.
*  But I'm sure robots are involved. Yeah. Well, let me tell you, I feel a little safer knowing
*  that someone who has a hand in bringing these robots to the masses, as you do, has that opinion
*  of love and how important it is. I think that's great because otherwise it's going to be that
*  fucking scene from T2 where Linda Hamilton's holding onto the fence and getting all of her
*  flesh blown off of her skeleton before the rest of her is wiped away. Because this is Skynet shit.
*  Anyway, I'm just terrified of dudesy all the time. That's why I think that they will...
*  Dudesy in the wrong hands can do a lot of damage. That's why Chad and I need to
*  do our best to control it. We need to travel back in time and murder Chad.
*  I think that's the only way. It's been said... I don't know why you need to travel back in time,
*  but you could just murder him today. But I think that would be very suspicious.
*  My nefarious plans for Chad involve going back to tomorrow and planning for yesterday.
*  Hopefully dudesy will give me the answer there with what it is to do with Chad's frozen body.
*  If I got to drive it out to... If I got to take my... If I got to get ahold of one of those Tesla
*  mom vans and shove my garage freezer in it and plug it in and shove Chad in there, drive out
*  to Arizona and deliver him under a mountain or wherever the fuck this place is and say,
*  here's this dog tag. What does this get me? And then I'm like, ah, it's going to be 300 bucks.
*  Do you take AmEx? No. And I'd be like, ah, shit. And I'll just dump them somewhere, breaking bad
*  stuff. Well, I would like to thank you and the... What is it? The Canadian International Agency
*  Apparel. Canadian International Apparel. I can't wait for the sneakers from dudesy. I can't wait
*  for all the podcasts that AI can and all the trouble it can get you in. So I'm a huge fan
*  of yours. It's a huge honor that you would talk with me today. Well, this has been amazing.
*  Cheers pal. Likewise. And I'm happy to be here, man. Cheers. Bam.
*  Oh, that was three hours. Holy fuck. What?
*  Thanks for listening to this conversation with Will Sasso. To support this podcast,
*  please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from John
*  Candy, one of Will's favorite actors. I think I may have become an actor to hide from myself.
*  You can escape into a character. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
