---
Date Generated: April 10, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 8789s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence', 'artificial intelligence podcast', 'fashion', 'hip hop', "kanye 'ye' west", 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex podcast', 'mit ai', 'music', 'rap', 'yeezy']
Video Views: 5257996
Video Rating: None
---

# Kanye 'Ye' West Interview | Lex Fridman Podcast #332
**Lex Fridman:** [October 24, 2022](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4AWLcxTGZPA)
*  The following is a conversation with Ye, the legendary artist,
*  producer and designer formerly known as Kanye West on this, the Lex Friedman podcast.
*  Based off of our connection and just you being a friend, I need to show you
*  my two tech companies and get your perspective on it.
*  Because now I have friends that can give perspective. Like when I would work on albums,
*  I had other friends that worked on albums and they would give me their perspectives on it.
*  You want to do this?
*  We are doing it. This is part of it.
*  This is part of it?
*  Absolutely.
*  All right. Beautiful.
*  I wanted to finish. The thing is, okay, you're going to ask me different questions,
*  but I'm about growing and building and bringing the idea to life. So when I see you, I say,
*  oh, this guy understands how to hire engineers. Where I'm coming from, coming from Hollywood,
*  coming from press, coming from media, all of the guys, so many of the guys that have been like
*  voices and faces and talking heads, whatever, have not understood how to engineer product.
*  And that's the reason why I was able to jump past everyone in the entertainment field and become,
*  whatever the net worth is, 11 billion. I'm going to stop putting the whole black
*  thing on my worth. Let's just see where I am on the scale of life, because that's a cop out for
*  me to say Rich is Black Guy of all time, because that's feeding into the same trauma economy that
*  Black Lives Matter feeds into. That's why I love and respect engineers. That's the only thing that
*  we really need to teach in school is engineering. We don't need to teach history. We don't need to
*  teach anything that is subjective. It needs to only be engineering taught in school, and everything
*  else needs to be recess. Nothing at all. Any force subjective information is just to weaken
*  and indoctrinate our species. And that's what schools do now. As an engineer, I love hearing
*  you say that, but to push back, history is not, the interpretation of history might be subjective,
*  but history has some facts and they're useful to give a grounding to the way you do engineering.
*  I don't 100% believe in anything, any concept of the future or any concept of history,
*  because history was just written by the victors. If I see stuff happen on the day that later that
*  day is reported wrong, so how wrong is something reported a thousand years ago? And why would we
*  argue about something that's not in the now? Because that's the only thing that everyone can
*  agree upon is that it is now, right now. Yeah. You try not to make the mistakes of the past.
*  That's the usefulness of history, the limited usefulness of history.
*  The biggest mistake from the past that we keep making is looking at the past.
*  Too much, giving too much value to the past. Too much value to the past. We are now. We are now.
*  We are here. We are one species. We are one race. We're here. And the leadership is changing,
*  because you have Elon as a leader, Ye as a leader, and we are the top leaders.
*  We're more influential than the presidents. So you're a human being with engineering challenges
*  before you, with a stem player, with parlor. What's the hardest thing in front of you on the
*  engineering front? That's the first sentence that any of our species needs to hear when they're born.
*  You are a human being with engineering challenges, and I consider challenges to be opportunities
*  in front of you. Literally, let me see a piece of paper. I need to write that down. That's the
*  beginning of our new species constitution. I'm going to do the paper like this wide.
*  Put it in widescreen. This for Ridley. You are, no, let me like, you are a being
*  with
*  engineering.
*  Opportunities or challenges?
*  Opportunities. I'm sorry, I don't spell as good as John Legend. Opportunities in
*  before you. I like the before because it can mean, actually can mean forward or before you.
*  This right here, I've always said I'm the top five writer in human existence, but this right here is
*  pushing me to like number four, number three. It's a good one. Because who would you say is the top,
*  it's top writer in human existence. We know who it is. That's subjective. Who's that? It's factual,
*  though. It's like, okay, who's the top person in tech history? It's not subjective.
*  There's a non subjective answer to both of those. Both of those people have influence 30%
*  of our existence. The influence is the main metric of greatness. One person,
*  30% of our language was the English language was written by them. The other person, 30% of the
*  products we use was led by them. So it's obvious. Shakespeare and then the product, product, product,
*  product. Steve Jobs. You put Steve above like Elans of the world because Steve is a designer,
*  not he's a designer engineer, but he's a design. He's a visionary in the design space.
*  Well, I would lean to him because I'm not an engineer. Right. So I'm more like,
*  then you're an engineer. If Steve is an engineer, you're an engineer, essentially.
*  He's a cultural engineer. Like the people who run the emotions of the world and run the world
*  off of people's emotions right now are social engineers. And social engineering is so important,
*  like, like, city design. There's a fancier word for that. But I was, I was in Oxnard last night
*  to see Anthony Jeselnik and I got to find out what his opening joke was because I'm doing
*  interviews and I'm thinking I'm funny. And I like that he said, he's just kept on saying 20 year
*  anniversary. I've been doing this for 20 years and his opening joke was so high level. I realized
*  that I wasn't funny. I realized that this dude is a professional at what he does. And so many things
*  are subjective. I always talk about this. It's like, you know, people are arguing like,
*  is Emily Ratajkowski the hottest, you know, person? And I'm like,
*  that's such a subjective thing. But like, if you go and shoot three pointers with Steph Curry,
*  it's not subjective. Right. Or if you go and compare bank accounts with Elon, it's not
*  subjective. And another thing that's not subjective, porn.
*  What about it?
*  Dick size. It's not subjective. You can measure.
*  But porn is more about more than just dick size and greatness is more than the size of the bank
*  account. Right. So there's a subjective. Greatness is subjective though.
*  Right. So you do, do you care about the stuff that's objective or subjective more?
*  Because greatness to me is what matters. The bank account comes and goes.
*  The impact on our society, like you said, social engineering, the impact on the collective
*  intelligence of our species, that what permeates throughout the rest of time.
*  I like what you said. The impact. I'm taking notes. How did you say the impact?
*  On the collective intelligence of our species.
*  Impact on the collective intelligence.
*  When Ye is writing down the words that came out of my dumb mouth, I have made it in life.
*  There's a lot of people that have kind of like sat through, I wanted to wear a different color
*  hoodie because I was just tired of saying this hoodie in all the interviews. And there's a lot
*  of kids that are with me. They see what I'm saying. And they had to sit through all of the muck of all
*  the previous interviews to get to this. Every interview has been just an emotional, it's just
*  like been an argument up to this point. This is the first of, this is the next frontier of where
*  our species is going to head. It starts here. It starts with you Lex.
*  So this is the first time I heard you say the word engineering at least so many times,
*  which I love hearing. So this is where you're at. You're like that newborn. You're a being
*  with engineering opportunities.
*  Yeah. And we're all a newborn because in Christianity we say born again. We're all
*  newborns. And everyone can, everyone shall like the word can. Shell, the only thing about shell
*  is like it kind of dictates and can kind of kind of lets people off the hook. So I haven't found
*  the perfect post Shakespeare and post Steve Jobs and post Elon and post Ye and post Drake
*  way to communicate this. But we update and we do. And what the current media structure,
*  no, it's not actually nothing that's holding us. There's nothing actually holding us back because
*  I'm still alive. I'm still alive. Like they could have killed me at, you know, George Bush don't
*  care about black people. They could have killed me at Beyonce had the best video, but we're here now.
*  So we just keep on leaning and leaning and leaning. And there's these things where I just think
*  about, you know, there'll be times when I'm at war and every now and then when the, when the bomb
*  stopped going off and all the headlines and the smearing and all that stuff going off, I think
*  about my family and I'll think about Kim and I'll think about how, you know, King Koopa has her in
*  the castle right now. And just on Mario Brothers, you know how it is, just go for the princess and
*  you get to this level and it's like, I'm like, I sung the song wrong. Right. And then they take
*  the princess again. Which one are you Mario? Yeah. What's your favorite thing? The thing you love the
*  most about Kim from a Mario perspective and the princess looking back, was there a moment?
*  She's definitely my favorite of all time. Yeah. Was there a moment that, you know, like that catches
*  you off guard and you say, I love this human being. Yeah. I mean,
*  it's just the DNA is like, she's a mix of Rob and Chris. Can you explain? I mean, that's like
*  a really high pool right there. Those are like two geniuses.
*  So, okay. So like the entire of history of evolution of the human species created this DNA
*  that created this being. There's a life there. There's a set of memories in the history that
*  brought you together. And you're like, damn, I like this DNA. Yeah. And so certain people have just
*  like high DNA. Ivanka Trump has high DNA. You know, it's like- How's your DNA? Pretty good?
*  I think we've seen that. It's been proven. I mean, but look at my mom and look at my dad.
*  You know, me and my dad have a water purification center in the DR
*  right now. And my dad is the original Steve Jobs. And he was blocked by people around him. And people
*  were using him and taking advantage and, you know, not believing in his vision. He's my dad's the
*  educated version of Ye. What'd you learn about life from your dad? My dad got girls too. But those
*  are the small details. That's a big detail. Being that I found my dad's, you know, playboy when I
*  was five years old, it greatly affected my motivation. Yeah. Oh, yeah. So that's part of
*  the engine that drives Ye. Absolutely. I remember when Pharrell was first in all the videos and
*  my girl was like, girls like Pharrell. And I was like, I want girls to like me too. Funny that
*  that's behind all the ambition, all the drive. That's how we make people. That's how people are
*  made. It's the desire to be loved. Is that at the individual level just being noticed and also at
*  the societal level of scale? Well, now I've gone past, I'm like at that place where Nikolai Tesla
*  was later into his career where it wasn't about being loved. It wasn't about sitting at the
*  dinner parties next to Anna Wintour and stuff. It was about getting the idea across. So I have these
*  cells that are very, and I just keep on saying Ridley Scott, but Ridley Scott has a special
*  anointing. It isn't just sci-fi what he's doing. There's something in there, just like George
*  Lucas. There's something different that's there. So. What are you drawing? I'm drawing these new
*  living cells that we will exist in. And this is over, okay, let's do like,
*  I don't like talking about money because man-made money anyway is like four quadrillion
*  respected dollars. And then you have other forms of currency. Of course, social currency is super
*  important right now, but this is a drawing and it's at a pretty good place now. This would be
*  40,000 square feet. I want to start just talking in meters. I just think we should go to anything
*  to restore the Tower of Basil. Like they say when the, I'm just draw a person here for scale.
*  Yeah, that would help. Okay. What do you think of that? Look at my person, see the scale in this
*  room. All right. So. Wait, the dot is the person? Yeah. I'm saying it's 40,000 square feet,
*  but that would be like- What are the other parts of the cell?
*  Okay. So it's a screen. It doesn't go all the way to the top and it's one
*  hole for light, but the water and the light and air all come in from the top. So that's like
*  the mouth. And then this is the belly button. We're God's iPhone. We're his greatest creation.
*  This is all connected? These are all connected?
*  Yeah. So I'm drawing how these other cells go next to each other.
*  What's the vision here?
*  Happiness. Did we talk about like, what's the motivation? Like, yeah, there's a motivation
*  somewhere in the back of my mind of my family. And if it's like where Moses smithed the rock and
*  God didn't allow him to get to the promised land, because the promised land is family.
*  That is the promise. That is Earth. I mean, that is heaven on Earth, is family. Family is heaven.
*  That's the promised land. And for your family to be together. So say I smite the rock and God doesn't
*  let me have my family back. My mission in life is still to promote families at all costs and make
*  families existence easier. So you take this thing, you put a localized farm, save us in community,
*  that we do localized growing and then we partner with Big Pharma and say, hey, you're actually
*  going to make more money by making better food. Because at the end of the day, you want money
*  right now. It's like everyone knows that between the pesticides and between the medical industry,
*  especially America, that we're keeping people sick. And we know that McDonald's makes food
*  that kills people and Coca Cola selling sugar water and all this. Just in case I haven't pissed
*  off enough people in power. You're going to piss off the sugar, anybody that's powered on sugar.
*  Well, Sugar, What's the Health was actually a documentary on sugar. It wasn't about how bad
*  meat was. It was like a reverse documentary on sugar. I don't know if you call it a reverse,
*  like a sub, but if you watch it again, when they show sugar in it, the sugar looks super clean.
*  Yeah. So as I state these things, I know I have protection. I have God's protection. That's why
*  I'm here to this date. It's for me to have this platform and express exactly what I feel because
*  it's kids out there. It's kids that are going to save the world through engineering and through
*  facts. And I've got to download as much of the information and as much of the don't be afraid to
*  state your facts is the biggest thing because the world is being ran by fear. And that is,
*  no, actually God runs the world, but there's just like little cloud, this patina of our ego
*  that deals with the money and the car and the girl we're dating and all this in the clothes we wear
*  and spending too much on clothes and a lot of stuff that I've been involved with promoting.
*  So now what I'm promoting is you have the idea, you say it out loud. Like if you had Tourette's,
*  say your truth out loud. If you hate, yay, you hate me, say that out loud. Say whatever you feel
*  out loud. Like you say it nonviolently, nonviolent. Nonviolent, I have to say that
*  as a shout out to Alex Jones and Trump where they try to say that when they say their truths out
*  loud that it's inciting violence. So let's be really clear. I'm saying that they have
*  criminalized free thought. I hate when people use they. Like they gets the blame for everything,
*  right? It's always they. Who the fuck is they? Exactly. The problem is they is us.
*  Yeah. Well, I love that. What we needed to do is turn I to we. So we take the responsibility
*  and turn they to us. So we take accountability to us. They to I to we and they to us.
*  And that relates. It's a language at the same time. You've seen the language of our surroundings.
*  You're seeing the language of one of the things. OK, let's go back to the cell explanation because
*  I'm also doing it. What's that thing when Elon just put all the information open and people
*  could figure out they could figure it out and open source? Yeah, open source. So I'm open sourcing
*  this idea right now so that, you know, engineers and anointed people, beings, anointed beings can
*  collectively contribute to this, to push our species forward. So where I've got to with my
*  research is that there will be a hole at the top that allows natural light, natural air, and there's
*  a constant water system. So it becomes like a water city where it's a constant flow that's not
*  it's it's regenerative. It's not wasting the water and it's just a constant flow. So I put the toilet
*  really close to where this this I don't want to call it a wave pool, but in the pool,
*  the water is not still. So that exists in in water.
*  It's surrounded by water. Well, the living room is that you have two rooms. You have the dry room,
*  which people would call the living room before, and then you have the wet room.
*  How is that a source of happiness? What is what is broken about our world today that that gives you
*  in terms of the pursuit of happiness, which is one of the things all of our previous declaration of
*  all of our buildings are based on just the industry and the economy. And then people lean into
*  what people are used to seeing. Like what we think is attractive, because then you go back to
*  the, you know, women who give life. So everyone wants to be attractive
*  to the attractive. And that's the reason why the media goes and gets, you know, Bella Hadid,
*  Kim Kardashian, Emily Ratajkowski. Those are the only ones I'm gonna. There's more. There's more,
*  but I'm thinking of ones that I think are attractive. It is subjective. Yeah, because
*  it's subjective. So to my subjective, which I think I think the only guys that could argue with me
*  on my opinion on girls would be Brad and Leo, because we're the only ones with the track record,
*  you know, everything else. So for everybody else is subjective. We've got history. So are you,
*  are you happy? Absolutely. I'm just here. It's actually,
*  it's difficult to make me
*  unhappy. Now I could deal with frustrations, but when those frustrations are, it's like
*  when you've allowed people to be in your life that shouldn't be there, and then they do the
*  thing you knew they were going to do and you're screaming at them, but you really need to scream
*  at yourself. Yeah. So you realize anything that's like anger or frustration, that's something that's
*  wrong with you that needs to be dealt with. Yes. Like right now, okay, say I got this pattern
*  cutter that I wanted to remove because I felt like she was copying our patterns into the computer
*  and I didn't know why she wanted to do that. And I just wanted to do the patterns by hand.
*  And then, you know, you mean like automating the patterns? Yeah. And my head of it, because they
*  just, that's the whole thing. It's like, it's a war of, it's a war of human beings and robots.
*  Yeah, but that makes it more efficient, right? You don't like the efficiency. You like the creativity
*  of the singular nature of the pattern. I believe that the human beings, and I'm saying this to you
*  as a person who makes robots and a person who's friends with Elon. I'm deeply offended right now.
*  Yeah. Well, you know, I'll let it go. Okay. So yeah, I believe that the... Yeah, he hates robots.
*  I'm not going to put that out there. It's a joke. Robots have feelings too. Yeah. Yeah, that's right.
*  That was also a joke. We need to clarify that for future robots. But the pattern cutter,
*  the pattern cutter, you don't like that. That had to be that, that's, you can't have that part of
*  life. That's not what I'm, I'm my, everything that I'm doing is for
*  the sake of the human race. There's things in capitalism, there's things in technology.
*  Well, tech, technology and original human species can exist in a peaceful way.
*  As long as the people that know how to make robots aren't using their robots to control the humans.
*  Lex. Definitely something you have to be concerned about as we become more technologically savvy.
*  That my friend is why engineering isn't everything. That you have to desperately
*  study the lessons of history. In Nazi Germany, science was used to create atrocities.
*  Engineering the same. Engineering could be a tool of war.
*  We're still in the Holocaust. A friend, a Jewish friend of mine said,
*  go visit the Holocaust museum. And my response was, let's visit our Holocaust museum, Planned Parenthood.
*  With all due respect, I grew up in the Soviet Union. I'm Jewish.
*  Parts of my family perished in the Holocaust of Nazi Germany. I have to push back that there is a
*  difference of the atrocities at that scale, at that time on an entire people.
*  I was going to say the number, that's the difference. It's not the number.
*  Because 6 million, well also African Americans are actually Jew also, the lost tribe of Israel.
*  I can push back on that too. Okay, so everyone came from Africa.
*  I am African. I'm basically African American. We're brothers.
*  And we're both Jew. And we're brothers. We're human.
*  6 million people died in the Holocaust. Over 20 million have died by the hands of abortion.
*  The media promotes the My Body, My Choice, which is actually still a promotion for Planned Parenthood.
*  50% of black deaths a year is actually abortion. It's not the cop with the knee.
*  It's not black on black violence and gang violence. It's not heart attacks.
*  It's actually abortion. The most dangerous place for a black person in America is in their mother's
*  stomach. There's 900 to a million abortions in the United States a year. I hear you.
*  But there's something about the rape, the torture, the murder of children, women,
*  men, the complete humiliation and just the suffering that was endured during World War II.
*  That's what we deal with on our TVs right now with black people.
*  Soros would use black trauma economy to win an election. What I love is having a healthy
*  conversation. And as opposed to there's certain things, you know, boom, this drops, people are
*  going to have pussy hats on. Boom, this drops. It's going to be black people and white people
*  with signs. Boom, this drops. So hey, China, hey, Left Agenda, hey, what we're going to do is say
*  that our species can have a healthy conversation. Can I just linger on this? Because when you say
*  Jewish media, there's an echo of a pain that people feel that reminds an entire-
*  You're saying it's redundant, right?
*  Huh, no, I'm not saying it's redundant. I'm saying-
*  I'm saying it's redundant.
*  You're saying it's redundant.
*  It's a redundant thing.
*  I'm saying it's something that-
*  I'm saying that it's something that Joseph Goebbels, the propaganda minister of Nazi Germany,
*  said. I'm saying it's been said so many times in order to murder and torture Jewish people
*  that it just rings wrong.
*  That's the thing-
*  Just like the N word when spoken by people that have the same skin color as me,
*  it reminds people of a very dark time.
*  I know. If Jewish people would accept that I'm Jew, then they would see what I'm saying in a
*  different way. They would hear it in a different way.
*  But see, the people, you saying you're Jewish, that-
*  No, I'm Jew, not Jew-ish. Jew-ish means like that of a Jew. I'm saying I'm Jew.
*  You're Jew.
*  Blood of Christ. Orthodox Christian.
*  Right. Are you a follower of the philosophy of the Black Hebrew Israelites?
*  That's where the idea comes from. Not all of those folks are extremists, but some are extremists.
*  I'm a follower of the idea. I have a vague idea that all people came from
*  Africa. But what I wanted to do-
*  Now, I could Andy Kaufman this about seven more minutes and then tell you what it is.
*  Let's count. Seven minutes.
*  I did this to do a spoiler alert.
*  Sure, spoiler.
*  What's the first thing I said at the beginning?
*  We're talking about engineering and humans.
*  And then what did I say we shouldn't focus on?
*  Race. Not just that. I said they shouldn't teach this in school. History.
*  The history because what they do, what schools are doing is exactly what the CIA does with Pixar
*  films and Disney films. They make Bambi's mom die in the beginning. And off that pain comes
*  a purchase of ice cream. Off that pain comes, I need some more toys. Off that pain comes,
*  I need a bigger house. Off that pain comes, I need more girls than my wife. Off that pain comes.
*  They put that pain in to make us- Now we're the orphans of capitalism, to make us be consumers.
*  And we need to be a community, not just consumers. I could have went another seven minutes
*  by being a person who presents himself in a way that says, well, I don't have to feel your pain
*  because I also have pain too that's not being recognized. And in every interview,
*  when I say, well, why did I get to the point of putting up the tweet?
*  No one wants to understand why I got to that point.
*  You had pain. You had pain. You had pain in your heart.
*  But let's say this, undoubtedly Jewish people have a lot of movies about that pain. And black
*  people have a lot of movies about the pain of slavery. It's almost impossible to find a movie
*  about Mansa Munsa. When you go to the African History Museum in Washington, DC, it doesn't
*  start with the idea of Africans being kings. It starts with the idea of Africans being slaves.
*  But here's another interesting point about this. This was said to me one time and it stuck with me
*  as a family member of mine. With Africans, how many times you've heard a rapper talk about,
*  we were kings. That's incorrect if we're Jew. If we're Jew, and since we are, we weren't the kings.
*  We were the slaves that Moses freed. Africans have always said, we've heard, you've listened
*  to rap music and hear black people say, we kings, we blood of the pharaohs. And if we are Jew,
*  then we weren't. We were the people that Moses freed. And when we talk about, have you heard
*  black people talk about 400 years of slavery? All right. That is in rep, and we're having this
*  history lesson, right? History doesn't matter. You're exploring ancient history and drawing
*  deep wisdom from it. And at the same time saying, we need to forget all of it. We need to put that
*  behind us. Absolutely. We need to forget it and we need to move forward. There is so much wisdom to
*  draw from history, even the 20th century. Look at this communism without the lessons of history of
*  the 20th century. Communism sounds like a great idea, except that some of the worst atrocities
*  conducted by Stalin and Mao that killed 50, 100 plus million people, not just killed, tortured,
*  starvation, where people, the cannibalism, they ate each other. They ate their children. There's
*  just dark people. People should read some books on this, on the Hollander Moore in the 1930s.
*  But I disagree. With that lesson, we would, and now it's becoming more popular. Marxism and
*  communism. I'm not disagreeing that that happened. I'm disagreeing that we need to harp
*  on the things that happened because the truth is I'm giving a fact. 50% today of,
*  let's say, you don't call black people Jew, right? Black people's deaths today is abortion
*  right now. It's not racism. That's too wide of a term. It's genocide and population control
*  that black people are in today in America that is promoted by the music and the media
*  that black people make that Jewish record labels get paid off of, or record labels,
*  media company also. So let's give it a wider. I agree with Martin Luther King. I have a dream,
*  too, that one day you would not be judged by the color of your skin or your race,
*  black or Jew, but by the content of your character. All the assholes that fucked you over in the music
*  industry, fuck artists over in the music industry, are individuals. They're not Jews.
*  Can you say they are Jewish? They're human with opportunities,
*  and they took those opportunities. I don't care if they're Jewish.
*  Do you feel like I should release that pain and separate it?
*  Yes. Okay. So if you're saying I should release that pain and separate it, then I'm telling you,
*  you should release your pain and separate it, and we could get to this, the list of how you are being
*  with engineering opportunities. That's 100%. I see what you're doing.
*  That's exactly what you're doing. The pain, I'm going to let it go. Engineering challenges. I
*  get it. One of the problems you highlight is people get fucked over in the music industry
*  and get fucked over in the media, get fucked over all over the place.
*  They created, there was a Jewish trainer that brought me to the hospital and put in press that
*  I went to the hospital. I know friends that off of exhaustion, a Jewish doctor that diagnosed me-
*  Why do you keep saying Jewish? Because they were, right?
*  Diagnosed me with bipolar disorder and shot me with medication and put me on medication,
*  then put it in the press. And every time, even if I wore the wrong color hat that a nigger is not
*  supposed to wear, then they immediately say, he's off of his shit, he's off his meds, he's off his
*  rocker, and it's literally used as a scarlet letter control mechanism for the- People understand.
*  The kids, the colleges, the high schools, what do you think they put me right now?
*  They put me as the prophet, not the leader. It doesn't have to be the leader, right? Because
*  we need a more intelligent person to be the leader. But at least, right? They put me as the prophet.
*  They put me as the only person that would say this. And I'm just saying that was four
*  Jewish members that controlled my voice because for the fact that 90% of black people in entertainment
*  from sports to music to acting are in some way tied into Jewish business people. Meaning that
*  in some way, just like if Ram is sitting next to Obama or Jared's sitting next to Trump,
*  there's a Jewish person right there controlling the country, the Jewish controlling
*  who gets the best video or not, controlling what the media says about me. There's a person,
*  not Jewish. Let me just say one thing- But they are though. That's the only thing. It just so
*  happens that they are. It just happens that they are. That doesn't mean that I hate them.
*  That just means that they are. But it's a dog whistle too. Let me just say, as I would love to
*  add more love to the world, I would love you to do that as a person with a big voice, with a big,
*  powerful voice that a lot of people look up to. And when you say Jewish media, it's funny how this
*  world works that way. When you say Jewish media or Jews are controlling the voice of black artists,
*  black people, black artists, when you say that- Am I not allowed to say it out loud?
*  You can say it. There's a large number of people that are hurting and have anger and even have
*  hate in their heart. When they hear Jewish media, that hate starts being directed towards the Jewish
*  people. Do you acknowledge that? Do you understand? Can you feel the hate in the world that comes
*  to the surface when you say stuff like that? Okay. I feel that when we go into therapy,
*  my dad was a therapist and obviously I've got some therapy skills myself. A lot of people,
*  my music is healing. These type of spa-like existences are healing. The color palettes
*  are healing. And we can use healing words. I feel that there is no accountability and no
*  responsibility on Jewish people in media to at least start with owning up with the facts
*  of what's dealt with and tell me if I say the facts out loud, to the point of Ari Emanuel writing
*  a letter in the Financial Times trying to take food out of my children's mouth, telling people
*  that they're not allowed to work with me. Even Chris Como or Piers Morgan getting me to apologize
*  and separate Jewish business people from the families of the Jewish business people, which I
*  did. Update. I did that. That already happened. That was a shitty apology. That wasn't really an
*  apology. But shout out for that conversation. I need to get on my knees and kiss the dick of Howard
*  Stern. You don't need to kiss anyone's dick. But that's what you guys are acting like. You guys,
*  look at that. Because you're talking about it as a shitty apology. But where's our fucking apology?
*  Watch this. Sorry. We don't get... Thank you. Now let's move on. Sorry. Do I need to get on my knees
*  and kiss my dick? Oh, shit. It's escalated quickly. That's escalated quickly.
*  Know what I'm saying? Where's our apology? But we can't get to apology because you're telling me
*  there's no right way for me to word it. So tell me, for me, a person who's been fucked on my deals
*  and a person that has friends that never figured out how to make shoes with a German company
*  that couldn't tell me to wear a BLM shirt and take off my red hat, like what would have happened if I
*  was at Nike, right? Tell me exactly how to engineer the situation I'm in. Tell you exactly how. You got
*  a big voice. Have the balls as a man to call out the individuals. Don't call them Jews. Call them
*  by their name and start a war against those individuals. They're not Jewish. But if that's
*  the case, will you help me with that? Sure. Okay. 100%. Assholes are assholes. Well, let me flip
*  that too. I don't understand the industry well. I see that people are fucking people over for sure.
*  But how do you solve that? If you right now run the world's... You're doing a million things,
*  but say you ran also a record label. I have ran a record label. Well, I've been ran by a record
*  label where I was the face of a record label and had Big Sean and different people complaining to
*  me. And I knew fuck about running a record label. I was simply just a talented producer and an
*  influencer that then started good music, but I wasn't the one running good music. How would
*  you do it differently? This is something I propose. I would look at the top 10 execs in three fields.
*  In sports, film, and music. And I would look at the top 10 clients, participants, talent. I would
*  look at the top talent in each of those fields, the top 10 of them. And some of them are going
*  to be Tom Brady. Some of them are going to be Taylor Swift. Some of them, they're not all going
*  to be black. Some of them would be Adele. And we'll look at all their contracts
*  transparently and we'll compare the notes and re-engineer like it's a new constitution.
*  Because when I told my dad when I was 19, I was going to get into the music industry, he begged
*  me not to. He said, I heard it's treacherous. Now I'm in a position where I've been through it.
*  I saw it. I went out, made some money somewhere else. I saw my name get smeared. I saw my family
*  get destroyed. I saw my reputation get destroyed. And I'm back here to have this kind of, I'm back
*  here as a being with engineering opportunities. So, I would say, if you say as a shitty apology,
*  what is the version of the apology short of kissing Howard Stern's dick?
*  I don't think anyone wants to kiss Howard Stern's dick. That's the whole point, Howard Stern. Nobody
*  wants to kiss your dick, so shut the fuck up. I said, by the way, I'm antagonizing you, Howard
*  Stern. I used to be a fan of you. Yeah, me too. Yeah. I'm still a fan sometimes. Now you're just
*  doing clickbait like everybody else. Now you're just a sad old man, Howard. All right. Now,
*  Howard Stern, this is the first time anyone's said your name in years. Your own family doesn't say
*  your name unless they're calling to get their bills paid. You're going hard.
*  See, that's beautiful right there. That's much better than calling Jewish media. Go after
*  individuals. Okay. Go after individuals. If you don't talk shit about me, talk shit about me.
*  This is great. And you know what that is? Yeah, what's that? Engineering. That's an engineer's
*  approach. Yeah, engineers. Yeah, yeah. You should learn some of that. We all can use our pain
*  against each other, or we can say we're being with engineering opportunities, and we can know
*  about history. So let me change something. We can have a, just to be judgmental, people say,
*  thou shalt not judge. I've been talking to Camille Vasquez. She says, I'm very judgmental. That's
*  what we're doing. I believe, now you could go to Bible and one thing's going to say one thing,
*  another thing may be contradicting in a way, and then the pastor has to unpack it. I believe
*  that we are to judge. If you look at some food and it's got a fly coming out of it,
*  you can then judge at that point. You're supposed to use your better judgment.
*  But whenever someone doesn't want to change something they're doing, they'll say,
*  don't judge me. But as a species, you call for me, you got the breakthrough. And by the way,
*  it's only an engineer that I would respect to tell me of how to update how I'm communicating.
*  Because this started off, right? I've been through all these interviews. Let me go to this. You said
*  this was a sorry apology. I was very specific. I said the Jewish, because by the way, it's a
*  barrage, right? It's a thing where I don't even remember the names at a certain point, right?
*  It's like, if a girl was getting raped by men, if that person's not 18, right, and she was getting
*  raped since 14, right? And she still got this face, this super like, Irina Sheikh level face, right?
*  She might say, I hate men. That woman may say, I hate men. She might get to that point
*  because she was raped. All my contracts, and no one can say this is ramped up. Howard Stern can't
*  say this is ramped up. Ari Emanuel can't say this is ramped up. George Soros knows damn well
*  that I'm not ramped up. George Soros knows like, wow, this guy's like a younger guy that's looking
*  at what I did and looking at how I control the world silently. And he's calling it out. And he's
*  not using any of the fear tactics. I can't send his homeboys around him. I can't send his wife to
*  him. This guy, that's what George Soros sees, right? When he's dealing with me, right? So
*  what you guys are actually asking me to do, I'm comparing myself to that 18-year-old, beautiful
*  woman that had been mistreated by men for four years of her life, right? And you're saying,
*  you know, as a man, you can't blame all men. And I'm saying, as a responsible
*  forward, philosopher, leader, okay, I'll drop the pain. And I will specify because I'm up here,
*  I lost my fucking family. I lost my kids. I lost my best friend in fashion. I lost the black
*  community. I lost, you know, people said I lost my mind, all of these things, lost my reputation.
*  And I'm up here just like, I just want my family, but I don't want my family to have to say what
*  the left wants us to say, to have to say what China wants us to say. I want to be an American
*  and protect my kids and protect my wife and raise my kids as Christians and have my wife be a
*  Christian and innovate and America made rock and roll. I want to innovate as a creative person and
*  be a successful American, but all of that had been taken away from me. So I'm coming back and
*  I'm removing the PSTD right now, right? I'm standing up and saying the only way that we're
*  going to be able to get past this and the way God is going to use me right now is for me to stop
*  talking about the pain, stop talking about what happened and do something about it. And that's
*  where I'm at right now in this moment. Like, yeah, people agree, at least there was something we could
*  say. He has a reason of why he got to that tweet. And what you're doing for me today is saying,
*  that was a sorry apology and let's specify. I'm not asking for anyone out here to empathize or
*  sympathize for a dude worth $11 billion that can make money disappear, I mean, appear at a thin air
*  in five different industries. I'm not asking for anybody to sympathize with someone who's
*  married to Kim Kardashian, dated Irina Shayk, blah, blah, blah. I feel like I'm just not going
*  to get the sympathy vote in this situation. Right? So-
*  I feel your pain. I feel your pain.
*  Yeah. I feel like no one's going to feel my pain. Only Brad and Leo can feel my pain. Right? So
*  But still.
*  But here today, when you said it's a sorry apology, what's the apology that you're looking for
*  as a Jewish engineer? Oh, no, no, say, as Lex, let's not talk about you being Jewish. As Lex,
*  what's the apology that you want me to say to, am I allowed to say Jewish? Tell me,
*  is it anti-Semitic for Ye to say Jewish out loud?
*  No, there's, I don't like the allowed that presumes censorship. I think you choose,
*  you have a powerful voice. Did I prove that there was censorship over the past two weeks?
*  Who censored you? Oh, drink champs. Oh my Lord.
*  Oh, like Twitter and so on. Twitter.
*  That has less to do- Drink champs.
*  That hurt you, that drink champs, that Noor took it down, took down your conversation.
*  No.
*  It didn't hurt you. Man, you got to be honest about the pain.
*  I feel kind of free, with still the kids we used to be. I put my hand on the stove
*  to see if I still bleed and nothing hurts anymore. I feel kind of free.
*  No, do you think, I went to Japan for two to three months, right? The day I had Sunday service,
*  my kids are supposed to be there and my kids were nowhere to be found. And I text Kim and said,
*  where are my kids? We get into an argument and then I get a text from a number I don't know.
*  And it's Pete Davidson bragging about being in bed with my wife.
*  Then- Just fucking with you?
*  Well, at that point, it's like, they're trying to put me in jail or put a friend of mine in jail.
*  Because then I'm going to go surround the hotel and do something which would have me not be able
*  to be here. And instead, I walked away from that situation. I went to Japan, like the samurai that
*  I am, and went to the top of the mountain. Because I knew there was no way she could love
*  this dude, not just because he's ugly, he's not black. She likes black guys. Every guy that she
*  is with looks exactly the same. Ray J, Reggie Bush, at that time, Kanye West, she has a type,
*  just like how I have a type. A lot of my girls look similar to her because in a video game
*  character, people have their type. So I knew that this was like-
*  The princess has a type and she likes Mario. Right, there you go.
*  As somebody cares for you and hopefully can be a friend, yay. I got to say, these words and the
*  words about Jews is not the words of a samurai, of a great man. I would say, you said something
*  that inspired, that resonated with a lot of people when you said George Bush doesn't care about black
*  people. I have to say, as somebody who cares for you, that yay, the artist formerly known as Kanye
*  West doesn't care about Jewish people. In the same way you spoke about George Bush being a politician
*  and not giving a fuck about the poor people that suffered after Katrina, you're not giving a fuck
*  about the suffering of the Jewish people across the world. Why am I not?
*  Because you're feeding, you're giving strength, motivation to hate groups.
*  We already updated, I gave an apology, you said it wasn't good enough.
*  Yeah, that's right. It's not-
*  And now you're telling me, no, I'm not gonna-
*  No, you don't need to kiss anyone's dick.
*  You're asking me to kiss-
*  You have to say it was wrong to say. There's no Jewish media, there's no Jewish-
*  There isn't?
*  There's no control of the media by Jewish people.
*  You're an engineer, brother. If you're an engineer and you're not holding to the truth,
*  that's not engineering.
*  Engineering is not, that's not, that's hate, that's not engineering. Engineering says,
*  I'm gonna build a better record label.
*  It's called stereotypes.
*  And I'm going to respect our-
*  Stereotypes exist for a reason.
*  Engineers don't do stereotypes.
*  I do.
*  Stereotypes are dumb. They allow you to channel hate towards the other.
*  You know what the biggest thing is?
*  Yeah.
*  With something, a veteran that was sitting next to me at Cheesecake Factory last night, he said,
*  the general justice, he serves for whoever is the president. And he said, what's happening in
*  politics is we're forgetting we're on the same side. We're forgetting we're on the-
*  This is someone is practically, now he's a nurse, so he's still fighting for humanity in a way.
*  He went from holding guns in battle to being a nurse when people are battling for their lives.
*  And he said, we're forgetting we're on the same side. This is a person that no matter who becomes
*  president, he can still be told to go to war. And the chaos that's created by the media
*  has split the country in half. And what we, what us as beings, what an engineer opportunity
*  needs to do right now is find the blue water. Where are places that we agree on? And I want
*  you to finish everything- I'm going to let you finish. Everything that you want to express to me,
*  get off all, I'm your scarecrow today. I'm your punching bag today for everything I did. And I
*  want you to stand up for all of the hate that- I'm your Al Gore when he lost the election.
*  Remember, he almost became a punching bag for the lady that had voted on him. And she just said all
*  this stuff. And he's like, I know, I agree with you, right? But there's nothing that he could do
*  about it. With this, it's like things that you're saying, I agree with you. You know, it's like if
*  you sit some kids in the principal's office and I punched somebody, right? I took my hand, right,
*  as what it really means. Even Ari Emmanuel had to say, this is a pop icon, right? And I went
*  and just punched an entire people at one time or said that I was about to. I went like this,
*  right? And I got blacked out, black mirrored, done, right? And it's like, what were you even
*  going to do? And why did you go like this? I went like this because I can't even do- I would look
*  insane to physically show you a metaphor, a physical representation of my last 20 years
*  of what I've been through as a musician, as a father, and as a black person with a political
*  opinion. A great man still through the pain does the right thing. And I think the right thing
*  is to not say that there's Jewish control of the media. That's incorrect though.
*  That's a fucking lie. There is. And they did come and bully me. It proved the point.
*  No, the reason you don't say it is because the world is much bigger than the, forgive me,
*  the narrow little world you exist in. Your impact stretches way past those little boardroom meetings
*  over contracts. So what should I have done? What should I have done? Not say that you should be
*  a strong man that doesn't mention religion to people and then fight. Do you want to win this
*  fight? How do we win? Call out individual people built- that's one way because they have a big
*  voice. The other voice that I prefer is to build another label or support another label. I feel
*  like you're controlling my creative narrative and my- because just like how you're telling me I
*  shouldn't have said that, do you think there are people telling me I shouldn't have wore a red hat?
*  No, because you asked me what should I have done. You're supposed to be a scarecrow. So I thought
*  I'm going to beat the shit out of the scarecrow with my words, right? You let me. It was consensual.
*  The punching bag is a bad- because scarecrow actually has a different real name. So let's say
*  a punching bag. I shouldn't say a scarecrow. But every single person that I've sat with from the
*  point when I wore the red hat to now has done the same thing. Sit in the principal's office and don't
*  do what you're doing. We're in the generous closet right now together and I'm not- the red hat is
*  very different. The red hat is a- you have a set of beliefs. You represent half the country that has
*  a hope, a vision for the future of America that's very different than without any purpose
*  whatsoever saying Jewish media, Jewish control of the media. You said that there's no purpose.
*  So you're taking away my history and my reason of what my purpose was.
*  I'm saying it was dumb.
*  Also-
*  Also-
*  I'm speaking my voice, vocalizing it.
*  Also, it's God's plan. There's a lot of things that open up. Let me tell you something that opened up.
*  There's a guy, like I told you, that was running STEM player who I've had issues with. We hadn't
*  got paid on time. Certain things, right? And he took his IQ, his know-how, his engineering know-how
*  to- he basically was trying to adidas me with- even though I was the bigger money in the situation.
*  That was fun and we funded together and he hired these engineers and he said, well, because of your
*  comments, we're not going to be able to hire anybody else. And I was like, well, how many Jewish
*  people do we have in our company? He said, I don't know. He didn't say exactly, right? I said, do we
*  have black people? He said, yes. I said, how many? He said, two. So we have like 60 full-time employees,
*  like 40 half-time and part-time. And I took as a responsibility. Let's take a step back from us
*  being one species and say, hey, you're Jewish, I'm black. Why step back? For this example, for the sake
*  of this example. And I said, wow, I'm sure I could hire more than two black engineers. And he said,
*  I'm sure I can hire more than two black engineers. And what happens is because there are so many
*  businessmen that just so happen to be Jewish that it's good business, right? Just to monopolize.
*  That's what people are looking. Everybody wants to be Elon, right? So the-
*  I disagree with that.
*  Okay. But let me finish this point.
*  Sure. I'm going to let you finish.
*  A lot of businessmen want to be as successful as Elon and as popular as Elon. A lot. Just worded
*  like that, which I hate the term a lot, actually. I want to be more specific, but I haven't done the
*  math on it. Let's say some. Factually, for sure, there are some business people of all different
*  walks and backgrounds that would like to be as rich and as popular as Elon Musk. So let me just
*  take a step back from the we're one species into the we're separated by race, gender,
*  socioeconomic class conversation and say, as a black owner of two tech platforms, hardware and
*  software, I need to take action. Let's not call it affirmative. Let's just say I need to take action
*  and I need to take accountability in ensuring that black engineers are hired. And guess what?
*  Hired together. Because when the black people that are brilliant are separated from our culture,
*  we forget who we are. And we'll get to a point where, you know, OJ will say, I'm not black,
*  I'm OJ. Because just to be on the golf course, we put on the golf shirt. But the golf shirt
*  might not be something that our culture would have done. And our culture in poor communities is,
*  oh, everybody's got Draco on them. Everybody's got a gun on them. Oh, if you run up on me on the
*  gas station, I'm going to kill you. Hey, you ain't got to talk to me like a man if I haven't killed
*  at least five people. What happens is we can kill five people, we can kill 10 people and still be
*  in the media as long as we play by the rules. Because what will happen is any of these guys
*  that have talked about killing people and different things, unless Trump had pardoned them,
*  but let's say even if Trump had pardoned them, they could still go to someone like a little boozy
*  or Meek Mills or Puff Daddy, anybody and say, hey, we need you to talk shit about yay,
*  right now. And also you're not allowed, if you do want to vote for Trump or vote outside of
*  what this arrangement is, then we're going to put you in jail. It ain't that we're not going to bring
*  you down. We have this on you. You get what I'm saying? If I had ever killed someone, if I wasn't
*  the bitch with the pink polo on, I wouldn't be able to be the vocal man that I am today.
*  You understand what I'm saying? This is the reason why I'm happy that my gangster disciple brothers
*  kept me from the initiations, which made me feel like a pussy my whole life, right? But now I am
*  someone who legally can say this. Other people in my position, they legally cannot speak.
*  They legally cannot speak or they will go to prison. I am in a bit of a glass prison
*  because I don't have say so of where my children go to school, but I'm in a freedom place where I
*  can have this conversation with you right now. And that is, I don't like the word breakthrough,
*  you know, that's God's hand on this situation. But you get what I'm saying about if I hadn't
*  said the tweet, I wouldn't have had to take the accountability myself to hire black engineers
*  into my two tech platforms. Yeah. And do you get what I'm saying? That's a beautiful personal
*  journey you're on, but do you get what I'm saying? That personal is for my people as a whole.
*  As a tribal person, it's a small company. As a tribal person, I believe that I am
*  my people. And the thing that businessmen have done to my people have pulled the brightest out
*  of our tribes and siloed them and made us lose our culture and lose who they were. All the only
*  thing I wanted to say at Virgil's funeral, which I wasn't allowed to, right? It was a white pastor
*  that talked the majority of the funeral, half the funeral was pissed, pissed, right?
*  And this pastor actually married me and Kim, right? He looks like Justin Timberlake a little bit.
*  And he talked half the funeral, he knew Virgil was passing, did a collaboration with him before he
*  passed, by the way, right? A clothing collaboration. I didn't know Virgil was passing. But the thing I
*  wanted to say, I saw Asap Rocky and I saw some other members of his gang in the audience at the
*  funeral. And all I wanted to tell him is, don't let them split the gang up. Don't let them split
*  the gang up. When I did the first Yeezy, because I did Kanye West two fashion shows before as a
*  high end luxury, all leather kind of designer, not all leather, but high end materials, mink,
*  this kind of thing. And then I came back with Yeezy with Adidas. And this fashion show was so
*  popular that Justin Bieber had to sit in the second row, right? This thing had every name you
*  could think of. It had Kim Kardashian, Kris Jenner, Kendall Jenner. It was Kylie's first fashion show
*  she'd been in. And in the second fashion show, I put Kylie and Bella Hadid next to each other
*  in the fashion show. You had Puff Daddy. At that time, Puff Daddy had beef with Drake. Drake still
*  came to the show and Jay-Z had to break up the fight backstage. The designers, you had Jerry
*  Lorenzo that's head of Fear of God. You had Kim Schraub, head of Skims. You had Virgil Abloh,
*  head of Louis Vuitton. You had Demna, head of Balenciaga, all working for Yeezy, for the leader,
*  for the philosopher, right? For the person that put, who put this together? Me, that's who, right?
*  You had these people working for the king of New York, basically the boss, Yeezy, right? You had
*  Jay-Z in the audience, Rihanna in the audience, Beyonc in the audience, sitting next to Anna
*  Wintour in this audience. And guess who heard wind of this? One of the richest men in the world,
*  Bernard Arnault, caught wind of this. What's going on? They're building up something and we need to
*  stop it. So then he met with me and politely offered me backing for my clothing line. It
*  would be Kanye West. They would get 49%, 51%, I would get 49%. They'd have control and they were
*  going to give me all of the support from Louis Vuitton. So I had to go to Adidas and I told Adidas,
*  hey, let's ademnify the apparel. So Adidas, you're not going to do the apparel anymore. Hey,
*  we had a good time, but we're going to run off with Gisele now, right? So that's like you told
*  your girl that and she's like, oh, no, we're supposed to, we had the proudest moment of our
*  career. So then he offers me to deal with Alexander Arnault, who's went to gone on and rape and pillage
*  from all of the talent that I had afterwards. I say, before I tell Adidas to ademnify the apparel,
*  can I get a written contract from your dad, Bernard Arnault? And he says, my dad will never
*  go back on his word. So you already know where this thing is going, right? You can spoil or alert,
*  right? He went back on his word. So three months into the deal, I get Anna Winter. I say, who should
*  I use for my lawyer? She picks my lawyer for me, right? I just found out even a couple of days
*  that the lawyer demanded an airplane during negotiations. Had nothing to do with me, right?
*  They said that Bernard Arnault got freaked out. And then Alexander Arnault calls me and says,
*  the deal got dropped at the board. I went back and told my high maintenance wife,
*  I was supposed to become this designer at Louis Vuitton or the Louis Vuitton group was going to
*  back the Kanye West line because that's how good I've done in fashion, babe. And now the deal is
*  dropped. Now the deal is dropped. So then I did a second collection and we didn't have any support
*  to be able to build the collection. Then I went and found a third collection. We did it. We took
*  over MSG. Fourth collection went and the show started an hour late. Then a week later, Kim got
*  robbed. Then I told Scooter Braun, my manager at that time, I say, I'm looking, you know, I need to
*  go to Japan. I'm tired. I'm tired. He says, no, you need to make more money. I do four more shows
*  on a second leg of the tour and I suffer from exhaustion and go to the hospital and then get
*  diagnosed with a disorder. This is the first time I ever suffered from exhaustion. By the way,
*  I haven't been to the hospital since. I haven't been to the hospital since and haven't taken
*  medication in two years. I'm sure there'll be people in the media, we won't say, where
*  phone will say, well, that's obvious. Right now I'm talking to you. I'm not on medication. I just
*  go to sleep. I have sleep. Have you been able to sleep? That's too low hanging fruit for you.
*  You're more, I expect more.
*  I agree. I agree. That was dumb. I regret it.
*  Okay. That's like Pierce Morgan trying to grab ratings. You got a whole life ahead of you.
*  You got a whole life ahead of you. These guys are at the end of their life.
*  Oh, good.
*  So this story is-
*  Call me out on my shit. I love it.
*  But then, amidst that, the same guy that dropped my deal, Bernard Arnault, goes and hires my best
*  friend, goes and hires my main engineer. It would have been like them hiring Elon from
*  Peter before they figured out Paul, before they figured out PayPal. But it don't, Paul sounds
*  like, Paul sounds like Paul. I just said it because I'm a Christian. I thought it was cool.
*  But it would have been like, what if someone could have went in and took Elon away from
*  Peter before they paid Paul? Because they paid Paul.
*  Paid Paul. Yeah, before they paid Paul.
*  Before they, it's just too close.
*  Yeah, too close.
*  It just sounds so fresh that the fact that it's so close. And that's what happened. They broke
*  the gang up. And I'm telling you right now, that hadn't happened. Virgil's alive. I'm still married.
*  You know what I'm saying? The power structure was broken then because we were building some,
*  Kylie wasn't a billionaire. We were building something together that a French colonizer came
*  in and caught it early and tried to destroy it. But the only thing is God is alive and I'm anointed.
*  And even with those drawbacks, losing my wife, losing my friend, exhaustion,
*  all of these late night tweets that piss off an entire group. The frustration still,
*  I work for God and God runs the world and we'll see what happens.
*  But in those words, don't you feel that being split up, don't you feel you're doing the thing
*  that you stand against, which is playing victim? Aren't you playing victim to the forces in the world?
*  I didn't play victim. I didn't even get a chance to play. I just said I was about to. I said like this.
*  No, you played pretty damn well. What do you mean? What do you mean about to?
*  You're like one of the greatest designers in history, fashion designers.
*  You're playing. You are playing. What does that even mean?
*  I thought you were referring to the tweet.
*  All of them there.
*  Well, there's a full set of things that you're under attack for.
*  The tweet and everything beyond that. But like you're blaming, not blaming, but you're saying
*  that the Jewish media, the Jewish record labels, the Jewish people, forget Jewish or not,
*  it doesn't matter. It's playing victim, right?
*  Ultimately, I am fighting a battle in the spiritual form. And anyone that believes in God
*  and is looking at this interview would agree with that. And I just so happen to be a bright part
*  of God's army. I'm fighting for us to live. The greatest gift is life itself. I am pro-life.
*  I am pro-God. I believe that Jesus Christ is our Lord and Savior and died for our sins.
*  What do you feel about another attack, another painful thing? I imagine super painful is
*  Balenciaga pulling. You had a really close relationship and friendship with their
*  creative director. How do you feel about all of it?
*  I told you I sang the song. I'll sing another song from one of my mentors' future. I never
*  feel pain. I done felt too much pain. There was a day where I was headed to Nashville to meet with
*  George Farmer, who is the CEO of Parla, the day when we made the announcement. At that same day,
*  Balenciaga was taking my imagery off of their site and the drink champs was being taken down.
*  And I said, this is the happiest day of my life. I love cutting the grass low.
*  People wasn't really with you. They was part-time. People switch up when it's wartime.
*  I'd rather have people who are really with me and not people who are just trying to use me.
*  As a friend, if somebody cares for you, you have to be really careful by the people,
*  by all people, always. The people that are going to try to be close to you now,
*  you don't know if you can trust them anymore.
*  Even more. With the Balenciaga, I have more to say about it though.
*  Yeah.
*  Let's do this. Demna will still work for you someday. And this is just speeding the process up.
*  Have you talked? Can you share if you've talked?
*  Yes, I talked to Demna. We're kindred spirits. None of this can keep us away from each other.
*  I brought Demna to Gap to be able to bring the best product in the world. At that time,
*  I wanted to go under $100. Now I'm like, okay, we're going to go $20 a product. I brought Demna
*  in to engineer. That's why I said engineer by Balenciaga, EasyGap engineer by Balenciaga,
*  to engineer the best product for the people. The people that they say are at the bottom of the Mas
*  Law hierarchy and need chart. They're at the bottom of the pyramid. Gap didn't want that.
*  Balenciaga didn't want that. Our agendas were not aligned. I was brought in
*  to the Gap for political reasons and influence, like a Virgil, like a George Floyd. When popular
*  celebrities are brought into Fortune 500 companies, it's not to raise the stock.
*  It's to strengthen the position and influence. It's definitely not to be out here letting a
*  nigger think he's Steve Jobs. Yeah, there's people like that.
*  Yeah. But you as a great man, a visionary, your job is to understand that game and be one step ahead.
*  Well, that's why I'm telling them that relationship, some relationships only last for a summer.
*  Some last for a year. The relationship ran its course. In that relationship, I invested
*  a lot of my social capital and actual capital. I spent somewhere between $5 to $10 million
*  personally on Balenciaga. How much money do you think Balenciaga had paid me in the past two years?
*  Just take a really wild guess, a really wild guess.
*  Less than that? Just take a super wild one. Just go to the
*  furthest extent of your imagination. $1.2 million.
*  Lower. $500,000.
*  Lower. Zero.
*  Zero. All right. And actually, two weeks ago, I paid at a Saint's account $862,000, not in clothes
*  for me from Balenciaga from the store, in royalties to Balenciaga where the deal had been
*  engineered where I was coming out of my pocket. Last year, I paid Demna $3 million to design the
*  collection. And we got it out of the Gap Marketing Fund. And he was going to deliver 160 skews or 120
*  skews. A hundred skews are separate items of clothing, styles of clothing. So he ended
*  delivering about 60. I feel like we're on the people's court because we actually are, right?
*  We're in the court of public opinion. So he delivered about 60. There were all kinds of
*  people that were working. Part of the reason why I had to get Demna, I didn't want to have to get,
*  I wanted to compete with him. I didn't want to have to get him. When I made Stronger,
*  I did it to compete with Timbaland and Justin Timberlake because my fiance at that time,
*  like Justin Timberlake, just a little bit too much. So I made it to compete. And then we had the song
*  out. It's number one on Apple. It's blowing up. I play it in a club and it sounds muddy.
*  It doesn't sound the way Sexy Back sounded in the club. So I go to
*  Pharrell Williams to do the drums and it sounds like a different record. And so it can't be a
*  different record because I'm like, I'm going to swap it out on radio, right? Then I go to
*  Swiss Beats. It sounds like a different record. I go to Timberlake, the person who did Sexy Back,
*  and he did it in five minutes and then spent the rest of the hour talking about how nobody
*  could have done it except for him running around the studio. I'm the best. No one could have done
*  it. That's why he had to go to me. He had to go to the king. Well, he had a point, right?
*  He had a point, right? So- What makes the song muddy is the beat.
*  It was in the drums. It was something that Timberlake had in those drums. Now watch this.
*  I said I'm going Defqon3, right? And the actual, I spelled it wrong. I have a tendency to do that.
*  I'm not quite John Legend, tight sweater level, spelling bee level. So I feel a parallel to me
*  going to Timberland to when I said, hey, you as an engineer, I need to work with you as an engineer
*  that is Jewish to look at these contracts and what my people, not just black people, let's say
*  artists are dealing with in our contracts. These contracts need to be fixed. Everyone could be so
*  mad at the messenger, right? Yay, you said it the wrong way. You're offensive. You're like Hitler
*  now because you said it. You said this out loud, but it does not, you weren't getting enough sleep.
*  All this shit does not negate the fact that we do have Houston. We have a problem.
*  Yeah, but we is just the music industry. There's a lot of hate that was created by just saying that.
*  But you're saying what is just is everything to me, right? Yeah. One person can mean everything to
*  me, right? And for George Bush, winning an election was everything. And then when you said George
*  Bush doesn't care about black people, that you woke him up. You woke the people up to the fact
*  that he was narrowly being selfish. There's a sense to which you're being corrupted by your own
*  greatness. You're focusing too much on the industry that you've made great, that you've
*  rose to the very top. One of the richest artists in history, one of the greatest designers.
*  I am the richest artist in history. Probably the richest artist in history.
*  The funny thing is they're like, oh, riches, black person. Also, richest actor, richest musician,
*  richest fashion designer. There's a bunch of riches in that one. You know what I'm saying?
*  It's richer than Ralph Lauren, richer than Armani, richest of that. But still low. Because where do
*  you put that on the totem? Because I don't even want to- Man's bank account isn't everything.
*  I would say you and I are equal in a certain deep sense, no matter what the bank account says.
*  So I wanted to give you some theme music for your moments. It's not a little muddy.
*  Let me give you the Timberland version. Thank you.
*  But okay. So the other thing about Balenciaga is Demna will work with Ye someday.
*  For Cedric and for Francois Pino, and Salma is a beautiful human being.
*  Five years from now, you'll hear and know the name Ye and know things that we did.
*  And Balenciaga is not going to make it onto your questions. Would you, as a gambling man,
*  would you bet on that? I will bet on that. I can see it in your eyes.
*  Let me ask you a question. So it was actually a sad day for me. Not for me, but more for Balenciaga.
*  Let me ask you a silly question about Demna. I read something that you two talked about,
*  like buttons for a few hours. They're my gumdrop buttons.
*  Just an added accent. Me and Demna only speak in Shrek.
*  What's your philosophy with which you approach this?
*  I think it's a little bit of a
*  philosophy with which you approach design. You are one of the great fashion designers of our time.
*  How do you think about it? Do you have a philosophy?
*  You know what I like about the zipper is the zipper hoodie replaces the dress shirt
*  because you could get on your douchebag shit and unzip it and give it a little bit of
*  that type of look. Which is the douchebag?
*  You know when the douchebags that go to Vegas unbutton their dress shirt?
*  And the problem with the pullover hoodie is you can't do the douchebag thing where you unbutton it,
*  but then still get the stomach. Because the thing is the ultimate look would be like military tank
*  pullover hoodie. And if you get a little hot, you take off the hoodie, but you're crazy in shape.
*  So it gives you that flexibility?
*  Yeah, the zipper is giving some flexibility and it's like maybe you want to keep your jacket on.
*  Like let's consider a hoodie to be like a jacket. If you want to keep your jacket on then
*  you might want to do this as opposed to pulling it all the way off.
*  Yeah.
*  You know so and it's just comfort, but then you get okay can I do a jogging pant on this?
*  What elasticity? Now people argue about climate, where we are with the climate.
*  I take responsibility as being the most influential designer of all time to
*  say we're going to use biodegradable clothing. Now the issue there is
*  the elastic is not biodegradable. So that means it's actually better to use jeans and a belt
*  than to have an elastic waistband because the elastic waistband is not biodegradable.
*  So I use the planet as a big, the future of the planet is a big piece of
*  the way I engineer and the way we talk about where designs are going.
*  The constraints on your design and engineering is given by the planet, by the future of the planet.
*  Yes. That could almost make Jewish people like me again.
*  Every time you say Jewish people, I think I've been maybe reading a little too much about
*  World War II, but man, I'd recommend you listen to some audio books or read some books on the
*  Holocaust because like it's heavy, it's heavy. It will put into context the impact of your words.
*  Would you read books on the current Holocaust that
*  black people are in? I mean, I read. What have you read about abortion? I've read a lot of short form
*  writing and I've listened to a lot of debates because it's really humbling that the question of
*  when does life begin is a really difficult question. For me as an engineer and scientist,
*  it's a philosophical question. I mean, we've got to be honest, I think that's a really difficult
*  question. It's a philosophical question. I mean, we could just go on population control,
*  not like if abortion is right or wrong, we could say factually the clinics were made by eugenics
*  for population control and it is controlling the population as is the never being given a 40 acres
*  and a mule so you don't have the opportunity. And when the people that do have the opportunity
*  are separated from our people, our tribe and placed in suburban communities next to us,
*  Chris Rocker put it, the dentist and whitewashed and made to shut the fuck up and vote left or
*  whatever niggas are supposed to do when we make it as opposed to saying, okay, we're building
*  schools, we're building up choirs, we're building up our own leagues, basketball teams,
*  our own factories. We started the first sportswear factory in America since World War II
*  was actually this factory I put in Cody. So I'm 45 years old, we're on this journey right now.
*  It's the other thing about this is people just in general, they love me so much. I'm actually a hard
*  guy to really hate for a long period of time because of my huge cock.
*  Jai Radha That's what I noticed. I didn't understand why you showed it to me when we first met,
*  but now I understand. It's very nice. Congratulations. I know you don't talk about
*  it, but your hat does say 24. If you run for president, what kind of ideas would you represent?
*  Cody Hayes That we're beings with engineering opportunities. I would represent
*  just as you served a platform here. There's something that happened on my last run that
*  I thought, I feel, I know was brilliant. It was noisy, but it was brilliant. I had one rally,
*  and in the rally, I just let people come up and I gave them a platform. It's our responsibility
*  to listen to the pain and hear the pain and understand even when we're the ones that cause
*  the pain, like with my tweet. It's my responsibility to hear you and understand
*  why you feel like that, but it's our responsibility as a people to understand each other.
*  Jai Radha To give people a voice.
*  Cody Hayes People need the voice, and even right now,
*  what I'm doing or how God is using me, I'm showing where our voices are being muted.
*  There's professors that are actually intelligent, actually have multiple degrees that have been
*  canceled from their schools, and they don't have a music industry or a fan base or shoe design
*  or a smoking hot ex-wife to complain about. They've just got the truth of what they saw
*  and what they dedicated to this country and to education that has been muted by schools
*  that have been taken over with an agenda. You want the brightest minds to be these professors,
*  and then you mute them, and they have nowhere to go. You might get a guy now that went from
*  being someone's favorite professor to he's working at Starbucks like he was back in school
*  or like he was back in high school. Jai Radha
*  So even if that voice is about anger and hate, it still deserves to be heard.
*  Cody Hayes Yeah, it deserves to be heard, and we deserve to ask why. You have to ask why. I
*  that's what's... I feel like that is sympathizing Mr. Hugecock. I'm just saying that it just needs
*  to be... Jai Radha
*  You should change that to your name on Twitter while you're still allowed on there.
*  Cody Hayes Yeah. Do you think that would get censored? I feel like they definitely cut it
*  down some inches. I'm pointing out this truth. No, I'm serious. This is not a Christian thing.
*  I wonder right there, when I say these jokes, is it something that... Because I do feel like
*  laughter is the key. Engineering and laughter is the key to peace. When I go get my teeth clean
*  and I have the nitrous, there's something that I want to go and hug Christian or I want to go and
*  hug Corey Gamble. I want to go and hug Howard Stern. No one wants to hug Howard Stern.
*  Jai Radha No, no, no. I would love to see you two hug it out and make up,
*  even though all this shit talking back and forth.
*  Cody Hayes What about talking it out or is he going to be screaming at me?
*  Jai Radha Yeah, judgmental and that kind of stuff. No, I hope there's love there.
*  Cody Hayes The thing is, I think Howard's just jealous. Not just jealous of my cock. He's also...
*  He's jealous that I started my campaign earlier than him.
*  Jai Radha You got to let go of that jealousy.
*  You got to let go of that jealousy, Howard. You got to let go...
*  Howard and everybody else. Jealousy is a natural human thing, man.
*  Jai Radha I wonder just as a Christian,
*  when I joke and say this stuff, it's like, am I being disobedient to God? Because as a boss,
*  I'll talk to an employee and I'll be like, why didn't you just listen? Because I've got the
*  bigger plan. It's like me talking to God, were there things that I did in this interview that
*  were disobedient to God? For those things, I pray and I repent for anything that I've said that
*  was disobedient to God. Howard Meehan
*  But humor is not one of them. Joking is... I feel like humor is the way we avoid so much suffering
*  in the world. It's like a catalyst for love. People that have gone through some of the darkest
*  trauma that I've ever met through war, I just came back from Ukraine, they're laughing. They're
*  making jokes. That's the best way to deal with dark times. I don't know what it is about humans.
*  That's the best way to socially engineer a good future, I think, is humor. Not taking shit too
*  seriously. That's the problem with censorship. One of the things that really suffer is humor.
*  Jokes. Maybe going too far in the jokes. You mentioned Anthony Jeselnik. That guy goes hard.
*  That guy goes really hard and it's great. He crosses all the lines and that's why he's a genius.
*  And that's what people feel is refreshing when he does it. I don't know what it is.
*  J.C. Bell But then it's hurtful when I do it. But I'll tell you something that was interesting.
*  I'm pretty sure Anthony doesn't like, sorry for the assumption, but just
*  most comedians I know didn't vote for Trump.
*  That's interesting.
*  J.C. Bell Not saying there aren't comedians that did,
*  but just the ones I know because I live in California, right?
*  J.C. Bell But they have an appreciation for Trump because of the sense of humor.
*  J.C. Bell Yeah.
*  J.C. Bell I gotta ask you about parlor engineering because I'm interested about that.
*  J.C. Bell Dum dum dum dum.
*  J.C. Bell Hey, man, I'm actually trying to hold it together. You're pretty offensive towards a lot.
*  J.C. Bell I'm not looking to be offensive. I really want to bring people together and get these sales done.
*  J.C. Bell I know, but 100% I see your vision.
*  J.C. Bell How do we do that?
*  J.C. Bell But somebody who cares, well, don't say Jewish media and Jewish controlled media.
*  J.C. Bell JM.
*  J.C. Bell Like, man, you sound like
*  it sounds too much like 1930s Nazi Germany that was leading up to the atrocities.
*  J.C. Bell Oh, he would say JM?
*  J.C. Bell Yeah, he was a brand of JM. That's right. No, it's just the implied, like this
*  meme-ified prejudice towards a group in a way that's going to lead to hate. And I know you
*  don't mean that. I know you have love in your heart. That's what I'm trying to-
*  J.C. Bell You know what's the prejudice towards a group that led to hate? BLM. BLM took a black person,
*  showed his death on camera because, okay, there are examples of us being killed and being killed
*  on camera. But if it was spread on camera, it was done on purpose by the media because
*  14, 20 kids get killed in Chicago every week and it's not spread that much. They, like you said,
*  singled out a person, directed everything on that person as the martyr and raised the people that
*  hadn't had any. We didn't have our 40 acres and a mule. We didn't have a lot of things that black
*  people have not ever been given. So once we're given just a little bit, like your life matters,
*  then we literally like, oh, okay, now we're being heard. But actually the death toll is up. The city
*  where this happened has completely been turned to a war zone. It's actually something like
*  Candace Owens can actually specify this better, but it's like its own city or something. They made it
*  not be a part of the actual state or something. It's like DC and stuff. It's like Washington, DC
*  now and stuff. And that has to be from a government that's got higher level agenda written all over it.
*  They're using the death of an individual. Yeah, sure. The media are. Not the Jewish media,
*  the media. And that's the media has fucked up. That machine
*  does takes whatever tragedy and pushes it towards whatever narrative that gets more clicks and views
*  and so on. Sure. And then politicians do the same. They use the media, the influence, the media to
*  tell a story. And this is a simple thing I'll put. I believe that the idea of anti-Semitism and
*  the closeness of the Holocaust is used by certain individuals in media to not take accountability
*  for the bad things that are happening. And what's happening is there's a new frontier, right? Meaning
*  it used to be okay for somebody to be a billionaire. We thought about a billionaire.
*  A lot of times you think I'm actually being out of shape 20 years ago, 30 years ago, like
*  Onassis or something. You thought about it a different way. Now you think about a billionaire,
*  you think about Elon, think Kim, think Ye. You think it's a new kind of billionaire. It's not
*  just Soros is a billionaire. It's a new form of billionaire. Well, right now what I'm calling for
*  the industry is I'm calling the industry out and saying like, hey, it just so happens that
*  there's been times where I had my lawyer was Jewish, my regulator was Jewish, but like eight
*  people that basically would collude and talk without me were in groups saying, okay, this is
*  what the tour is going to be. This is his next house. And they were making all these decisions
*  and they're making all this money. And at the end, I was like, I ended my tour and I don't have the
*  money. And it just so happens that that's the case that what they were. But what I'm saying is
*  if everyone can say, hey, you can't point out this fact, or we're going to say you're anti-Semitic
*  and we're going to call you Hitler. I feel that there has to be at least 1% of safeguarding the
*  ability to screw the artists based on saying it's anti-Semitic by pointing out that they just so
*  happen to all be Jewish. And I don't think that's anti-Semitism. I just think that's, hey, this is
*  another thing. Like, okay, the Kardashians, when you hear that, do you think male or do you think
*  female? You think female. You get what I'm saying? You think this is the realities. This is why rap
*  works. They're going to make an anti-women thing in a second. And it's going to say, well, if you
*  point out that these five women, six women are having a meeting on where the Christmas party is
*  and none of the ballplayers or rappers that they have babies with have any say so, so that Christmas
*  happened at Courtney's house all eight years when I was there and it never happened at anyone else's
*  black family house. Right. If I'm the one that pointed it out, they just don't have they don't
*  have their or your anti-Semitic word to say, shut the fuck up. Yeah. But this is the way it runs.
*  This is the way we want to do it. If you say that though that women are silencing the black voice,
*  yes, you're going to get the same response. But especially if historically resonance,
*  the fact that it's true. When you talk in groups that breeds hate, when you talk about individuals,
*  it solves problems. You're an engineering. Okay. But this is something I pointed out on Pierce.
*  I said, if a black person gets pulled over with a car and it's three other people in the car,
*  they're also going to jail. They're not going to single them out. They're going to say, you guys
*  are all in collusion. I just described collusion five times in this interview. And you keep on
*  going back to this is like 1930. This is like this. This is like that. What I'm saying is, look,
*  I want to work with you as an engineer to free my people. Can we start as a being with engineer
*  opportunities right here? I am sorry to the people who had to be hurt and affected by that.
*  Now we are here and I'm looking to solve it. But what happens is every time if I talk to any of
*  these business people one by one, because mind you, I didn't get to the tweet by not having a
*  conversation. I had the conversations beforehand before I got to the tweet. Now we're going to take
*  it to the stage. Now we're on the world stage. And you saw Ari Emanuel do exactly the kind of
*  thing that I was saying had been done behind closed doors. Now he's doing it and open doors.
*  They told Candace Owens, I couldn't be on the daily wire. You can't even explain yourself.
*  And we don't care how you got to that point either. And that's fucked up.
*  They told Candace, you can't be on daily wire.
*  They said even about, yes she did. That's what they said. And you know what? And you can have
*  my voice raised or lower. I'm going to do it lower, right? Because what's happening to me by
*  I put it in your words, the media is saying, not only can you not explain yourself, we don't care
*  how you got to that point. You need to apologize and you can't explain. And that's the end of the
*  story. So just apologize so we can have Mel Gibson do some more films. It's exactly what
*  Ari Emanuel was saying. No one is looking to change the problem that led so many people to
*  that same level of frustration. And I just so happen to be the one that's not going to back up
*  on it until this changes. Because you know what? I'm sorry I had a sleepy text. I'm sorry that I
*  was 5'12 or 5'11 on Tinder. My cock is not 14 inches. I lied. It's only 13. So I'm sorry.
*  Why are you dropping so many facts today?
*  So what I'm saying is, but where do we get to this? Because even you,
*  as engineering, as intelligent as you are, you, just like everyone else that I say was colluding,
*  won't let us get to the point of fixing it.
*  Yeah. But I'm not, I think you're more powerful than the media. I'm not saying you need to
*  apologize because the media, I'm saying everything we've been talking about just because I care for
*  you and I want you to be the best possible man you can be. To me, a definition of a great man,
*  I'm with Martin Luther King on this. You don't talk about Jews or black people. You talk about
*  engineering. You talk about humanity. You solve problems. You identify the problems in the world
*  and you don't come from a place of resentment. This group did this, this. Fuck all that.
*  That is in the past. You just build solutions. I'm going to create a new record label. I'm going
*  to create a new design firm. I'm going to create a new social network. I'm going to do it better.
*  I'm going to do it right. I'm going to do it right by the people that I know don't have a voice. I'm
*  going to give them a voice and talk about that. Is it okay to call out collusion? Do people collude
*  in your business? Under you, like the engineers, they come together and like say they collude
*  against the bosses, right? You know why Bernardo Noh offered the deal and took it away from me?
*  Collusion. Because I was too powerful with the collective that I had right there. He had to stop
*  that at all costs. They said, for whatever reason, this kid, yay, it has the ability to have all of
*  the Kardashians, Jay-Z and Beyonce, Justin Bieber, Demna, Virgil, all these people in the same room
*  working towards the same goal. I've been that person since preschool. That's called a leader,
*  right? Right now, what I'm saying is, hey, for the people in business, whatever their background is,
*  whether they turn their cell phones off on Friday or not, there's been some bad business done. There's
*  some bad business practices. We have to change that because this game is like boxing. More people
*  end up retarded than rich. I'm saying like beat to a pulp, driven crazy, beat by the media to a pulp.
*  Right now, the media has done everything they could to make me apologize and to make me look
*  crazy. That one person has done anything to find out why I was frustrated enough to do that tweet.
*  That's facts and that's fucked up. Well, I was hoping to. I am finding out. We found out. I want
*  solutions. See, there's something about human nature where if you focus too much on resentment.
*  We're not focusing on anymore. Fuck the resentment. We're moving forward.
*  There's two things I think that are required for ... This is how I've lived my life,
*  for great engineering. You surround yourself in your personal life by people you trust.
*  Then in your professional life from the engineer perspective with a team,
*  with an incredible team and everything else doesn't matter. That allows you not to focus
*  on other groups, how they're fucking you over, how they're trying to manipulate or collude and
*  all that kind of stuff. You focus on solutions and you find a way around all the difficult shit.
*  That's it. If you have people in your life you can trust.
*  That's lifelong. You said some people you're with for the summer,
*  for a year. Find people you can be with for your whole life. Do you have people in your life
*  that you trust, really trust? No, I trust God. At any point, a human being ... If I go and
*  really treat this guy like a piece of shit or do this and that and that, am I supposed to
*  trust him to be loyal and stay in the situation? No, I trust people to be people and people are
*  flawed. People can have the right intentions, but it only makes sense for us to work together
*  when our agendas align. When Kim was pulled really far to the left, our agendas no longer aligned.
*  That made the marriage impossible. It aligned where it's like, oh, I could wear a red hat,
*  that can help her to get Alice Johnson out of jail because Trump's willing to do that for my
*  wife because I was the only person in my position that stood up and said, Wasek, I like you.
*  But isn't the deeper agenda, the human agenda, just being in love?
*  What you're talking about, red hat is just politics, right?
*  The world is becoming more and more transactional every day and actually,
*  marriages are actually originally based on transactions. That's why they're less needed
*  the more autonomous as we come or the world makes it less needed. I feel like we do need each other.
*  I feel like we do need someone we can always count on. It's like I'm pulled away by
*  King Koopa, which is the media, the politics, the promise, oh, we're going to keep you safe.
*  The reason why I get really frustrated with Kris Jenner is she says losing Rob Kardashian
*  was the greatest mistake of her life, but she never gave Kim's hand over in marriage
*  because this is the bottom line. When me and Kim met, we were millionaires or whatever, right?
*  You're telling me you just hand her hand over in marriage that your daughter's not successful,
*  handing your hand over in marriage too, but no, she had to still be the husband to all of her
*  daughters. We see what the results are consistently. That's where I get frustrated. It's like,
*  let that go. Let this person do what you made mistakes on. Don't make this person relive those
*  same mistakes and then put that agenda into my daughters too. Is there somebody in your life
*  close to you that you trust enough to call you out on your bullshit? We're all full of shit sometimes.
*  What's my bullshit?
*  Well, some of it I pointed out today, but I don't know you deeply enough.
*  What was the bullshit?
*  Jewish media, Jewish-
*  That's not bullshit. The bullshit is that the Jewish media won't admit-
*  Your dad was right. Your dad was right. The words you used, the you weren't-
*  And I said it. You're not going to make me say it 800 more times.
*  I don't know if it resonated because you keep saying the words-
*  Did it resonate to y'all that y'all ain't do nothing about it and that all y'all want to do
*  is have somebody apologize and sweep under the rug your bullshit that you've been doing the whole
*  time. You own the same bullshit as the other people. So you're doing the same thing that the other,
*  let's say media, because I'm not allowed to say, has done. So until somebody stands up-
*  Which is what, man? Which is what? I'm trying to call you out on your bullshit
*  because I hope I'm somebody you can trust. That's it.
*  I don't fucking trust you.
*  Well, you should find people in your life you can trust.
*  Don't tell me what I should do. I'm not one of your BLM marchers.
*  Listen, I'm with you on the BLM. A lot of organizations use tragedy.
*  And I watched the Candace Owens documentary.
*  And what was your take on it?
*  I think it's important to question the mainstream narratives, but I don't agree with it. I still
*  believe that George Floyd died from the knee of the cop, not from fentanyl.
*  And even if that was the case, there's still 50% of black deaths is actually abortion.
*  So let's get into engineering. Let's just go-
*  Well, how do you fix that?
*  Population control is social engineering. And it's most literal form.
*  The blacks that are under population control. That's something that, I mean, that's just what it is.
*  African Americans are not choosing to get the abortion. I mean, it's a choice.
*  It's an individual choice. But we're being influenced to.
*  Well, then speak to the community and help. I mean, I don't know what the engineering
*  solutions there are. It could be you're doing that in part by speaking to the value and the
*  power of family. Well, watch this. I was building
*  shelters. I bought land in Calabasas, bought two ranches in Wyoming, 300 acres in Calabasas,
*  12,000 acres in total in Wyoming. And I started building ideas for shelters.
*  And God set it on my heart to make monasteries, which would be modern day facilities that don't
*  turn people down, that have farms, that have shelter, clothing. But first of all, water.
*  First of all, knowledge. Because knowledge is the most important resource to our species,
*  to our species above water. Knowledge itself. Because then you can go get water. I mean,
*  you can argue like if you're a baby, how do you get water? But the baby doesn't have it. So someone
*  with the knowledge then feeds the baby the water. But it's important that those with the knowledge
*  teach the baby how to find the water themselves. And the business people that I've been dealing
*  with have been keeping the baby sick by not sharing the information and the knowledge
*  with inside of those contracts. My people are sick. If I load up Apple Music right now,
*  and I play the top songs in the rap chart, I will tell you my people are sick. If I go
*  to the restaurants and opportunity zones, and we look at the calorie rating and the cholesterol,
*  I will tell you that my people are sick. If we look at the obesity rate, if you go to just
*  a restaurant somewhere in middle America, Denny's or something, I went to Denny's the other day,
*  you will see that my people are sick. And my people meaning all people,
*  but black people are very influential to all people. So if the media picks an overweight
*  black woman and says this is body goals, then the media are influencing my people to stay sick.
*  And it just so happens that that night, I was so frustrated after 20 years that I had to call it
*  out in one tweet that now, even if I say, Hey, okay, I was frustrated for these reasons. Now
*  it's not good enough. You've literally tried to make me re-apologize 10 times in this meeting,
*  re-say this, re-say that, but it doesn't change the fact that my people are sick.
*  And I'm the only person in my position that will say that my people are sick
*  today. Not 30 years ago, not 60 years ago. My people are sick today. 50% of my peoples of
*  deaths are abortion today. My people don't have the opportunities today, even to the point that,
*  because if JP Morgan had been nice to me and if Alex Klein and Stem Player had been fair to me,
*  different things, then I wouldn't even point it out that we don't have any black, we have two
*  black engineers. So I have to have a responsibility, obviously to all people, but specifically to my
*  tribe because tribes move. Tribalism is real with black people to separate the brightest from the
*  tribe or to separate the leaders. It is factual that the CIA removed the leaders from the black
*  community, put crack in the communities, put guns in the communities and locked up all the leaders
*  and called them gang leaders, locked up all the leaders, locked up all the fathers. Now,
*  72% of black mothers are raising children by themselves. This is a gender, like a Tuskegee
*  experiment set on my people. And what I'm calling out for the black people in entertainment is,
*  what are we doing? We have to collude. And if we don't collude, because even if I said,
*  hey, I'd like to make a company that's all black, is that okay for me to say?
*  Is that okay for me to say? Or is that anti-Semitic? See, if I hadn't crossed the
*  line so far, then that would have sounded anti-Semitic. Now I've stretched a bit,
*  so now we can go to, okay, let's make an all black company. But that would have been anti-Semitic.
*  Just that concept, because you could word that in a different way that would sound anti-Semitic.
*  I don't know, man. I have to be...
*  No, no, listen. If you were, if I said I didn't want to have the Jewish people in the company,
*  would that be anti-Semitic? It would sound like it, right? You'd say I'm from 1930s, right?
*  Yeah.
*  But for me as a tribe to say, no, I want an all black company, right?
*  I'm generally against that kind of thing. But first of all, you have the right to do
*  whatever the hell you want. This is America.
*  Well, what I'm saying is, that's what I feel may need to happen for my people to have power again,
*  because when my people have been left under the media's control, we've been made sick. We've been
*  allowed to be sick. We've been promoting, and we're promoting sickness.
*  I think, at least in the engineering realm, I haven't met an engineer who happens to be black,
*  who would like to be called a black engineer. And when you have a company of all black people
*  that are engineers, I don't know the creative arts, I apologize, but engineering, they really
*  try to look at each other as humans and look at the problem. And you want to know, you want to
*  have the confidence that everybody on the team is the best possible person for the job.
*  What I can say is, the world is sick. And I have slight images of utopia,
*  slight images of happiness, slight images as a visionary and a creator. And I know for fact,
*  the way that business deals have been done for me are keeping the world sick.
*  Fix them. I see that's what you're trying to do. And you probably, listen, people should not doubt,
*  yay. But I got to tell you, I have to be honest. This is silly because you don't know me,
*  but it hurt when you say you don't trust me. You kind of lost me.
*  I don't think anyone's ever said that to me. I don't know, man. Fuck that. I don't care about
*  views or clickbait or any of that bullshit. I just thought you were one of the greatest artists ever.
*  It'd be cool to talk to you. And I just, I feel like you got pain you're working through.
*  And never had anyone say that to me. Maybe I'm just being a mess about it, I guess.
*  That's fucked up though. But maybe it's not. Maybe you shouldn't trust it. But I just haven't
*  had that experience. Yeah. Do you think I would trust anybody at this point in my life?
*  Yeah, it's tough. It's tough. It's tough. I hear you. And it's also kind of good to see how much
*  strength you got. You're not broken by any of this. You're under a lot of attack. A lot of attack
*  by a lot of people. You have a vision and you're trying to feel your way through it. And you might
*  get destroyed for it. That's the human, that's the risk you take. It's a wonderful life though.
*  What do you hope your legacy is? To be forgotten. Do you think you'll be forgotten?
*  Because the memory, there's ego and memory and the memories. Who designed the sidewalk?
*  Who designed the water fountain? Who designed the stop sign? Who designed the stoplight? These things
*  are so ubiquitous that the person that designed them is forgotten. If it's a good idea, it's a
*  God idea. And I don't know VCs can own it. So you want your designs in all realms of life to be so
*  simple that they permeate everything. They take over and you're forgotten. That's a successful
*  design is you're forgotten. Yes. Do you have advice for people? A lot of young people look up to you.
*  Do you have advice for young people of how to live a life they can be proud of?
*  Don't tweet while you're sleepy. Take a nap.
*  Surely there's other things. I love the humor. Don't take it seriously, I suppose is what that means.
*  Don't send sleepy tweets. Unless you buy your own social platform the very next week,
*  call Parler. But other than that, if you're not going to buy your own social platform, then don't.
*  Is that why you bought Parler's so you could be sleepy and send messages out into the wild?
*  I actually am really interested in the engineering aspects of Parler. Is there a vision there?
*  Because I'm also super interested in Elon buying Twitter. I like Instagram better than Twitter.
*  I'm sure Mark Zuckerberg liked Instagram better than Facebook or saw how valuable that was and
*  he bought it. So you'd like to take Parler or something, whatever is the magic that makes
*  Instagram work, you want to push it? Well, I thought it was interesting how it felt like Snapchat made
*  the Kardashians bully Instagram. What's the point of Snapchat going to war on Instagram?
*  Everyone wants to say, well, this is our value, Snapchat. No one wants to lose their value to
*  someone else's value, whatever. And everything is just, what's the difference between permanent
*  and temporary? Is this a permanent structure? Until God says it's not. Nothing's permanent. Our life
*  is not permanent. So how do we just let go of those things? Even going from the name Kanye West
*  to Ye was the beginning of just letting go of some things, of these titles. We need to remove the
*  titles like, hey, if I have to leave Adidas and I have to go next computers, that may take me out of
*  the billionaire standing altogether. And I got to get low for however long God says I have to get
*  low and refocus. I've been reshaping, refocusing my staff. I had some people that were good and I
*  had some people that weren't. I had too many people and I've got a vision inside of me and I'm like,
*  this is how I make this vision. I have to bring this vision to life.
*  I have to bring these houses to life. I was talking to one of our architects on,
*  we're actually getting close on it. I've built it a few times. I had the domes you probably saw
*  and I said how he transformed Kim's house and now we're getting there.
*  So you won't get into architecture. You really want this to become physical reality.
*  Yes. And I've got close. Rome wasn't built to today.
*  Yeah, but Rome had to start somewhere. I got to call you out on the advice. There really is a
*  lot of people that look up to you and you've lived a really difficult life and you made it through
*  all of it. What do you advise them to do? Do everything that you feel, even if you are told
*  that it's the wrong thing. No, no, no, no, no, but not anything violent.
*  So do what you feel, say what you feel, like trust your heart.
*  Yeah. Trust your gut, trust your instincts because that instinct is who God made you to be.
*  Not what lines up with your frat brothers or what lines up with what your dad wanted or
*  what lines up with your classmates. God has something inside of you and when you walk down
*  the street, you're thinking about it and then you just see it in the window and you go down another
*  street and you see the same thing or you're thinking about a number and that number pops up
*  or you see it on a license plate and that's just something is trying to say be the maximum.
*  Yay. Be the maximum you and God will give you anything that you can't handle. So for me,
*  everything is a yes. I think they say be like water. I know Bruce Lee said that.
*  Or matter of fact, just be because we are beings with engineering opportunities.
*  Please.
*  Beautifully put. Yay. I have hope. I have faith that however this turns out that
*  you have the skill and the capacity to really add love to the world and I hope you do that.
*  I really, really hope you do that. And we talked about the tension of that,
*  the challenges and the opportunities of that.
*  I mean, I see how we could be of use to each other. You actually have a particular thing
*  for me as I eject from media because even also, I'm really big at burning the phoenix too.
*  All you know as an engineer that your cells completely regenerate every seven years.
*  I think I rushed the process a little bit so I run around looking like a burn victim sometimes.
*  Yeah. But I got to tell you, anyone I am close with, I work with, there has to be trust,
*  there has to be love. And I think you've been burned quite a bit in your life.
*  Sometimes I did it myself. I put my hand on the stove.
*  So how do we get to engineering? There's a deal to be done here.
*  Not saying you're making this money off of that. I'm making that money off.
*  I don't care about money, by the way.
*  Same, twins. So there's dealings here. You got pain, I got pain,
*  but we're beings with engineering opportunities.
*  For a long time, I thought somebody should create a new social network.
*  And it looks like great engineering could do that.
*  You got two at one time from two of your homeboys at one time.
*  Yeah. And that's a great way to, I mean, every, you know, it can be done from scratch
*  or it can be done anew with an already established platform. Yeah.
*  I'm very excited by that possibility. Parler is smaller. Twitter is larger.
*  I wonder whether you can do any kind of revolutionary engineering with a large company.
*  If anyone can, I would say it's Elon.
*  Well, Elon can look at what we do over here. That's why I like, God does this a lot of times.
*  He creates doppelgangers. There's a lot of examples where theory happen two places at one time.
*  A really similar type of personality happens at one time.
*  It's weird. It's beautiful. It's hilarious, actually. It's kind of humorous.
*  So we should just share every piece of information together as I go build
*  Parler and as he builds up Twitter and see how to make both those better. But I'll be like, hey,
*  I'm not going to let Snapchat bully me out of adding something to it that's best.
*  It should just be the best platform possible. That means TikTok
*  has amazing features. Twitter has amazing things about it. I know this girl that's like,
*  I like Instagram better than Twitter. She likes that Twitter has porn. But other than that,
*  Instagram. But I was like, well, Instagram is porn also. It's soft. It's more subtle.
*  It's not telling you. It's not conservative by any means.
*  That's the thing. You have to please a lot of people with these platforms.
*  I think the goal of a platform should be to help individuals
*  maximize their long-term happiness and growth, like intellectually, spiritually, psychologically,
*  all of that. And it's a tricky thing to figure out how to do that. Of course,
*  you could just have a platform that's just strictly for fun. I think that's where TikTok leans.
*  But I think there's a balance to strike. Twitter, there's a lot of intellectual
*  philosophical stuff going on on Twitter, but it somehow currently makes it too easy to be
*  divisive and hateful towards each other and cancel and all that kind of stuff.
*  I think we need to have these healthy conversations. That's what it is. Healthy
*  conversations, healthy dialogues. That's the biggest thing. When I first wore the red hat,
*  the conversation is less healthy than it is today. The conversation about George Floyd,
*  did I send the tweet the right way? Is Candace Owen's documentary perfect? Is Michael Moore's
*  documentary perfect? Is Century Self, is it fully accurate? It's two to three hours of a transmit
*  of information through a particular, usually one person's view. Anything you want to research,
*  if you're interested in it, you got to look at 10 versions of it, 20 versions of it. George Floyd,
*  we've looked at one version of that. Now we have a second. Well, by the time we get to the...
*  I know this is like, it's not my last hoodie, but it's definitely not my first hoodie that I put on.
*  That's how we got to it. Even this particular size of zipper or the fact that for people who know,
*  they know that it's Carhartt, even though the Carhartt tag isn't there anymore, you just know
*  by the shape of it, you feel it. It abstracts, it takes into this Cubist place like Picasso,
*  Matisse or African Cubism or Dire Straits. Money for nothing and your chicks for free.
*  Great band. I wouldn't think you could reference Dire Straits. Look at you.
*  That video.
*  Yeah, I know. It's a great video. Your encyclopedic knowledge of music is great.
*  I think that porn is not just sexual. That term actually relates to torture. You know what I'm
*  saying? Watching people beat each other up on Worldstar or something. That's called torture porn.
*  There's also food porn. How do you explain that?
*  What's food porn?
*  Food porn is like looking at really delicious cakes and cookies and steak and so on. And you're like,
*  holy shit.
*  Exactly. Architecture. There's people who love architecture. When they see architecture,
*  I have friends that are like, oh, that's porn. Architecture.
*  That's like love, like dopamine-fueled love for a thing. That's beautiful. I think that's
*  beautiful. As long as nobody's getting hurt.
*  The intoxication that people have. The worst part is when one person's in love and the other
*  person's in like.
*  That's us right now.
*  Who's in like?
*  No, because you said you love Bill Maher and you like me.
*  And I love you. So that was.
*  No, I actually love you both. And the funny thing is that as a visionary, visionaries are
*  more extreme than business people. Because a visionary would do bad business for their vision.
*  A business person will never do bad business.
*  It's well put. Yeah, it's really well put.
*  So when you say I don't care about money, it's like, yeah, I feel you. I feel that I care in
*  a way that I need that. But I care about the vision that I have to a Steve Jobs level,
*  to the point of putting that above my regular human existence. Meaning having to go and take
*  all the arrows that I become a soldier of the vision. Because someone could say, a wife could
*  say to like say like in the 60s, their husband's about to go to war. The wife may not want their
*  husband to go to war because of their children. But he's going to war because of their children.
*  Yeah. Definitely. Do you regret any aspect of just giving everything to your vision?
*  I mean, you've spoken about that saying like, I got fucked over in the business side.
*  I promise that I had to stop envying. Cool people at their current cool time.
*  If anything, if someone's cool, and I say their name a lot, I'm going to flash the light on them
*  so much that it ages their coolness. It's actually a war technique. Showered in compliments.
*  Yeah. Because that that you that to be able to stay at 45 years old to still be the bad kid
*  in class. At 45, I'm still in the principal's office. Because if you look at like say fashion,
*  right? If you think of something fashionable, it's probably going to look like the kid in the
*  principal's office. That's going to be the fashion. And that's part of the reason why I'm the most
*  influential person at fashion. And fashion because I refuse to leave the principal's office.
*  The principal's office. If the substitute teacher comes in, I'm going to say, you got a big butt.
*  Right back to the principal's office. And people are going to be like, yo,
*  and that's what you keep on saying. Like, who can we talk to? Because no one can talk to me.
*  No, I'm out of control, bro. It's just God, then me, and then fuck everybody. You know what I mean?
*  That's really how I live my life. And I just want to say this one thing about the children thing. I
*  wanted to put that point together, put that idea together. I don't like the word point. I'm really
*  big on words, words being powerful, says the person with the sleepy tweet. You're full of
*  contradictions. Yeah, I'm a human being, right? It's like some days I'm like, I could go 30 days
*  to be celibate. You know, like really like I'm a monk. I'm being like faithful to God. And then I'll
*  go like working out, no carbs, like my weight will fluctuate. And I'll have times I'm like, I don't
*  feel like being told what to do. So I don't want to work out with a trainer. And I just want to
*  drink this Hennessy. But I want to say this thing that I will text to Kim sometimes. I'll say, you
*  know, you may not understand what I'm doing right now, but you will. And that's what I would say to
*  everyone. You may not understand what I'm doing. And this gives a little bit, maybe we're like 20%
*  there, but there's still going to be people we leave this interview, and they'll be like, I still
*  don't like the way they apologize. I still don't want to say what my involvement would have been
*  to make him lead him to that point. And we just want things to be how they are. There's people in
*  the world who want the world to stay as it is. And there's people who want to change the world. And
*  that's happened throughout time. They say that with DaVinci halfway into a conversation, he could not
*  suffer fools so much that he would walk away halfway into the conversation. And I said,
*  well, that's why it's the DaVinci Code and not the DaVinci world. And every time I go and piss off
*  a group of people or do these things, on some end, it's like I could be turning my thing from a
*  potential world vision to a code. Or I could be opening up conversations with new friends that I
*  may trust someday. Yeah, that's beautiful. That's beautiful. That because the change you will have
*  on the world that you don't know for sure, but it will happen across years, even decades. So you
*  have to think in the future, like you're working in the future, your actions are working in the
*  future. And a lot of people will judge this conversation and others you've done and so on
*  in the present. And that doesn't matter. You know why I apologize when I say I'm sorry to the Jewish
*  people that I hurt? It's not about, like I said, I'm not going to hold this apology hostage.
*  Obviously, it's about God, but God is everything. So what's the point of having language in me?
*  You can't engineer if you say God, God, God. It's like God asks us to be judgmental so that
*  you become, if you're a doctor, it's your judgment that saves grandma. And God puts that in this.
*  We have God inside us. We're a piece of God also. So I'm going to go specific to a person.
*  That story about DaVinci alone is enough of a reason for me to give a sincere apology
*  to the Jewish people. Because I do believe that there's a DaVinci code inside of all of my
*  misspellings and scribbles right here that God wants me to get to the world. And when I'm in my
*  way, if God has set something on me, when I'm in my way, I'm in God's way. Now I can point at other
*  people and say, hey, you guys are in God's way because you're not listening to me. But if I'm in
*  my way, I'm not listening to God. And for me to be a philosopher and a leader or whatever other
*  language, I have to listen to God. So before God, what I would do is start off as a samurai
*  and say, I'm sorry for hurting you as a Jewish person. I'm sorry for the way that made you feel.
*  And I'm sorry for the entire population of a race that I feel is actually my brothers,
*  because I classify and feel that I'm also connected with Christ in that way, that my people
*  came from Africa in that way. And I can't say it's this exact teaching or that exact teaching,
*  but I feel that there's an important, the sons of Abraham, however we want to word it,
*  for us to come together and bring our different talents together to serve God collectively.
*  And he, as much of an alien as I am, he does not cause me, he did not call for me to alienate.
*  And that's what the problem has been, especially in politics and in America. He plays America
*  as the TV, as the radio to the world. We invented rock and roll. We are the influencers of the rest
*  of the planet. We're the youngest startup in history. We're the youngest country, we're the
*  youngest superpower. So for me in my position, the fact that I can talk to Trump one day and be at a
*  game with Kim Kardashian the next day and then be at Paris Fashion Week, they don't want me to be
*  involved with language of decisive, divisive language, proving that I can be just as racist
*  as a racist white person. Oh, I can be a racist black person also. That's not what God has called
*  me to do. So how do I simplify and say, hey, to you as a visionary, as an engineer, as a person
*  that's given me a platform that as my brother, I want to apologize to you for how that made you
*  feel and to the rest of the people that carry specifically that pain, not the pain that I
*  talk about that doesn't seem to be as much of a pain for people when I talk about the abortion
*  clinics and stuff. That's the argued pain even in my own community. Not everyone thinks that's a
*  pain, but for the Jewish community, it's collectively this was a pain. And I've gone so far just
*  psychologically on this journey since that statement had happened where I didn't want to give up the
*  candy in my pocket. I didn't want to say, hey, I stuck my hand in the candy jar. I wanted to defend
*  my freedom of speech. I wanted this, but even with freedom of speech, pain is pain. Causing people
*  to hurt is not helping. Causing people to hurt is not helping. So that means I have to take a
*  more sophisticated approach to engineering this problem. This problem is the opportunity.
*  And yes, that what could some people may deem as a mistake. Would it be more genuine if I called it
*  a mistake? I think I would be hypocritical by calling it a mistake with the idea I'm going
*  to say out loud. So I don't try to be a hypocrite on purpose, but I will call it a mistake to add
*  a genuine, to be genuine about the feeling. With that mistake,
*  with me as a human being, not to justify, but I have to state that God makes no mistakes,
*  because if I hadn't made that mistake, I wouldn't be in front of you today. And that's not to justify
*  this sleepy text. But I can tell you're a man that has love in his heart. And I hear that. I hear it
*  through the words explicitly and implicitly. And I think if we're to engineer a better future,
*  the way to do that is with love. So as one human to another, I love you, brother. Thank you for
*  talking today. This was great. I like you too. Son of a bitch.
*  Thanks for listening to this conversation with Ye, formerly known as Kanye West. To
*  support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me
*  leave you with some words from Ye himself. Nothing in life is promised except death.
*  Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
