---
Date Generated: April 11, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 7829s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence', 'artificial intelligence podcast', 'denis cyplenkov', 'devon larratt', 'john brzenk', 'kings move', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex podcast', 'michael todd', 'mit ai', 'oleg zhokh', 'vendetta', 'wal']
Video Views: 1185924
Video Rating: None
---

# Devon Larratt: Arm Wrestling | Lex Fridman Podcast #265
**Lex Fridman:** [February 16, 2022](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nvBEXXnNaNQ)
*  I get so passionate about it. I get so angry, you know, because there's a saying like oh, can you beat him in a hook?
*  Can you be man win?
*  Win, that's it. Just win and don't talk to me about anything else
*  You believe the match is finished and I wonder if that gets in the head of the other person see this. Yeah
*  Quit
*  The following is a conversation with Devon Larratt
*  Considered by many to be one of the greatest arm wrestlers in history
*  This is a Lex Friedman podcast to support it
*  Please check out our sponsors in the description and now dear friends. Here's Devon Larratt
*  You are considered to be one of the greatest arm wrestlers in history
*  Plus are one of the most charismatic and fun people to watch in arm wrestling
*  But let me first start with a ridiculous the controversial opinion
*  I actually really enjoy over the top the movie with the Sylvester Stallone where he's a trucker
*  It's like a father-son movie
*  It's you know, like a bunch of sports have the definitive movie. The boxing has
*  Rocky maybe folk style collegiate wrestling has Vision Quest
*  What else is there billiards his color of money? Yeah, this is
*  The sort of movie for arm wrestling. So what did over the top get right? What did get wrong about arm wrestling?
*  That was actually based off of a real story. A lot of people don't know that yeah the over the top movie
*  I mean to a certain degree
*  That's actually real life like that tournament over the top was real. Yeah, it was literally named over the top. Yes
*  Yes, there was a trucker division and the guy actually won a truck for reals names John Brzezinski
*  You know who that is?
*  Right, so the actual over-the-top tournament the trucker division was won by John who is John
*  He's saying he is a lot of people talk about him as like a legend and one of if not the greatest arm wrestlers of all
*  time John Brzezinski is
*  Every arm wrestlers father to a certain degree all of us
*  The entire sport looks up to him
*  He
*  It's incredible what he's done. I mean at 18 he won over the top at
*  57 he just competed with me a couple months ago
*  Still at the world level 18 if that's that's 40 years of being at the top of the sport. It's incredible
*  He's hailed as the greatest of all time in the sport arm wrestling
*  Yeah, and he doesn't he's beaten some monsters. Oh, yeah. Yeah, and he doesn't I mean when you talk about like the
*  The evolution of the sport
*  He's responsible for so much of it
*  like when you talk about like a lot of times when you go back like 20 years 30 years a lot of us looked at
*  Arm wrestling I think it's I mean
*  As something you could kind of do and he's the first guy who's like if you want to get better at arm wrestling you got
*  Arm wrestling and it seems so simple but
*  You know, he answered so many questions that all of us had about techniques in the sport
*  back, you know pre
*  pre video internet
*  Yeah, he's everybody he's been everybody's target for like 40 years
*  So in terms of strength in terms of power in terms of skill, what did he teach the sport of arm wrestling?
*  So if you look how did the sport change from 80s 90s to the odds?
*  You were at the top of the world for many years, you know
*  Many argue you're still at the very top of the world
*  but like you were very dominant both left and right hand and I don't know 2008 to
*  2013 something like that. Yeah. So how does that sport evolve to today? So
*  It's hard for me to comment, you know prior to
*  You know when I came to the sport was kind of mid 90s like I've been arm wrestling my whole life
*  but I wasn't really involved in the sport to a
*  Major degree until probably, you know mid 90s
*  but I'll say that
*  Before the mid 90s. It was really hard to get good at arm wrestling very difficult
*  Everybody was doing it wrong really
*  Like it was really rare to find people who were technically good arm wrestlers
*  It was very underground, you know when I when I got into sport
*  it was a flyer that came in the mail you had to know somebody who knew somebody who knew somebody and
*  then you go to a club and you can't do anything with these people and
*  And they'll and they knew how to arm wrestle they did but real masters were rare and
*  You know then internet internet helped everybody communication
*  The transfer of knowledge became so much faster
*  People became technically
*  You know invested people start train sharing sharing ideas
*  by I'd say
*  2000
*  Well probably around the turn of the millennia I'd say that professional leagues started to slowly pick up more organized
*  Bigger productions started to attract more athletes
*  More people took it seriously by 2010. I'd say there was another jump
*  more serious leagues a little bit more money
*  by 2015
*  More major media like people were investing a lot of money like
*  you know millionaires billionaires type of people were organizing events setting up leagues and
*  Yeah, I mean the past five years it's just blown up the techniques I mean if if I was to go back to when I started
*  You know what what took me 10 or 15 years to learn? I mean new guys are showing up and they've got it down in
*  Like a year. Yeah. Yeah
*  Well, the thing about it the development of the sport is it's like I was telling you off Mike it's a battle of
*  One
*  Versus one. Yeah, and then that can turn into battle of nations, which you know, there is there's Canada
*  There's the United States. There's all the Eastern
*  Europe
*  Russia, Georgia all of that that that's what makes some of the greatest sports in Olympics
*  Great like weightlifting. It's a battle of nations
*  Not just the battle of individuals and it's almost like these two humans represent the two nations and I see that very much
*  We'll talk about your matches coming up, but there is
*  That battle between North America and that other part of the world. Yeah
*  North America is very prized
*  You know the North American champion is always highly sought after because they're typically the most famous
*  Yeah, even still when you know quite arguably there's always somebody in Eastern Europe who's just monstrous
*  It's typically the North American athlete who's more recognized by the way
*  Oh, yeah, we'll have a cup here with some maple syrup. Cheers. Cheers. We should probably show
*  You just down that whole thing no no no, I'm gonna sip it I'm gonna sip it, you know, but by all means
*  It's really good right? Yeah, that is maple syrup. Yeah, that's a perfect July day
*  From Canada in a bottle. Yeah, so you're on a totally
*  On a total tangent you are known for appreciating food in all kinds of ways, but one of the things you're known for is pancakes
*  That is uh, yeah, that's gone to a crazy place in the sport. But yeah, like where did that originate? So
*  Where that originated when it went from like your actual love for pancakes to the meme
*  So I think what happened was
*  So I had a match with Michael Todd big match Michael
*  great champion
*  He's another guy who's you know, he's never gonna get off the horse
*  You know, he's Jesus his elbow is a complete disaster
*  Probably one of the most loved and hated guys in the sport right now
*  Is it because of the Kings move? Yeah
*  One of the yeah, the Kings move brings them a lot of hate
*  Not from me not from a lot of people but a lot of observers have a big problem with the Kings move
*  What's wrong with being a little bit controversial? That's fun. You know, I get so passionate about it
*  I get so angry, you know because there's the saying like oh, can you beat him in a hook?
*  Can you beat him in a hook? Can you beat man win? Yeah win. That's all that matters
*  That's it. Just win and don't talk to me about anything else. If you can win with style win with stop
*  But don't talk to me about anything but winning other that's the priority. So you had this match with Michael Todd. Yeah
*  So I was in a terrible place
*  I guess was I get so screwed up with the years. It's 2022 now, right? No, it's 2030. What are you talking about?
*  That's right. I think it is actually 2030. We're way ahead of schedule. Yeah. Oh man. That's right
*  So when was this this is like a decade ago and now this is like a year and a bit ago
*  So very recent very recent. Yeah, so I got really sick
*  Yeah, this is the match right? Okay, awesome match
*  So this is this matches for the legacy hammer
*  So we invented this thing called the legacy hammer and Michael took it from me and I think 2018
*  then kovac shut everything down and
*  Michael went overseas to try and set up because at that time nor Michael was a North American champion
*  he beat me and
*  He went to Dubai and he organized this great big match with LaVon and the whole thing fell apart
*  organizers leagues wouldn't let it happen
*  But the there was still an ability to have a match of significance happen
*  So Michael's like who do you want and like let's give Devon a rematch and I'm like
*  And I was really sick at the time I had DVT I had pulmonary embolism
*  I was mentally in a terrible place and I got offered the match and I just
*  totally turned my life around and
*  I
*  committed
*  Really hard. Yeah, and
*  What happened in this match by the way? Oh, I just totally destroyed him
*  Yeah, I just beat the piss out of him
*  Yeah
*  Michael's a good friend of mine, but yeah, there's a lot of camaraderie. Yeah, you guys talked afterwards
*  Yeah, but we fight like like brothers, you know, like so we let each other really fight hard against each other
*  but so I was I knew I mean strength and mass they go hand in hand and
*  I committed to just getting as big and as strong as I could and literally I was eating pancakes every day
*  Bacon pancakes every sloppy bit of garbage food. I could eat. I was trying to eat healthy also
*  But if there was garbage food, I'd eat it. We mean bacon and pancakes isn't healthy. What are you talking about? Exactly
*  People should go watch there's a video where you make like the the Canadian meal of
*  Bacon with some bacon cooking tips water. That was interesting. Yeah, and then
*  And then obviously pancakes and maple syrup all over the whole thing. Yeah
*  You're making me very hungry. I've caused more diabetes and then you know
*  Probably gonna get in trouble karmically for making the world obese
*  You should probably write a like like a book the pancake diet. Yeah, Kevin Larratt. Yeah
*  I think I will do that one day
*  So you said mass and strength go hand in hand just at a big level about arm wrestling. What's more important?
*  strength
*  power
*  endurance skills strategy or mental toughness like
*  How do these components all come into play in arm wrestling? They're all important
*  You can use everything and you can adjust your strategy based off of the tools that you have
*  I would say if I could pick ever just one thing to have more of
*  I
*  Would I would say that it would be strength gained
*  while fighting
*  While actually arm wrestling so not off the off the dawn and all so you get stronger from arm wrestling
*  How do you get stronger from arm wrestling in jiu-jitsu and grappling you can get good by?
*  training with people
*  Much technically worse than you so white with white belts and blue belts
*  Yeah, it's actually beneficial agree because you get to work stuff out, right?
*  but I
*  wouldn't say develops like
*  that
*  intensity and power required to go against
*  people at your level
*  So what how do you balance that do you is it okay to go against people that are much weaker than you or
*  That you really have to go against people at the same level. I
*  think that a
*  blended
*  Strategy is probably the best
*  I'd say kind of a rule is
*  Whatever you do you get better at right? So you want to be kind of as precise as possible
*  You don't want to get hurt
*  And it's just about investment and
*  The answer is not always the same things are gonna change I
*  am currently a big believer in what I call tower building, right so
*  You have to do a lot of volume to build a great tower
*  You you need to have a ton a ton of volume. So so when you look at how to best build volume
*  You want to do?
*  Workouts that aren't particularly challenging to make you feel good and do them so that when you add them all together
*  You get the biggest number so many easy workouts a day
*  That are specific as possible in my opinion is the best way to lay the foundation for an extreme peak and
*  And
*  Precision right like there's no more precise way to get strong at arm wrestling than arm wrestle
*  So
*  How often can you arm wrestle? What's your training regimen you're talking you've talked about this as?
*  The climb right what is the training process?
*  To get great arm wrestling well again. It's gonna depend on what level you're at
*  The answer at the beginning
*  Might not be the same for me
*  Guy has been doing it almost 30 years. I
*  Have to harvest. I have to harvest energy from clubs
*  I call it cosmic punch
*  Sorry to interrupt you were here in Austin, Texas
*  You are in Austin, Texas, but you were at the what was it called the the water tank?
*  Yeah, you had an awesome crowd. It was great. I get to watch I get to interact a lot of those guys
*  Just amazing community amazing human beings I got to talk to Dimitri in Russian and in English. He's a
*  He's engineer his wife is an engineer, so he's a brilliant dude, but also
*  One of the toughest I guess guys you face there
*  Yeah, but you faced I don't know how many people must have been hundreds of yes, so the bar was full
*  Yeah, and that that for me is a perfect training scenario
*  Yeah
*  So if I go in and just kind of be I'm like a lightning rod and I just absorb
*  Everything that I can get from people, you know all their effort
*  That's perfect that's perfect, but I'm lucky because I'm in a place that I can handle it
*  you know if I was losing or
*  Failing this would not be optimal
*  But because I'm I'm strong enough I've been doing it long enough that I can kind of absorb it without damaging me
*  This is perfect. This is perfect. I typically when I'm training up for a very serious match
*  I'll try and do that
*  Three or four times a week and then the days in between I will just do blood flow
*  Rehab blood flow rehab. I will never hit a PR a record. I'll never do it anymore
*  I don't do it. I used to a lot of things change. That's why I say like there's a lot of ways to do it
*  This is currently a system that's working very well for me. So when you say PR
*  You're not aggressively chasing a peak. You're just building and building and building
*  Yeah, my only peak that I care about is for this cycle the 25th of June. That's my only PR
*  Let's talk about the 25th of June. Oh
*  Yeah, let's talk about
*  LaVon
*  Saganish Vili
*  The Georgian Hulk. Yeah
*  question number one is it possible to beat him he is widely acknowledged as
*  The most powerful person in arm wrestling today is he beatable
*  And if so, how everybody's beatable everybody's beatable LaVon is incredible. He's he is
*  What this modern peak of arm wrestling represents?
*  so for people who are just listening we we also have an overlay of a video of
*  LaVon going against Vitali LeDen
*  another top three person in the world perhaps
*  in arm wrestling and
*  LaVon is the guy in the right just big. I love it and the the aggression
*  I mean actually sort of underneath it all is it seems to be a teddy bear, but when he turns it on. Yeah, it's
*  It's raw power. He's the full package LaVon is he represents the pinnacle
*  There's Dennis in the background. He's like I want to be back in there. Yeah
*  LaVon has a lot of bases covered
*  He's I mean, he's curling 300 pounds with one arm
*  I mean the strength that he shows for arm wrestling is
*  Is is so far ahead of the field is very very strong
*  But
*  It's absolutely possible. It's absolutely possible. The one thing that I'm confident about well, I'd say there's two things
*  the two things I'm confident about is that I have more experience than he does and
*  Experience counts for a lot
*  the other thing is
*  My ability to breathe and recover
*  So if ever there's an opportunity for the tide to turn
*  That's I think where he'll never get it back. So I think if I can somehow find a hole in his game
*  Then yeah
*  You want to hold off the initial like assault of power in that and then wear them out and
*  to find the hole and then
*  How much of that is mental how much of is just a physical ability to do?
*  for your muscles to have the endurance to hold off I
*  Like to make the sport bigger
*  and a lot of things that most arm wrestlers
*  Believe the sport is I always try and push those boundaries
*  so
*  There is definitely a mental aspect to it when you're faced with something that you've never seen before
*  That's when things like experience
*  Comes in he can become surprised
*  Where what's a surprise for him is routine for me? So my adjustments will be more precise more accurate
*  That's how I get in that's how I get in yeah, I play it I play a dirty game
*  You know so some of it how important is confidence in the whole in the progression of the match
*  Is there
*  Ups and downs of confidence like holy shit. I actually have a chance to win this. Holy shit. I'm winning this you're done
*  There's some of my favorite moments
*  I don't know if those are fake or not in terms of your expressions
*  Those are fake or not in terms of your expressions if it fake until you make it
*  but whenever you shake your head or whatever it you make it apparent that
*  It's you believe the match is finished, and I wonder if that gets in the head of the other person
*  When you start to actually
*  So I'm sure you're doing things in like precise detailed things with your hands to also indicate that you believe they're finished
*  But you're facially just see this yeah
*  Quit oh, that's right cuz it's facing the other
*  So that's ultimately what the battle is about it's like it's you're done. It's you might as well give up
*  commitment is so important in anything that you do right like I
*  always
*  Kind of try and bring things to a level of commitment that's uncommon
*  I think that that's a lot of reasons why I do well is because I just get so committed in the whole process and
*  By the time that I actually show up to fight. I sometimes just wish that they would kill me
*  You know I wish that they would because that's what that's how far I want to go like people talk about like how?
*  Committed are you to the match like if you're committed to the match you lose you should be hurt like that's I'm often unhappy
*  When I lose a match and I don't have an injury. I'm like damn like what the fuck like I should have like
*  I feel I feel like I didn't commit you know
*  I don't know if you know Dan Gable is the wrestler he oh yeah, he was on
*  Here's on the podcast yeah, yeah, yeah
*  He
*  Talked about his whole career. He dreamed of working so hard that he gets he can't get off the mat
*  Right by himself, and he was always this he's disappointed ultimately at the end of his career
*  Because he was always able to get off the mat on his own accord
*  So he wants to yeah leave it all on the mat just from exhaustion
*  See that that's what commitment looks like yeah, what is this process? What is this climb for?
*  Probably the toughest match of your career I
*  Would say the most epic match in in arm wrestling
*  History I mean it's really building up
*  You are the you said North America. That's a I mean I think
*  By a constant menu one of the greatest arm wrestlers ever he is one of the scariest
*  And so this match by the way, where's it happening? It'll be in Dubai in Dubai
*  Yeah, June, so what is the climb look like?
*  the climb for me
*  What I have to change in my life always
*  People talk about being a professional
*  I've always loved the sport of loved it like crazy
*  but to me the path is about simplicity and
*  removal of distractions
*  The I do better and better the more I get rid of everything
*  nothing else
*  So that my life is just
*  The goal just the target and everything else is off the table, and that's that's where I need to get to
*  Where there's nothing there's nothing between me and him and every single day you're putting in the volume every day all day
*  Now you said you worked out so you yesterday you did hundreds of arm wrestling matches
*  And then today you said in the morning you still worked out. So what was that workout?
*  So you you're mixing up stuff where you're doing weights also this morning, you know, I
*  Try to really focus on what's administratively easy
*  That's a big part of me if everything I do so I just travel with bands
*  yeah, I got bands with me and
*  It's rehabilitative in nature, so I'm really focusing on blood flow
*  Feeling good doing proper movements
*  But yeah, just a band workout in the hotel. What does a band workout look like?
*  So are you doing the arm wrestling movement? Are you don't see that CC what you did there? What's that?
*  Yeah, it's you that you want to bring him in now
*  Up
*  All the up thing up up into your center, right? Yeah, you think what can you control out here?
*  Now you bring everything close you want every just that's it. Don't worry about pinning pinning happens once it's close to you
*  Yeah, yeah pinning is
*  people always think about pinning you don't think about pinning how much of the body is a part of this to like the
*  the core the torso because it feels like there's that almost like a
*  Mike Tyson punch power right? Yeah, does it come from the hips too and the
*  the legs
*  It just gives it's a whole body the whole body. It's definitely the whole body like everything is working
*  You're connected to the table at times as far as your base
*  Sometimes your base is your feet, but a lot of times you can base off the table
*  So so you can base off your hips, but I'll tell you
*  No arm wrestler cares about doing squats
*  No arm wrestler is doing planks, yeah, okay
*  It's all about the forearm and the actions of the hand. Yeah, that's always the limiting factor
*  You look at a guy like Oleg Zok. Okay. Do you know this guy Oleg Zok? Yeah marvelous
*  He's a he's a total hellboy. He's my inspiration to what I call pumpkin training
*  but
*  What's pumpkin training?
*  Probably will get into that but I only train my right arm. That's it. Yeah with homework
*  But back to full body
*  It is full body my my good friend Matt mask
*  When he arm wrestled me, he actually blew his internal abductor in his in his leg
*  So yeah, people walk away from tournament their calves can be sore sometimes, you know happens but
*  No, oh there is right there. Yeah. Oh like he's he is a real-life hellboy
*  He is a real-life hellboy
*  He's like he's like 170 pounds there. Look at his arm. Look at his
*  crazy, yeah
*  Yeah, he's totally crazy. That's you doing left right there. So that's by the way Levant you're going right? Yeah. Yeah
*  So can you say more about the the mental side? Are you visualizing what it takes to beat him?
*  Are you trying to get in his head all of these things?
*  So do you think it's possible to get in his head?
*  There's definitely strategies that you can do depending on who it is you're facing
*  It's very good to know who it is. You're fighting and choose the correct strategy mentally
*  But
*  I always follow a process
*  When it comes to my mental preparation
*  When i'm far away from an event
*  I just always
*  Build up my opponent
*  Build them I build them. I respect them
*  To a point where I almost start to fear them and start to believe that they'll beat me
*  And this is a very vital part of my preparation and that's where I am right now with Levant
*  I don't I just build them up build them up into this thing that scares me
*  And it forces me to be responsible, you know
*  Because I don't want to lose, you know, I want to win
*  And so the greater my opponent the greater I can build their worth in my mind
*  The more motivation it gives me
*  Then there comes a point
*  when uh when it changes
*  and
*  Then I start to degrade them
*  and uh, yeah, that's when it normally starts to get fun
*  and uh
*  Normally by the time I face them
*  Uh, I just try and completely dominate from every interaction from start to finish
*  uh
*  Yeah
*  When uh in the actual moment of the match like in in the moments leading up to it, what's the feeling?
*  Is it uh fear is a confidence?
*  Anxiety what what's going through your mind?
*  I love to fight. I love it. Uh, I always have
*  I um
*  there's
*  There's every day
*  Um where you have, you know the distractions of life
*  And then there's really living in the moment, right? That's whatever you love to do and that's when you can you know, really be free
*  Uh, I i'm free when i'm fighting, right?
*  So you put me in a good fight and I just love it and I don't think about the past
*  I don't think about the future
*  I just think about killing that dude in front of me and I enjoy that
*  And just being intensely in the moment just that's it just right there just fighting as hard as I can
*  Do you study the opponent like do you have you for this particular match?
*  Do you study videos of levan? I've seen
*  everything
*  I've read everything
*  I get opinions from other people
*  I watch
*  Very closely. Yeah, what do you make of his evolution? So so he's he's grown in size
*  But also you've talked about his um
*  You know evolution technically as well
*  Lynn studying him
*  Since we're in the uh build your opponent to be
*  Terrifying stage. Uh, what uh, what makes him great?
*  He's very impressive the the greatest thing about him is is his strength
*  That's the thing that sets him apart from everyone
*  Uh his strength specialized strength exact strength for arm wrestling
*  I believe it's unmatched. Can we just uh
*  linger on that
*  Word strength. What does strength mean? What does it feel like are we talking about?
*  um
*  bicep
*  Like shoulder are we talking about like whatever control right the wrist? Yeah, is it the
*  What where what how does strength manifest, you know, like when I touch your hand when we grab arms, I feel like
*  Fuck that's strong. There's control. What is that feeling? Well, where does that come from?
*  We're in arm wrestling when you're at the top of the world. Where does that come from? So
*  It's chains. There's chains of strength and in arm wrestling. This is like technical strength
*  Okay, and we use these technical chains to fight each other
*  um
*  the the chains that i'll talk about is
*  So you'll talk remember how we talked about the post this upwards drive this ability to close this angle
*  This is a chain
*  Um, it can be used. It's it's a technical attack. It's also an attack that can be built with with training just the ability to drive upwards
*  Uh, there's a chain where you cup right cup your wrist in cup your wrist in in the in the anchor and the chain
*  Brings you right to your heart right to your center, right this chain and this can be done at any time
*  Uh, there's a pronation chain and that's that's to turn your thumb over right turn your thumb over and you attack the person's
*  cupping chain
*  And there's a huge number of muscles involved in each of those chains and that's why I say it's a chain, right?
*  But they're movements
*  And these movements
*  You can develop in the gym or through practice
*  So you don't mean so it's easy to sort of interpret strength to mean the the how much you curl essentially
*  Yeah, but you mean the chain it's all right and that's like I mean people talk is a bicep
*  I mean, yes, there's bicep for sure involved
*  But I i'll always be inaccurate if I try and tell you like what muscles are the so I prefer to explain it in a movement
*  And then everything that's involved to do that movement
*  right
*  Yeah, and levon's movements for arm wrestling
*  Are incredibly impressive. What do you attribute to how much of that is genetics? How much of it is
*  some
*  Training thing he's doing
*  I think that
*  Levon is very special in terms of his genetics like not everybody can be levon
*  You know, yeah, there's there's not many levons out there
*  But
*  What i've encountered in the bias that I always see like when people talk about people like levon
*  They discount the other side so very quickly
*  And the thing is levon rarely has to show the other side because he's so far ahead
*  You talk about the technical application of the sport
*  He so rarely needs to show it
*  But he's clearly incredible if you watch his progression
*  He came up
*  Having very difficult technical struggles to overcome georgia is a great country for arm wrestling
*  Like there's this guy gennady kvikvina who no one would ever say is not technical
*  And you know it took him years to defeat him
*  To a point where now it's not it's not even a discussion
*  Yeah, you talk about the progression. They had a lot of battles together over the years. Yeah, it's fascinating to see the tides turn
*  Oh, yeah, and once they've turned it's like
*  Completely completely different level
*  Yeah, I mean he's got he's got strength. He's got technique
*  some people
*  Will argue that his technique is flawed at times
*  They've shown matches where he hasn't shown the best technique, but he still won
*  And I think sometimes he just plays with people, you know, like uh, there's a famous match that he had with
*  With um
*  They call him the bruce lee of arm wrestling a guy called angor baev, uh, kirtagali angor baev
*  He's they had a match in the top eight
*  Great match kirtagali is like 220 pound guy from kazakhstan
*  uh
*  Brilliant technician but power wise, you know not in the same world
*  and kirtagali
*  Did well, even though he lost six nothing. He still did well
*  but in my opinion
*  Lavon didn't care lavon was like grabbing him low and just like whatever like
*  I will show him things that he's not seen before I will
*  He hasn't competed often in this rule set which will be a challenge for him
*  but uh
*  Yeah, what can I say like lavon? He's he's everest
*  Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, you are seen by
*  Basically everybody is the big big underdog, but you're also even even in the eastern even uh, I mean
*  I talk to russians a lot
*  They're you uh, you know that moment in rocky when they start cheering for rocky
*  You're kind of the they they love you. They want you to win and just you know, it's not even um
*  Just the battle itself is inspiring and it's it's it's like the culmination in your career because
*  It's it's you know, you're at the top for a long time
*  But it's like it's almost like it should be over for you. But no you're returning it's it is like this
*  Big moment. Yeah, the big climb
*  I will be the pointy end of the spear for north america
*  Yeah, uh beautiful well, let's uh, thanks for bringing that match up let's talk about just um
*  The the match against uh, denis your left hand match, yeah, he's also terrifying and seen as one of the strongest probably the
*  Uh one of if not the strongest left hand arm wrestler. Yeah, um
*  There's a lot to be said there
*  Maybe you could talk about this match at a high level. Why did you take on this match?
*  Why did you do the left hand? Yeah versus the right hand? What can you tell the story?
*  Okay, denis the plank off
*  There's so much about this match. I love denis russian guy. Yeah russian guy russian. I used to call him denis chernobyl
*  What a monster he kind of uh
*  led i'd say this new era
*  of arm wrestling where
*  The super heavyweight strength level has just gone through the roof
*  I wanted the match for such a long time. We tried to get the match
*  Uh, we couldn't get it organized. This is back in like, you know
*  2008 to 2012 couldn't get the match couldn't get the match. I've always been more of a one-on-one puller. He was doing the uh,
*  The tournament format I was ranked number one in the world and towards the end it kind of was very undecided
*  I ended up getting surgery
*  I ended up abandoning the super heavyweight division. I went down to the 225s for a few years
*  Wal failed temporarily
*  um, so the 225 pound division was scrapped and I said, okay
*  I'm gonna go for the for the big crown once again
*  And I started uh to go after super heavyweights
*  The 2018 season was right hand
*  Uh, I started to enter negotiations to have the match with him. I i've we've been chasing the match for 10 years
*  They wanted to do it left hand. I wanted to do a right hand
*  I just wanted to I just wanted to do the match. I wanted to do the match with dennis. I wanted to meet dennis
*  So people should know that you were
*  The right hand has always been your strongest. It has been I mean I had surgery in 2016
*  I hate to make excuses. I hate to do it
*  um
*  Dennis was better than me that day even on my best day if you had gone back my entire career
*  At no single day do I beat dennis aplankov in 2018? I would like to think that I could maybe do it now
*  But at that point there would be no version that could have beat him left or right, uh right hand no
*  I i'm curious about the right
*  Uh, but left hand so is the world
*  Well, it might still happen it might but uh dennis
*  Completely destroyed me
*  um
*  and
*  I learned a lot from it
*  I I think before
*  The dennis match
*  I think I was I don't know. I I don't know exactly what your word to use
*  Maybe I felt like
*  My thinking was a little bit elitist
*  uh, and
*  I really learned a lot. I was really humbled that day
*  um
*  By how far and how professional and how prepared dennis was
*  And how seriously he took the sport?
*  There's a mental
*  a slightly terrifying
*  Calmness to him which only comes with extreme preparation. I think yeah his level of dedication
*  Uh was extremely inspiring to me. Um
*  You know
*  I
*  Used to do a job
*  where
*  It was serious enough that the the price could be death, right?
*  and
*  I arm wrestled throughout that entire period
*  And I always kind of looked at uh, you know the cost
*  Of doing an activity being death
*  Uh limited to soldiering
*  and
*  I I kind of changed my mind a lot after that match. I realized that
*  Anything that you're in love with
*  Once you get far enough down the road and professional enough at it. It's going to kill you
*  Like doesn't matter what you're doing if you're crazy enough about anything it's probably going to take your life from you in some way
*  um
*  And that doesn't mean you rush towards death. It's just your level of investment and level of risk
*  Can have some catastrophic effects
*  Bukowski charles bukowski, I think is the quote
*  Do what you love and let it kill you right like that, right?
*  and
*  I understood that dennis's level of professionalism
*  Far exceeded mine in what we were doing at the time
*  And I realized that you know, I I was no longer employed. I was now in the world of professional arm wrestling
*  And I realized that uh, you know, what was I doing?
*  Like how serious was I?
*  So dennis is an incredible guy
*  Is there moments in that match there's just humility there too from him that was a fascinating
*  uh, sort of
*  It seemed like you realized that you just hit a wall and you were not ready enough for it. It was incredible
*  There was so many things that I remember about the dennis match. I mean, I remember
*  You know seeing video of somebody and then meeting them in person. It's different
*  I remember in the weigh-ins sorry, not the weigh-ins in the standoff that we did, you know before the match i'm looking at him
*  Like i'm close i'm looking at his arms
*  and
*  his bicep
*  It looked like an ass
*  Like it was like a freaking glute muscle. Yeah, like his entire structure was so sinewy and
*  Just so strong
*  I was like, wow, like he's so physically so impressive and
*  and um
*  I remember when I arm wrestled him
*  a certain at a certain time
*  He allowed me to kind of set my position. You can very you can't really tell because it happens very quickly
*  But he let me set my position which means I kind of got my locks in where where you can kind of really do a great
*  hold
*  And he just ripped through me
*  Just so you you were able to get this great position. Yeah, so it was
*  Tore right through me. Yeah, and uh
*  This first time I ever thought that uh, you know, he that I had torn something
*  I thought like after the match i'm like, geez did he rip my chest right in half like
*  um
*  What what did it? No, it's 100% yes. No, I didn't I didn't actually nothing went purple or anything but um
*  Yeah, the strength gap was very significant with dennis. Uh, so could he
*  What would it take to beat him on that day? Um
*  It would it would take me just being a little bit stronger
*  Um and and more healthy. Yeah
*  My left was not as healthy as it should be
*  Like I didn't have a full rounded technical arsenal because it takes the time after surgery
*  it really does like I mean
*  you can be good but
*  After a surgery like what I had, you know
*  You're probably looking at three or four years before you're starting to hit technical proficiency the way you should be
*  And uh, yeah, just a bit stronger
*  How do you interpret the calmness on his face? Well, what is that about?
*  Is he actually it's very russian, isn't it? It's a russian thing. I think I don't know
*  I see a lot of russians like that, you know, they're so like stoic and
*  I'm such a fan of russia. I I really want to go to moscow. I've been saying it forever
*  You've never been not yet
*  Not yet. I I want to go I want to just go and live there for like a month and just train
*  Moscow's got such a crazy arm wrestling scene
*  They've got from what I understand. They just have so many clubs. There's so many strong athletes
*  Just go and just lightning rod
*  Yeah, have you considered doing something of that sort? It's like rocky four again
*  Oh, yeah, like oh and lead up to june. I would certainly consider it. I've got
*  Only one trip planned at the moment
*  Administration is very important
*  You know what you mean by administration so like managing your time and management. Yeah, the management has to be very efficient
*  You know when i'm a tourist when i'm a visitor a little bit of that goes down, you know
*  When i'm at my home and things are familiar
*  I've got a really great grasp on my time
*  You know, everything's in place
*  Everything's perfect
*  You know if I could magically transport Moscow into my hometown and just go out and visit them
*  Yeah, so it's very difficult when you're traveling you have to keep all the you have to
*  Figure out what are you eating? Where how are you getting the food all the socializing plus you're
*  More and more celebrities. So there's social interaction, which I don't know
*  How draining that could be on you outside of the arm wrestling table?
*  so all you have to manage all of that because
*  Ultimately, you have to focus on
*  The fight ahead. Yeah
*  Yeah, a lot of my strength comes from just being in a familiar place
*  Doing my routine
*  I love to travel. I love to get out there and meet people and
*  new experiences
*  But when I just want to really prepare for a big match. Yeah home is uh
*  Where I get strong so that loss against dennis was one of the few losses in your career
*  uh, how did that
*  Feel in the moments after in the days after in the months after in the years after how has it changed you?
*  As an arm wrestler as a human being
*  Well
*  It's tough to lose uh still haunt you
*  um
*  I don't think so. I actually was really happy to lose to dennis
*  Because you know sometimes when you lose a match there's a lot of matches that have lost where they upset me
*  Because I know I made a mistake
*  I didn't make a mistake with dennis. He was just he was just way better. There's nothing I could have done that day
*  Uh, i'm really at peace with it
*  um
*  Dennis to me was just a big inspiration
*  I think that me arm wrestling dennis left-handed that day just let me touch probably
*  One of the strongest human beings on the arm wrestling table that's ever lived, you know left-handed
*  so so knowing that's possible
*  is almost like
*  Yeah, uh inspiration to you that I can be at that level too. Yeah
*  Yeah, yeah seeing what dennis did
*  Uh, you know just trying to absorb a little bit of his knowledge
*  Planted seeds in me
*  Yeah, I mean when I look at my career
*  it's it's a bit like the stock market, but
*  for sure i'm trending upwards and
*  since
*  Really kind of wrapping my mind around
*  Uh some of the russian philosophies
*  They really changed my training systems
*  There was some base philosophies that they talked to me about over there
*  that
*  Massively impacted my training is it possible to convert some of those philosophies into words?
*  Can you describe some of the ideas they taught you?
*  So never smile
*  Right
*  Man, there's so like it takes a while to break the ice with a lot of these guys
*  Uh, but once you do I mean that's this deepest bonds you can form there. Yeah. Yeah for sure
*  I think that I was raised under
*  I believe it's a flawed. It's I mean, it's not flawed because it has its value as well
*  Um, but it's best if you understand both philosophies
*  Uh, I think a north american thing
*  That's just so ingrained
*  in our fitness
*  Society is no pain. No gain
*  You know and just pushing and like sweating and going harder and like fighting through like
*  and grit and tough and
*  but
*  And then you talk to the russians and they're like, yeah, never fail. You never fail never never go to failure
*  Uh always feel good
*  Always feel good. It should always feel good. Don't um, and those two philosophies express themselves very differently
*  And if you want to get strong
*  Yeah, don't fail
*  Don't fail
*  So that's how you they also are believers of volume
*  Yeah, uh, there's a lot of strategies
*  But yeah volume is a massive principle and volume is very hard to achieve when you're believing in no pain. No gain
*  Right. They don't really go together. No pain. No gain more injuries
*  So the is there parallels because in in wrestling some of the greatest wrestlers of all time are russian and they they were big
*  Um dan gable talks about it. They were big on
*  Play right like lighter wrestling right is probably ultimately actually
*  It boils down to that's how you achieve higher volume right like over the stretch of years
*  The way to reduce injury
*  Um, I mean in wrestling also technique
*  Might um
*  Have greater value than it does in arm wrestling. Obviously technique is extremely important in arm wrestling, but power is
*  Like can defeat technique it seems like yeah in wrestling you can get away
*  There's a lot of ways you can really uh
*  Do sneak attacks sort of use leverage on those kinds of things
*  So there's even more incentive to do play and all that kind of stuff. Yeah, but uh,
*  Do you see the parallels between the two worlds wrestling and arm wrestling 100 you saw what I did the other night
*  Right. So i'm playing on the table for hours. Yeah, right. So that's that's that's that's my number one
*  Training thing that I do is I go on the table
*  For hours and I play yeah
*  Yeah, when you did, uh, surrogate, can you pull up that video? It's on dan's channel the uh, the water tank one
*  Oh, it's like 180p. It's like
*  The wi-fi in there was so bad. Yeah, it's great. I love it. It's uh, maybe the
*  I don't know if it was fisheye, but it had a fisheye feel. It was a crowded. I mean so much camaraderie. It was it was amazing
*  but maybe uh
*  Just a brief mention of uh, demetri the uh, the russian
*  the russian guy what uh
*  uh
*  What in that play? What are some memorable things here?
*  Like when you when you go against a bunch of different people a bunch of strangers
*  What are all the differences and how do you grow from them? How do you learn from them? Well, everybody's a bit different. So
*  I love to go to new clubs because the energy is always high
*  Like the first time you go to a club everybody's trying to kill you. Yeah. Yeah, so there's excitement
*  Yeah, and so you feed off of that. Yeah, you do you can you can if you're able to be strong enough to absorb it without
*  Injury, it's it's awesome. It's awesome
*  Um, because they're giving you everything they can yeah. Yeah
*  Yeah
*  Right. So it's it's very specific right? Like i'm gonna get way stronger at arm wrestling and what I try and do
*  When I go to these places is I make an assumption
*  I make an assumption. I'm the best guy there
*  and so i'll arm wrestle in a way that kind of protects them because the more I can protect them and
*  Kind of keep them kind of in a good position
*  They can actually give me more
*  Right. So I kind of I kind of give them little pieces that I think will put them in a place that they can really give me more
*  And so yeah, that's what i'm doing. And then when I see somebody like dimitri, yeah, I pull that in a little bit
*  Right. So, okay. So I know dimitri is the number one guy in texas
*  Uh, you know lots of respect to the guy
*  I won't give him all the pieces until I really kind of gauge where he's at
*  Because I certainly in training don't want to fail
*  I don't want that. I don't want to when you fail in arm wrestling. It's just imagine it's just bad technique
*  And you're trying and bad technique you're going to get hurt
*  Yeah, so you always want to be in a strong position here. What about how?
*  How does endurance come into play here and here's video? Yeah strapping up with that's right
*  How do you I mean you went for like, I don't know two hours. Yeah, it was long
*  So the first this first run of the video I think was a little over an hour
*  Then I took a break and I probably did another 45 minutes or so, but I mean do you
*  How can
*  Are you okay with the endurance aspect of this? Yeah, that's probably like when you talk to the arm wrestling world
*  That's probably what i'm best known for is is my endurance. So this helps build that
*  It does but that's not why i'm doing it i'm doing it to get strong
*  In my opinion, this is this is one of the best ways to get strong
*  Especially far away from it from a tournament or any kind of an event
*  I wouldn't want to do this
*  You know even a month or even six weeks or even maybe even eight weeks before a big event
*  I'd want to already be kind of shrinking my volume
*  but
*  Far away from an event. Yeah as much volume as your body can handle and you'll feel it
*  You'll feel it like I felt it at times like, you know after the hour mark i'm like, okay
*  I can feel my blood sugar kind of diminishing. I can feel like the blood that's going to my muscles is kind of like
*  It's not really pushing more good stuff in it's i'm starting to break down and you don't want that
*  You don't want that
*  Quick pause bathroom break. I'm good. Okay, I kind of need one
*  I'll maybe get a sweater. It's a bit is it cold? Do you does that matter does that care for?
*  And I still love the idea of you going to russia yeah and uh training there
*  Yeah, i'm also making a trip out to russia. Oh, yeah when for different me was hard with the current conflict
*  Uh, yeah, the tension's there, but i'm hoping uh before your match actually so may
*  For a couple of interviews with a couple of folks
*  some of which people know
*  Maybe I could ask you about um
*  To comment on some matches that stand out to you in in your in your career. Sure
*  Is there something uh, is there a particular I have a bunch that I really enjoy but is there something that stands out to you?
*  As uh as memorable we talked about
*  Sort of a defining loss perhaps the dennis
*  then
*  You you faced michael taw like we mentioned john
*  present you've you faced matt
*  Um, is there something that stands out to you that technically or psychologically you've learned a lot from?
*  I feel like I try and learn something from every match, but there is a very special match to me
*  That to this day, I can't explain
*  Very weird phenomena
*  so
*  I think it was 2005
*  Uh was my first
*  combat tour overseas
*  so
*  it was a
*  active tour, uh
*  You know among among other things I I got shot during that tour like we got blown and long tour rough tour
*  And I trained the whole time through knowing that at the end of this I was going to have a big match
*  so
*  There's a champion guy called ron bath
*  Uh, he's kind of if there was no john brisink, there would be ron bath
*  okay, so
*  extremely decorated
*  unbelievable arm wrestler from the united states
*  And this is kind of when I was just kind of coming up in the sport still I was fairly well established
*  I was definitely the best guy in canada and I had been for a few years
*  But I hadn't really expanded internationally too much
*  So
*  I had a one-on-one match with ron bath and
*  That's the one
*  Yeah
*  Extremely hard fought battle
*  Was three one I think three one but every match was really close and he won the first one
*  and I had to kind of like dig my way out of the trenches and uh ended up coming back and winning but
*  It was a match
*  That was probably it was probably one of my closest matches ever
*  and
*  It was seems like there's frustration on you. What what is that? What was going through your mind here?
*  With these, uh, was it first of all going in did you think you could beat him?
*  What was the level of college think I can win? I can always do
*  Um, but you know a lot of respect to the guy. Um, but yeah, I mean I always think I can do it
*  Uh, so how did what lessons did you take away from it? Uh, why why is it so meaningful to you?
*  Well, it's what happened afterwards
*  So I had some kind of a release afterwards
*  And that was the strange thing to me
*  so
*  match
*  ended
*  and I felt like
*  So relaxed afterwards so calm so
*  Uh, so, you know satisfied
*  Because it was one of those matches, uh that kind of takes everything from you, but you win it
*  And I was relaxing in the chair
*  And uh, i've never had the sensation
*  Before i've never had it afterwards
*  But it's like the center of my backbone just exploded
*  and it was like
*  So weird right because i'm not really spiritual that much or religious even
*  But it's like a fire just ripped through me and it only lasted an instant
*  Just exploded through my whole body
*  Out out at the top through my feet
*  And then it was gone. That was it
*  Uh weirdest thing i've ever felt my entire life
*  Yeah, but it was it was as a result of uh, what happened in the match
*  And leading up to it. I had some kind of a release
*  Um to what it uh, it's almost
*  How did you interpret it psychologically was it like, uh
*  Some kind of I mean not to be spiritual or whatever but some kind of superpower that was uh
*  Like
*  Like a lingering feeling like holy shit
*  I
*  Them, you know, I can't I can't explain it
*  And I haven't really tried hard enough to try to
*  Um, but something changed something happened there. Yeah
*  Something happened to me. I was sore for about three or four months afterwards. It's like it smoked out my entire body
*  Yeah, that whole summer. I was kind of sore and uh, yeah, and then after that like two or three years later
*  That's when I won the world championships
*  um
*  Yeah, I mean all the matches are you know, you get something from people like, you know, you study them
*  You you take something from them
*  people have an invisible crown and uh
*  He had one and I think I took it from him
*  Maybe that was the feeling of wearing the crown. Yeah, maybe
*  What about all the trash talk? How much of that did you learn that come naturally to you?
*  You're you're one of the most charismatic fun. I mean there's always like
*  Respect behind it. I would say to me and i'm a fan of a lot of sports
*  You're one of the greatest trash talkers in all of sports that i've ever seen because you're able to talk shit
*  But there's so much love and respect behind it. It's just masterful, but you also get into people's heads
*  In the moment. It's beautiful to watch because it really gets it gets to some people
*  So where does that come from? It's powerful weapon, right? Yeah, it's your voice is a powerful powerful weapon
*  And it's underutilized by so many athletes because they think that it's not sportsman like or
*  something like that, but the truth is I mean
*  I mean
*  You can be a weak
*  Person but with your voice you can
*  influence and change any number of things
*  And the same thing happens in a fight between two people if you can just be a never-ending, you know
*  flow of negative encouragement to someone or you know,
*  You know suggestion
*  Anything can happen
*  It's a tool
*  And when you're fighting a person you're not just fighting them
*  You're fighting everyone who's watching you're fighting the crowd the referees
*  and
*  You know to get in the most ideal
*  Positions situations you need to use your voice
*  Yeah, yeah, and there's uh
*  for people who haven't seen I definitely recommend you watch a bunch of arm wrestling matches because
*  There's a crowd really gets into it and it feels
*  It feels like there's a really intimate connection with the crowd. I suppose because the crowd is allowed to be very close to you
*  I love it
*  I want the crowd like right up on me. Yeah. Yeah, so sometimes
*  Oh, yeah
*  Who are you whenever you talk to somebody you literally pick somebody from the crowd. Yeah. Oh, yeah
*  I'll i'll fuck him like i'll start fucking off his fans and like
*  Yeah, like i'll start talking to their wives or whatever. Yeah
*  Yeah
*  Yeah, there's jodie
*  Um, she's pretty dangerous to to listen to also but yeah, one of his buddies mike stelares who's you know
*  Really good arm wrestler was was talking was was cheering for him. So I started to go after him. Yeah. Yeah
*  Smiling the whole yeah, it's fun, right? It's fun. It's yeah fan
*  It's fun to listen to but it's also what's fun is how much it actually affects some of the people you're facing
*  They get frustrated. Yeah, it's great. Well, you have to fight right?
*  Like a lot of people think things will be given to them
*  and and the thing that you know, i've always believed from the time I was very young like uh
*  I was convinced that uh
*  Our inevitable death was going to come from aliens, right? Like some super aggressive
*  Super violent species was going to come and smoke us all
*  You know and i'm like i'm i'm not like that i'm like but as soon as one person is
*  Then you're forced to have to accept it as reality, right?
*  so
*  I like to fight
*  For every single thing. I like to try and be more and more aggressive and if someone matches me
*  That's when I can use my endurance and if they don't then I have the tactical advantage
*  So that's kind of my my balance point and then by the way, you also yell at the ref
*  Yeah, I mean the games there's like levels to this game
*  But you know the feeling sometimes when people get frustrated is like, okay
*  This person's cheating or like you're trying to get a good grip
*  uh
*  before the go before it goes
*  And and I think some of the frustration in combination with the trash talk is what this person is cheating, right?
*  But everybody is like kind of trying to cheat get an edge within the rules. Yeah
*  So I try and just ramp it ramp it ramp it
*  But uh, you know, everybody's different i've learned how to play the game
*  Based off of the tools that I have physically. Yeah, and for me
*  This works because you know, my genetic makeup
*  Is more a more of a persistence hunter, right? So like I need to extend things and
*  That works well for me
*  You know if if I was more explosive i'm probably wouldn't have the same strategies. Yeah
*  By the way for people who are watching who are watching, uh, you're wearing a no limits hoodie, which is
*  Uh one of your nicknames I uh, I don't wash this thing too much. It's my bacterial shield to uh to the world. Yeah
*  Yeah
*  Awesome. So you mentioned jody. She's often in uh in your corner and does perhaps more trash talking than even you
*  so
*  I mean
*  If we could step away. She's an incredible human being is sort of as a fan. It's fun to watch the two of you
*  Both when you're arm wrestling and just as people you just see so much
*  I don't know kindness and love radiating from the two of you whenever you're
*  Trash talking or talking about just uh random things or just talking about life
*  It's just a beautiful thing to watch and thank you for sharing that with the world, but
*  maybe
*  Can you um, she paid me to ask you this
*  Uh, what what are the things you love about jody your wife jody lark
*  What are the ways she's affected your life
*  Yeah
*  Jody and I go way back, right? We were in high school together
*  Um
*  The thing that I admire most in people
*  Is is bravery?
*  Uh, it's to me. It's the most admirable quality
*  And
*  Jody
*  always
*  Has inspired me because she's such a fighter, you know if if she believes that something's true
*  Um, she won't she just she does not back down
*  She will she will not and you can not to say that she's can't change her mind because
*  She can but while she is convicted
*  She will uh, she'll not stop fighting
*  She's pulled me out of the fire repeatedly
*  We've we've lived through so many things, um, very lucky how she made you a better arm wrestler
*  She's fed me
*  Yeah, I could see your uh, you have videos of your house basically coming apart when she's not there
*  Yeah without jody i'm on the street, uh living in a tent and uh, yeah eating dog food, yeah
*  Yeah, um
*  Bravery, yeah, what about love? How's love made you stronger now? We're gonna make uh devin uncomfortable
*  Love is difficult to accept
*  Love is one of those things that um, you know a lot of times
*  You don't feel worthy of it
*  You know, and so it's hard sometimes to accept someone's love
*  And someone who really loves you
*  They'll love you even when you don't
*  you know and
*  Here you go. You're gonna make me cry lex
*  Uh, yeah jody and i've been through so much
*  um
*  And she's shown me how you know
*  She supported me just repeatedly repeatedly
*  Some of that is loyalty and patience and perseverance and all those things. That's like when love really
*  Shows itself. Yeah sticking through yeah together for years even when you're
*  To the the shitty times love and faith are powerful forces in this universe, you know without them
*  That we can descend into darkness very quickly, you know as a world even between people, you know when love and faith is destroyed
*  then
*  Then we fall apart
*  You know and i've i've been graced
*  By by the love that jody's given me, you know, it's allowed me
*  To continue to build you know when you have love between people then you build together
*  um, I love I love
*  My family I love canada. I love the arm wrestling community
*  I have a love for what we're trying to achieve as a human species, you know
*  and uh, you know
*  When that when that falls apart, we don't have much
*  Yeah
*  Just with my boy there. Yeah
*  Yeah, she um
*  You also mentioned you were uh, and uh
*  You once had a job where uh, your
*  Death was a real possibility. So you were on the canadian special forces
*  What did you take away from?
*  that experience
*  That time. Yeah, it was such a such a great life
*  Really really loved it. I honestly I never I never wanted to leave. I never thought I would leave
*  I thought i'd be there my whole life. Um
*  Real honor
*  To to get to serve what what did you get to do?
*  What was the things you loved craftsmanship wise like fun things you get to do learn and challenge yourself
*  Yeah, and and you mentioned sort of honor
*  In terms of the the serving part. Yeah
*  Yeah, my favorite thing about
*  serving in the special forces was
*  For sure the people that I worked with that's probably the first thing I could say
*  Uh, you know, I never I always felt like
*  Totally comfortable and and putting my life in the other guy's hands
*  Um, I was so happy to be in a place where I felt I could follow
*  Like
*  Didn't matter like I knew that the people ahead of me were were incredible. I knew the people beside me were incredible
*  So just having that faith in your team. It's very special
*  And to know that they're for there for a reason that has nothing to do with money, you know
*  And that's what kind of brings everybody together is you're there to for a higher purpose
*  Uh, and in terms of being an adrenaline junkie
*  There's nothing like it. I mean, there's nothing like, you know going out at night and fighting
*  and when I say fighting like
*  My whole life I wanted to fight
*  and to me
*  There's a lot of and look at I've said this in the past and I think it's been a personal failure of mine
*  Because i've said things like it's the highest level that you can do and I don't believe that to be true anymore
*  but at the time
*  Uh, I thought it was the best way I could express
*  Um my drives that I had, you know to be a fighter
*  um, so oh, it's a your sense in the past and maybe in part now is that
*  So fighting is when humans get a chance to express themselves deeply like like that that mix of um, the bravery
*  the integrity
*  the
*  Yeah, whatever that is that makes us human that human spirit can really shine and I don't believe that anymore
*  I believe that you can do that in any field in any discipline
*  You know if you go hard enough, it all kind of starts to feel the same
*  um, but at the time
*  Uh that you know expression to me was really really awesome. I I loved I loved close quarter battle. That was my favorite thing
*  That's really the whole reason I was there
*  Uh, can you describe close quarter battle close quarter battle is
*  Is team fighting?
*  so
*  And it can look a lot of different ways
*  but basically it's
*  ground troops
*  Doing some kind of a mission
*  And it's the orchestrated movement that is the skill the orchestrated movement and the the drills
*  Done quickly and accurately. It's it's it's very difficult with communication
*  With communication. Yeah, so so you're just you're basically cooperating together communicating. Yeah, there's some strategy
*  There's some adapting to the changing environment and the more the team works together the less communication there is yeah
*  Yeah, uh, and that's an amazing thing to do to be part of a machine well machine a team
*  Of people who can fight together like that
*  it's I think it's
*  It's uh, we're really designed to do it
*  Like as good as we can fight as individuals the thing that makes us really good is our ability to fight as as a team
*  Yeah
*  Yeah, we're that's one of the things that makes us really human is that collective intelligence social aspect and
*  Uh fighting is the highest of stakes. So like that social interaction under the highest of stakes is uh,
*  Really does bring out something that's deeply human
*  I mean
*  War in general brings out something deeply human. It's just
*  it's
*  I mean obvious to say that it's tragic that it results in so much
*  Loss of life and well-being
*  Uh, let me if it's okay for a brief moment to take us back to um
*  Arm wrestling we we did this like offline
*  We talked about you gave me some advice and about arm wrestling, but maybe do a high level overview of um
*  Like the different styles and strategies
*  That we've talked about we talked about the importance of strength and power
*  Or
*  But is there like offensive defensive styles is there we mentioned king's move
*  Uh, what what what would you classify your style as it's it's nice for people that don't
*  Know maybe even zoom back out. So arm wrestling is a sport. Yeah where
*  two
*  people
*  Have to uh when we talk about strictly the sport put their elbow on a particular pad
*  Means they have to keep that elbow on that pad and they uh
*  When when the back of one of their hands crosses some kind of or basically touches the table
*  and uh
*  When you actually lock up
*  You do so depending on the organization
*  Without straps meaning there's just you agree. It's like mutual agreement that you're going to uh
*  Uh clasp your hands in in a way that's fair and there's a referee that helps ensure that it's fair
*  But of course, there's these little games going on and then when you actually go all out with this battle
*  If there's no straps, you can slip out so often you'll put the straps which means you're uh, it's like marriage
*  Yep, you're committed
*  Yeah
*  For like somebody will have to lose essentially. Uh, there's no pulling out
*  So
*  Okay, so that's sort of the battle within that
*  What are the different styles that you can speak to that people that don't know arm wrestling?
*  Could uh, could could yeah, we can start to kind of just dance around the subject a bit
*  i'd say
*  There's a lot of different types
*  they're specialists
*  And there's kind of blenders and people who are very versatile
*  Um a lot of guys win world championships on one singular move they get just extremely crisp at
*  Say a hook or a top roll
*  And their style is very kind of focused and you'll see it with a lot of athletes like
*  Kind of a talk guy about guy who's very active guy called jerry cataract. Okay, as soon as you think jerry cataract
*  He's got a very unique style. He's got a flop wrist press
*  Okay, so most of his technique is built around this one system flop wrist means you're
*  Yes
*  What it sounds like? Yeah, your wrist is flopped. So yeah, looks like you're losing
*  So he is pushing from a losing position. No
*  He will be offensive. So he will be in a press so offensively so he'll give his hand away
*  So that he can get his shoulder behind it properly so he doesn't
*  Wow, right, so you can press press means
*  Put like push push. Yeah
*  Without having that hook position, right? Which is what most people are always looking for
*  And jerry's looking for it as well. And then so example, there's another one. There's another specialist matt mask. Yeah, he's top roller
*  right, uh
*  Basically, that's his that's his great move. It's top roll and his other weapons aren't nearly as powerful
*  this
*  Incredible top role and then you have a lot of athletes that are more blended. Okay, they have a lot of good options
*  Um, I think that I probably fall more into that category
*  You have people who are more speed guys. Okay, so they
*  Try and do very little. Uh, I call it attrition
*  right, so
*  A lot of people are very willing to trade energy
*  Because they have faith that their their gas tank or their pool eventually will tire the other person out
*  So anytime there's a trade they'll trade
*  Whereas you know a guy like travis bagem
*  You know, he was very very well known as being extremely explosive, right? But if the match stops
*  Typically he's gonna lose
*  All right. So based off of your genetics your hand
*  You know, there's a lot of ways to skin it so
*  I think you said something like
*  you're a
*  20 second guy
*  That's right. I'm a 20 second guy. So what are we what are the seconds we're talking about?
*  So a lot of the power people they want to win in the first maybe five seconds like even shorter
*  Just that first push that first press that absolutely and that's it right to the pad. Yeah
*  And so you're trying to hold off that attack, yeah if I beat you in a second we're not in the same world
*  Yeah, uh
*  When i'm with my peer group, I will typically win 20 seconds and beyond
*  That's a typical win for me when i'm with a peer
*  Um, whereas other guys when they're with their peers, they'll win in a second, right? That's how they do it
*  That's that's the way they're built. That's the way they they train
*  Um
*  Yeah, most guys at a higher level at all starts to kind of it starts to get more and more difficult to be a specialist
*  At the high level now
*  Some people just have little holes in their games
*  It's rare to get someone who can really do all the moves it's very rare
*  What uh, where would you put levon?
*  Uh, I would not say he's a specialist i'd say his top role is the strongest move top role top role is the strongest move
*  Yeah, uh, and the interesting thing about the
*  The specialist versus the blender
*  There's a counter
*  Right. Every move has a move that theoretically should be the right choice
*  So if you're a single move guy
*  Uh, there's going to be a guy out there who'll get you
*  Yeah, it'll be very difficult for you to beat that guy. Um
*  but like when you come to like a tournament
*  Typically specialists do much better in tournament scenarios
*  Because their singular move can get them through a tournament very quickly and efficiently
*  Whereas you get a blender in a tournament
*  They typically will have longer and more difficult matches and by joe, right? Yeah. Yeah, but in in super match format
*  Typically blenders do better
*  So we uh offline also talked about arm sumo or uh, freedom arm wrestling. I don't know how you want to call it
*  Oh, I love freedom
*  Exactly north american way
*  So what so this is this is this idea and i've watched a few videos and it looks fun
*  Is basically removing the restriction of having to keep your elbow on the pad
*  And just being able to arm wrestle over the whole table
*  I think you've mentioned that the criticism that gets is it might be injury prone or something like that
*  So can you describe this arm sumo freedom arm wrestling idea? Right when you come to freedom arm wrestling basically
*  It removes the limitation of a standard arm wrestling table. Yeah, right
*  So basically every single thing is a freedom arm wrestling table. Some are better than others
*  All right, so looking for that nice table where we can kind of stand apart from each other and we're anatomically
*  You know in a fairly safe position
*  And the rules in freedom the way you win is like the knuckles
*  Must either touch the tabletop or you hold it off the edge
*  For a three count
*  Right. So this is the main way to win. Yes, you can foul like if you lift your eyeball up still a foul
*  But you have the entire playing surface so your elbow is no longer limited to your seven by seven or seven by nine pad
*  So you can move it all over the table. You can move your body
*  Around the table a bit too. And if it's a big table your body could largely be on the table
*  Yeah, so it basically it's like adjusting your ring size. So arm wrestling you're fighting in a phone booth
*  Yeah, right. So you're fighting in a field you're fighting, you know, just bigger. So it just it just makes the sport bigger
*  Yeah, this is japan, but even on a small table there
*  Even in a slightly larger phone booth, you can get a lot more
*  Fun and variety. It's very interesting. I love it. I think it makes the sport bigger
*  I actually believe that it's the future of the sport. I really do
*  Because it makes it more accessible like you don't need the equipment right do it at a bar. Yep all that kind of stuff
*  Yeah, yeah less less equipment requirements
*  Kids most kids start freedom like most kids arm wrestle on school desks. Yeah
*  Yeah, and like if you see a guy on the street like whatever like you can arm wrestle anywhere
*  you don't need to bring your table around with you
*  if uh
*  We talked about the elite level if somebody was
*  interested in
*  starting in arm wrestling or like going from
*  Just like you know, I go to the gym you kind of lift
*  You've arm wrestled a few times trying to get better at it trying to learn. How would you advise like?
*  Getting better to where you can beat your closest buddies. Yeah that first step first step
*  I'd say find people
*  Find people find good people
*  Uh volume get we'll get with a club get with people who know what they're doing who can mentor you
*  And that's really cool. I got to me. I realized there's a club in austin. Yeah, i'm sure there's in a lot of places
*  They're everywhere. Uh, we we got this app called arm bet
*  Yeah
*  Which is a app that helps you find other people there. Yeah, very easy
*  But I mean they're all over social networks. I mean, it's kind of widespread now
*  But yeah find people
*  Find people and it's just much easier to learn with another person and you'll get stronger that way
*  But I mean do this do the lifts
*  I mean if you go to the gym just start doing the lifts, uh, and right away
*  Those will technically prepare you what are what are the lifts? Can we describe? Yeah
*  So i'd say if you want to just keep it very very simple. Let's just talk about three
*  There's more there's much more than three but like when you talk about energy allocation
*  these three lifts in my opinion
*  should be like
*  90 of your investment
*  Is very big these three lifts
*  uh
*  And the exact percentages can you can argue about it, but we'll start off with the cupping of the wrist
*  Just this it's a simple thing
*  And do it with a cable?
*  You know, you can get a thicker diameter
*  So it kind of you know is is more out on your fingers where an armrest is going to attack you
*  Right because any good armrest is going to attack your fingers. So like open hand no
*  No, well, I mean for health. Yes, you could
*  But like if you want to be really specific you train exactly the way you would at a table in the position that you actually start
*  That edge. Yeah, and then you're just doing uh this kind of yes to your center
*  Your people people one of the one of the big misconceptions in arm wrestling
*  Is that you're aiming for that pin pad?
*  right
*  No, the center the chest i'll bring it close to you
*  Okay, make it come close to you, right you see like whenever I do my exercises
*  The the vector is always pulling straight towards me. Yeah
*  Yeah, so just uh, you know cupping close to you
*  The most dangerous thing that a person can do to me on an arm wrestling match is just pull me away from my body
*  That that's a terrible thing for me
*  Yeah, so so that cupping
*  Yeah, that's a massive part of the sport
*  Uh, so
*  Now when you think what does the cup do to the other person?
*  If I cup they get turned over
*  Right. So this has to get really strong
*  This pronation so
*  So to fight the to fight that rolling exactly. Yeah, so that's that's through the thumb
*  Yeah, so you put uh, you know, got it you put on the thumb and you put this motion
*  Yeah
*  Got it. Yeah
*  Those two things those two things together this cupping and rolling
*  This is what's gonna make the person's hand bend back
*  And once the person's hand is bent back, they're just their whole game gets cut to pieces
*  They have very little good options. It's all like nasty stuff
*  Wow, yeah, so those two things that's a that's a huge part of of your of your investment
*  uh
*  rise
*  Always be climbing. Yeah, exactly
*  Yeah, those three simple things
*  That's what I would tell anybody to spend most their time on if you want to become an art wrestler
*  So and to use bands would be good for this bands are great because they're easy to transport
*  The only problem I have with bands is like if you like to measure
*  You know, and if you like to be precise bands just aren't that precise right to to have growth
*  Yeah, yeah
*  Just I mean, it's just like, you know, you know exactly what you need
*  The prescription is kind of a band is kind of like and a lot of people myself included
*  I like to um, I like to know exactly my outputs. So so weights
*  So, uh, it would be like cables. Yep
*  Cables are nice bands are great too. I I I mix the two bands are
*  Uh when I kind of don't need to they're more like easy for me. I when I train bands
*  Bands are dangerous because the acceleration is so high on them
*  Like when you screw up with band training, the acceleration is way faster than gravity, right?
*  So if you do something bad it can
*  Can make it go really much worse. Yeah
*  It's funny that you didn't mention
*  bicep curls or uh, well, it's a chain
*  It's a chain and so you're I mean the idea if you focus on these three the other stuff catches up
*  Like it's all involved this whole this whole thing is involved
*  So if you have an axe
*  right
*  The blade of the axe
*  That's that's these things, right?
*  Like you need the the pointy end of all your attacks to be awesome
*  Right if you have a super sharp axe, yeah, you could have a shitty hand
*  Yeah, right. Yeah, so focus on that the the pointy the yeah tip of the axe
*  Yeah
*  The tip of the axe is so important, right?
*  Like if I have an awesome bicep and I can't quite use it. What's it good for right?
*  Yeah, I think a lot of the motions with the wrist that you mentioned are
*  Just thinking about jujitsu, especially in the gi. Yeah
*  There's a lot of I mean, there's so much importance to this and people don't often work
*  it
*  Explicitly. Yeah, so many of the chokes require
*  Yeah ability to it's almost like exactly like arm wrestling very close because you're weak here
*  Uh, what's that called flop wrist? Yeah, and you're strong with the cup. Yeah
*  And so you just getting the muscle the whatever that's involved
*  The muscle the turning the pressure because that's where also the choke comes that little
*  The thing that makes you win in arm wrestling is also the thing that finishes the person when you have
*  Them grabbed the strength is very similar. Yeah
*  It's fascinating actually, of course, like you said if you want to be very good, you should be doing
*  The very specific exact motion. Yeah, so if I was gonna do jujitsu i'd be like working out with the gi
*  Yeah, the problem is
*  You know, uh, it's difficult to construct
*  the um
*  The exact so you have to actually go with people and then they don't like being choked on
*  Right. So like it's hard to i'm actually a big
*  We have these kinds of debates all the time is um
*  You know, i'm a big
*  believer in drilling
*  I love doing something thousands of times like john donahue or somebody i mentioned to you about the jujitsu folks here
*  they're less believers in drilling they
*  they see the value of
*  Almost like the mind of of going live and exploring ideas. It's that play
*  You don't need to do the thing a thousand times. You just need to always be
*  Thinking about the little details that make you uh, make you better and then in action practicing like
*  Developing the strength the power the explosion of the agility in action. So actually rolling I don't
*  You know, I I agree with this but I just
*  Believe in volume more. Yeah, so you can accomplish it through volume. You can you can play a lot
*  Yes, exactly. Well, that's the word if you really want to get it good is you're talking about
*  I mean, that's why
*  Uh a lot of these folks are training three times a day
*  They're doing you know, they're putting in the hours eight hours
*  Nine hours just just that's tough. Oh my god
*  Well, so there are a lot of them are not doing going hard
*  It's just being on the mat some of it is just sitting there talking through ideas watching others or teaching explaining stuff. It's just
*  It's like it's not just physical. It's it's uh mental too because you're keeping in your mind and some of the greatest
*  This is what they talk about. The the wrestlers i've talked with the fighters at the top of their career
*  they basically
*  Uh george san pierre is like this another fellow canadian is uh
*  Like his stick figures in his head they can't help yeah, they're like in there because if you train enough hours
*  You're it's just going to be in your head and they're all going to be playing around in your head
*  And some little detail over time it's almost like computing or something like that and that ends up
*  Uh having a result even though you're not physically doing anything. It's it's it's always in there
*  I do have to return to diet real quick. I know we talk about pancakes. Let me
*  quite seriously, um
*  you are one of the
*  I mean strongest athletes in the world for your sport
*  So you have to get big you have to get powerful you have to get strong
*  What is the right diet for you for that like what do you eat? How often do you eat? Yeah
*  Um, yeah from the the highest detail to the smallest or the things that make you happy and feel good. Yeah
*  I've experimented with every diet. I've done it all i've been a vegan
*  I've done raw i've eaten only meat
*  I've eaten balanced i've eaten like a bodybuilder
*  You know you name it i've probably tried it
*  I don't believe that it's as important in the sport of arm wrestling as it is perhaps in other sports
*  uh, I believe that
*  I mean just to be very basic. I mean if you're eating enough food, you're probably going to be okay. Um
*  So it's just calories it's a lot. I mean it really I mean not to over complicate it
*  But I mean that's that's where the conversation starts. Are you eating enough food?
*  And it can come in any number of ways and
*  I I don't think it's as important
*  As a lot of other people do
*  Uh, i'm certainly irresponsible in a lot, but the thing is is
*  Back to like volume right? Like you need to like if if you want to be a super heavy weight
*  It's very different than if you want to be a weight category guy
*  If you want to be a weight category guy, i'd say that you need to be more responsible make better choices
*  If you want to be a super heavy weight
*  Everything just so we're watching a delicious looking omelet. So eggs bacon
*  Syrup, so you don't care carbs approach. So in all the things you try so I mostly eat
*  Meat now. Yeah, and I landed on that. There's several
*  Things, you know, obviously i'm not
*  But I do a lot of sport. Yeah, and I was very surprised how my particular very specific body can perform
*  Uh better with only meat. Why better the sports I do the mind matters
*  And so for some reason my mind is just clear. Yeah, and I I don't think because it feels unhealthy
*  It just makes me feel really good. I don't think I would recommend it to anybody else
*  so
*  it's
*  It's interesting that that journey
*  Of just exploring can take you to figure out something about your own self
*  One of the most interesting things that I heard about nutrition
*  was
*  I heard there was actually Doritos. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, i'm an idiot
*  Uh
*  Now I do i'd say over the last couple years i've really gone into into carbs a lot and high glycemic carbs and you know
*  Just to I feel like it's one of the best things you can do if you're working out really hard just cheers add carb. Yeah
*  exactly
*  um
*  But
*  Oh, where was I so good so you've had
*  Distracted syrup is I forget everything is distracting
*  No, so you've added the high glycemic carbs into the mix so that you those help but that's for mass building
*  Right. So
*  There was a study that I heard about by somebody who's trying to identify heart attacks
*  They did this great big study and at the end of it. I mean didn't matter what the people ate
*  The the most important thing was how they felt about the food that they were eating
*  Yeah
*  So if you believe in the food if you believe that it's going to do good things for you
*  And if you allocate it the right way, it's it's going to have a positive impact
*  And I try and do that no matter what it is. Like I have my foods that I think do certain things
*  and so
*  You know for me, I know that
*  Actually, I mean I learned about corn fed pumps when I was overseas
*  Uh, I realized that if I I never used to eat crap really didn't I ate super clean all the time
*  and
*  When I was faced with
*  imminent death more
*  I would be like, okay. I'm going out tonight. Let's have let's have a couple ice cream bars
*  You know like whatever
*  and
*  what I realized is
*  If I eat like an entire bag of chips or like, you know a bunch of chocolate bars
*  And then I go and have a workout
*  My workout will be incredible
*  It'll be incredible
*  There's something about
*  easily processed carbohydrates
*  That will continue to quickly
*  get into your blood as fast as you can burn it and
*  There's something about that that
*  Gives you incredible blood blood flow. Yeah
*  And also your mind plugging in enjoying that right and then believing it works and that's how it makes it work better
*  Exactly. I mean I feel that way. I think this is really not
*  This has been frustrating to me about the health culture in the united states in the studies
*  That are done, you know, you look at like the importance of sleep the importance of x diet
*  All those kinds of things. I I wish incorporated into that would be
*  Your mental relationship with all these things. So for example people that tell me well your sleep schedule is insane
*  yes
*  perhaps
*  but also
*  It's insane because i'm doing what I love and I don't see it as a problem, right and I
*  I think that's really important to understand if if you if you're if you sleeping crazy hours
*  Is not affecting your stress and is actually making you happy or you're drawing some kind of source of
*  Happiness and pleasure and satisfaction like being awake when others aren't it's like the mike tyson thing or something like training when you
*  You've convinced yourself everybody's sleeping and therefore you're somehow training much better, right? That's powerful
*  Even if you look statistically
*  Six hours maybe worse than eight hours or four hours, maybe worse than six hours. So the mind is a powerful thing super powerful
*  But if you want to be a super heavyweight eat
*  You got to eat like stupid amounts all the time. Yeah, you have to test your digestive system
*  What's your favorite meal by the way, just if you had to you know
*  You know, I am
*  I do
*  Oh geez, I like so much food. It's tough
*  But i'd say the food that I rely on a lot when i'm getting ready to compete is sushi
*  Just because it normally comes in an all you can eat format
*  you know
*  So, you know, I love to go and just binge all you can eat just all you can eat buffets sushi is just super convenient
*  Yeah
*  Uh, if I was a sushi all you can eat buffet place. I'd be terrified when I saw you
*  Have you had barbecue at texas?
*  Yeah, I love it. I love it. Yeah
*  So you uh, just a small tangent on this you you uh face the mountain
*  Uh, how for uh, uh, uh, be honest. Well, first of all, you arm wrestled them. It's interesting to ask
*  Um, so this is the mountain from the game of thrones
*  Uh a strong man one of the strongest people in the world for time the strongest person in the world
*  What was it like? I know sort of you guys maybe weren't going 1000%
*  But what's it like? Well, he probably wasn't going a thousand percent
*  But like what it's interesting to think
*  What does that strength feel like so?
*  It's a specialized strength in another sport. Yeah, what did it feel like?
*  What how strong?
*  Was he what is some kind of deep insights you drawn from that battle?
*  I feel like if we were to go back
*  a thousand years
*  And if you give him armor
*  And a two-handed sword
*  He will just
*  Rip across the landscape
*  And no one will stop him. So this is the boxing match between the two but there's also a video of them arm wrestling
*  Yeah, what a titan though what a titan, uh, you know a guy like that
*  tall
*  Yeah, strong fit disciplined. I mean he is uh, he's quite a warrior
*  419 pounds. Oh, yeah. Yeah, he's
*  He's incredibly impressive, uh, I really like hapthor and I like eddie hall too
*  And I was just so i'm just so caught up with the drama
*  Okay, so
*  So eddie hall and hapthor bjornsen. Yes, two of the strongest legendary strong men that we have
*  Uh at you know, and they were the coolest they were the top when strong man was really super cool
*  uh
*  I don't know all the details
*  But they legit hit each other
*  Like legit, so I think it kind of stems. I don't know like like I say i'm not right there with them, but
*  uh
*  eddie won
*  The the world's strongest man event or something one year and like and the thing it was one of those victories
*  Where hapthor, you know was not accepting of his defeat
*  Okay, and there was a little bit of back and forth and basically from what I understand they were gonna fight
*  Like the knight of the world's strongest man
*  And they got kind of got pulled apart and this uh, this heat between them got translated into a potential boxing match
*  So it's very real
*  It's a very real fight. So you have the two strongest dudes on the planet. They're gonna fight each other
*  So so i've been like, you know, because arm wrestling is strong man. It's it's kind of similar communities. Um,
*  Who do you got?
*  If you if you were giving me financial advice, oh jeez, I am so bad. I always call it wrong. They're very different
*  uh, I I see uh
*  Hapthor is being you know, well eddie hall is slimming down. Is that what yeah as well?
*  I see hapthor is a bit more regimented
*  um, but I see eddie hall as like way more barbaric and like
*  I think he's a little bit more athletic
*  but hapthor is bigger and uh
*  And you know, they've chosen slightly different paths to prepare for the match but but what happened was like they were about to fight
*  And eddie eddie hall blew his bicep
*  So me I was getting ready for lavon in december. We were supposed to arm wrestle in december, but he's got his movie
*  And so I was like, okay, I can kind of get away from the sport just a little bit broaden my base
*  that happened and I was like
*  Oh an opportunity you stepped in an opportunity to fight i'm like i'll do it so how much training you uh,
*  You trained a little bit. So can you tell about your own decision to do that? What was the training like? What was it?
*  Yeah, oh it was so much fun. It was so much fun
*  uh, so basically
*  I made a funny video and I sent it to the organizers of core sports that I would do it
*  I'm like i'll do it. I'm sure they got a thousand people who wanted to do it
*  But i'm like i'm like listen i'm like I i'm an old man like i'm gimped up like everywhere outside the arm wrestling lanes
*  Uh, I said but but I will 100 like if you let me fight him i'll give it my all
*  and uh
*  And whatever they didn't get back to me. They're like, yeah, whatever
*  Okay, so then so then they call me on a friday like five weeks before the event
*  And they're like, hey davin, were you serious?
*  And i'm like, oh shit
*  And i'm like, yes, I was serious. Yeah, i'll do it and they're like, okay
*  um
*  They're like it's down to you and like two other people
*  Uh, we'll get back to you in a day or two, but you would do it. I'm like, okay, so they got back to me on sunday
*  Like so right away i'm like skipping rope and i'm like and i'm so I only arm wrestle legs. That's all I do
*  So what was your you did some? Yeah, so striking training. Yeah, so I went to um
*  This guy that he was he was awesome. Zach ben bushida there. Uh, that was it from from tri star
*  Do you know for us the hobby?
*  Uh, and that's and yes people in the comments. I will interview him on this podcast. I think people he's brilliant
*  Yes, right. He's an incredible guy. So right away like I had no idea about the fight community across canada really
*  and I got like
*  By the fifth message that said you must train with faraz. Uh, I was like, okay
*  Called him up. He was incredible right away. He's like yeah, you can come and we'll just work with you
*  so
*  I got I got the call. I called him on like monday
*  at two o'clock
*  By like seven o'clock. I had my things packed and I went to montreal
*  And I spent four weeks in in the fighter dorms just humbling yourself. Yeah every day just getting punched in the face
*  you know, uh
*  over and over, uh
*  Going for runs with all like they're all like olympians and pro fighters living in the dorms super cool dudes
*  They were so good to me. Yeah, there's a good video of you and uh faraz
*  Just talking. Yeah, I don't I don't remember which stage this was but this is early
*  But you're already beginning to get humbled. Oh, man
*  I knew I mean I knew what I was getting into like I knew it was
*  I knew it was going to be a losing battle
*  But I felt like the opportunity to fight thor like how cool is that?
*  Like I had I had to say I had to do it
*  um
*  I love the process and I learned a lot from doing it
*  Like the dorms I want to do something like that with arm wrestling
*  I think we're big enough now that we can have these kind of uh, you know dorms frat houses
*  Whatever you want to call it. What's the dorm like so you're basically staying there. Yeah food is there
*  Yeah, so you can you can you mentioned, uh, what was the word you use administration? Yeah, exactly. That's it
*  So it removes all of that makes it so simple. You can just focus, you know, the gym is here
*  You live here. Yeah
*  You know that your life becomes simple
*  Yeah
*  So this is a guy named jimmy paedro here in america. He's a famous uh coach. There's a place up in boston
*  He has kind of a dorm like that too. Yeah, and it that that becomes essential
*  When the community is small, but you're trying to do epic things like winning olympic gold
*  Yeah, so you have to really put the people together
*  In these kind of minimalist conditions when they just focus on the training focus focus focus. Yes
*  Yeah, it wasn't enough time. I mean I trained for about well, yes three or four weeks
*  Uh, but I love the journey and uh, what are some of the fun things you enjoy?
*  So you did mostly striking. Did you uh, yeah, I guess it was yeah, it was boxing. It was straight up boxing. Yeah
*  Well, what are some things that were transferable? What are some cool things you learned from that?
*  So from the world of armors, have you taken anything back like some
*  Training regimens ideas about training even just even even movements
*  Because for us is a
*  Unique mind as well for training
*  Yeah, I I don't know. I mean i've gone very far down the path of arm wrestling
*  Uh boxing and arm wrestling are very different. They're they're very different sports. Uh
*  The the physicality required is very different, uh, you know the mentality I mean it's fighting
*  So it's another form of fighting which is cool. The the big things that I took back from it
*  The things that I loved about it was I had to run again
*  You know
*  So really work on endurance. Yeah
*  Yeah, I was going for runs with guys in the dorms and they'd
*  They would just destroy me just like it was
*  So bad, uh, did you uh
*  Like how did you feel in the actual boxing in terms of endurance?
*  Were you able to no?
*  It's a torture. It was it was terrible and and and the thing is is it was so crazy for me because
*  I really was good once upon a time. Yeah, I really was like physically like I had incredible full body endurance, you know
*  Um, but you know being so specialized I realized how much I had slipped
*  and
*  Yeah, it was it was fun to try and regain. I think it's affected my body composition
*  I think since that training i've become much more lean
*  Uh, I think it was a very healthy thing for me to do like health wise like I always think that
*  You know when you're far away from competition, it's really good to kind of spread out really good
*  So I think that in that way also for your mind. Yeah. Yeah, just like
*  Mm-hmm
*  Yeah
*  Yeah, so something about clearing your
*  I think you've talked about this is like, uh, you're basically taking steps back
*  Before you take steps forward is I forget how you call it the wave. Yeah. Yeah under
*  You know, you have to go under you got to you know, if you want to go above the line
*  You have to spend some time beneath it. And yeah, I was definitely beneath the line for a long time
*  Yeah, uh, but mountain I mean like the interesting thing was as incredible as he is
*  Uh, you know like what a monster and I think if you had a had him
*  Training in boxing, you know for a long time and like from his youth. I think you you know, the guy could be world champion
*  But you know to be so specialized and then to switch you're at a disadvantage
*  Yeah, and and also like I know
*  From just fighting guys in the gym in tri star
*  Some of those guys were way scarier
*  For real like as scary as thor is like there's guys in that tri star gym
*  That don't look like anything
*  That would murder me
*  much worse
*  Much worse. Yeah, but also, you know, that's the difference between being in the gym and under the lights too. I mean
*  Gsp is an example of george st. Pierre's an example somebody that maybe doesn't look
*  Yeah terrifying, but it's a tri star. Yep. He's he trains a tri star, but he's quite he's super nice
*  super
*  Humble but is terrifying when he's fighting right is dominating people you mentioned
*  Death and your canadian
*  Special forces and in general thinking about mortality. Yeah, do you think about your death? Do you?
*  Yeah, do you contemplate the the end that this thing that this ride ends?
*  All the time. Yeah from uh, i've thought about death from a young age. Are you afraid of it?
*  Yeah, I hate it. Yeah, I don't want to die. Yeah, definitely definitely don't want to die
*  Uh, but there's times when I can rid myself of it. Yeah, but for sure. I mean I i'm i'm not uh,
*  I'm not happy that you know death is inevitable
*  And i'm not happy that potentially it's inevitable for all of us
*  um, but uh, it does
*  You know, I like to to fight against it
*  Does it yeah, that's you if you if you could be immortal would you oh, that's my only wish
*  Oh, see, but here's the thing. That's but the point is to have that wish
*  It's uh, it's like the all you can eat buffet at uh, sushi
*  It's that sushi is more delicious if you have a limit do you have a song well, I don't know
*  I mean, I don't think I get sick of stuff. I'm very simple
*  Yeah, I don't think I would get tired of it. I really don't um, I mean if someone would pose it to you
*  Do you want to live forever? You would choose no?
*  Yeah, I would choose no choose no. Well, my answer is probably yes
*  Uh, like
*  No, I would uh, it's more like the snooze button
*  Do you want to do do you want to go to sleep?
*  But it's very difficult in the moment to go to sleep, but if if
*  I'm, uh allowed to live forever
*  I'm going to uh delay
*  all the crazy
*  Like, um all the ambitious goals all the all the things because oh there's always time. That's fine
*  But there is tomorrow then but there is tomorrow
*  But see I think that takes away from the richness of like
*  The richness of the lived experience of just each moment
*  I think the richness of each moment comes from saying like I could die tonight
*  Like that that it tastes delicious because you're going to die. I'm afraid if if you're not
*  I'm afraid all that goes away all that magic goes away if you can live forever
*  I don't know
*  But i'll tell you every time I have a near-death experience or think i'm gonna die I definitely live better afterwards
*  yeah, like uh, it's always been that way, but
*  Yeah, no, um, that's why the stoics, you know, they really preach
*  Contemplating your mortality often it kind of yeah
*  Reminds you it could this whole thing could just end any moment and it makes you really appreciate
*  Yeah, I don't know
*  I don't know
*  Certainly improving the quality of life
*  Is important but um
*  Part of me thinks that immortality
*  Is is not as fun as um, we would like to imagine
*  Do you think that maybe you're uh
*  In what you're building potentially is immortal. Well, that's what I definitely
*  Think about with robots
*  I think if they were to have a human-like experience
*  And be able to interact with humans in a deep meaningful way
*  I think they too have to be mortal in some fundamental way that means mortal like their ride has to end as well
*  Because they won't be able to interact with humans deeply unless that's the case
*  um like to have
*  to have fear
*  to have
*  Love the ability to suffer the ability to miss somebody
*  I think
*  Scarcity is important. You have to be able to
*  Truly lose somebody
*  You have to be to to fear things you have to truly have the risk of destroying yourself
*  And to have a sense of what it means to be a self
*  You have to be able to lose it
*  So if you're immortal you're just going to be I feel like
*  You're going to be like a toaster an intelligent toaster that just serves such a negative perspective on it
*  And then mortality. Yeah, just think well now you just you can get all those things done that you want to do
*  I hope you're right. I hope you're right
*  Yeah, I I mean potentially you could invest even harder because you're like wow
*  I'm actually gonna be able to get all this stuff done. I I think about this a lot
*  I hope you're right, but I
*  I fear that the drive to create I can even do more all of that dissipates
*  Disappears if you have all the time in the world
*  I just know how lazy I am and if I have all the time in the world, i'm just gonna sit there
*  and just like watch
*  The stupidest youtube videos for the rest of all eternity
*  Uh now eternity is a long time eat Doritos
*  Cheetos and just get fatter and fatter. I can get in shape later. There's always time
*  That's like a long period of contemplation
*  Yeah
*  So for the first thousand years, it'll be the Dorito period of the lex life in there
*  You could be like job of the hut for a thousand years. You mentioned aliens very important topic
*  Do you actually think about about this has been an increased interest?
*  It has been increased ufo sightings and encounters all that kind of stuff the us government at least releasing data
*  release releasing videos of
*  pilots
*  Pilot observations and from airplanes of ufos
*  Do you think about this kind of stuff because you met you mentioned in the following context you mentioned like our semen will get our shit together
*  When the aliens eventually come?
*  Yeah, um
*  What do you make of all the sightings is that something you think about?
*  I thought about it a lot when I was younger. Um, and i've just I made my conclusions and
*  Yeah, I I don't think that there's a possibility that there aren't aliens. I would think there would be impossible for there not to be aliens
*  Uh there, you know
*  Um, you know, I feel like this is pretty good real estate. So
*  You know, yeah, you'd probably want it but we already might be well, I well I don't even think might
*  I mean it's probably quite likely that we are to some degree aliens
*  I mean all life is probably to some degree alien. I like the real estate so the resources but we're also kind of interesting
*  Yeah, whatever this ant colony of living organisms that we've created. It's kind of interesting to study
*  I I tend to believe that the alien civilizations that are
*  Going to reach us or have reached us are far more intelligent
*  And
*  Just orders of magnitude more intelligent than us
*  And so it's going to be very difficult both ways actually for us to understand them and for them
*  To dumb themselves down enough to understand us. Yeah, probably so they might even just
*  Miss our existence altogether just because it because I tend to believe I don't know what you think that we're not that special
*  In terms of all the life forms in the universe. There's a lot of cool stuff out there and
*  It has to be
*  Has to be but to us we're special. Yeah. Well, that's all that matters, right? Yeah
*  Even the human species is the most special to us humans that could be much more special species here on earth
*  They were just totally oblivious to like trees
*  On the scale of thousands of years, maybe they're like they're onto something
*  lex, you know, um
*  I think that
*  so much of what makes a person special is what they pass on your kids. But,
*  but I think that you are quite special because you're part of this thing that's
*  potentially giving birth to the next thing.
*  The robots, the robots.
*  I should say the funny thing is while talking to Devin during this podcast,
*  I, I would adore a doorbell ring at the good on stairs and there was a big box
*  box,
*  medicine box with a new legged robot. So, um,
*  the hilarity of you saying that is because that, that,
*  that robot is actually going to likely be the main robot that I showed to the,
*  to the world in the coming months. Cause that has the,
*  that's the highest compute level in that robot. So I've been playing a lot with
*  legged robots, the, um, four legs, like a, like a dog.
*  Um, I like, I like all of robots,
*  but there's something about when a robot has legs, it's able to communicate,
*  it's able to connect with humans in some kind of deep way in the way a dog can
*  just show affection, something about like step, step, step, step. And then,
*  and then the robot realizes you're here and then it steps and then notices you
*  in the way the dog does and raises its head. Um,
*  it makes me feel noticed and heard in the same way I do when a dog notices me,
*  that excitement, that stupid excitement of like, yes, uh,
*  fellow living organism.
*  And what excites me about legged robots is that holy shit is possible to engineer
*  this. It's possible to create that feeling. And I wonder where that can go.
*  There's a lot of negative possible trajectories, uh,
*  but I have a sense that there's positive ones too.
*  You think they'll take us with them?
*  Yeah, I think so because I, I, so there's this fear of robots that they become
*  super intelligent and run away from us humans and basically become so intelligent
*  and then they almost just not giving a damn will destroy us.
*  Uh, but I think in order for, for robots to become intelligence,
*  they have to integrate themselves with society.
*  So they, they, by the very nature of,
*  of how they become intelligent have to bring us along.
*  So it's not that there'll be this separate thing. They have to,
*  like we'll have robots in the home where they'll be interacting with us.
*  You have human kids and you have a bunch of robots. You have robot friends,
*  you have human friends and the robots make your human to human relationships
*  much more meaningful and richer. They bring more love to the world,
*  but they it's integrated.
*  It's not like they'll be developing smarter and smarter, um,
*  as like, um, sentient beings by themselves.
*  I think that's very difficult to do.
*  You have to be doing that together with humans and so we'll come for the ride.
*  There's technical things like we might merge like cyborgs more and more.
*  Well, we already saw our cyborgs, right?
*  With the phone and so on, but more and more.
*  So with Elon and Neuralink deeper integration of robots and AI into,
*  like increasing the bandwidth at which they can communicate. Right.
*  So if we do implants in the brain,
*  I think, um, again, a lot of people are really nervous about this, uh,
*  as am I,
*  but I think there's a lot of trajectories that are positive there and that to
*  music side and also I just don't think it's possible to stop this development.
*  So we should, uh, steer it. Yeah. Yeah.
*  Oh good. Did you, I mean, you must've watched the movie Terminator, right?
*  Yeah, of course. I love Terminator. Yeah. I love Schwarzenegger.
*  My favorite movie of all time. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, that's,
*  that's the big fear, right?
*  Yeah. What's the conclusion with Terminator? Isn't ultimately humanity wins.
*  I think they're at like Terminator eight now. Yeah. You know, I don't know.
*  Uh, yeah. The, so they're in, it's interesting.
*  Actually I was going to bring this up as you were talking about it, but, um,
*  but China and the United States actually don't know where Canada is on this,
*  but they both have agreed that they're not going to put limits on autonomous
*  weapon, uh, system development. So not going to, they're not going to.
*  So because China said we're not going to,
*  and now us officially announced that we're not, we can't.
*  Well you can't. It's like, it's, you never could, right?
*  As soon as it exists and it's better, people will use it.
*  Well, but you, um, there's been a global ban on bio weapons.
*  So you were able to come to an agreement there that we're not going to use
*  biological weapons in war. So it was,
*  is a lot of people are really upset that in the case of AI driven weapons,
*  the world said, Nope, that's okay.
*  And so now you have this potential for greater and greater automation and drones,
*  for example, in picking a bombing locations and so the area at which they attack
*  and so you get some of that stuff that you mentioned that,
*  that drew you to the military is that teamwork between humans,
*  that decision making. So there's strategy,
*  but built into that team is a deep humanity.
*  Like, yeah, even when then there's an enemy,
*  there's lines that you are aware of of what is ethical and what is not,
*  what is just and what is not.
*  And it's so easy for a machine to,
*  uh, to miss all of that,
*  plow through it and do deeply inhumane acts, commit atrocities.
*  That that's something that worries a lot of people.
*  Cause yeah, an AI based war is just, is, is, is terrifying,
*  especially with cyber security, which is becoming more and more of an issue,
*  which is hacking the sort of, uh,
*  people that look a lot like me being the warriors of the future,
*  which is meaning people behind a keyboard versus, uh,
*  versus the traditional warriors.
*  Probably inevitable. Yeah.
*  And terrifying.
*  It is, it is, but I think if you believe that it's possible,
*  it's certainly going to happen. Like at some point it's just when, right?
*  When does it happen?
*  So that, I mean, to me, I'm optimally, uh,
*  ultimately optimistic about the future and to me I'm excited about the world
*  with AI. I'm even excited about, uh,
*  the metaverse and all these kinds of things living more and more in the digital
*  space in the virtual reality. I think,
*  so it's a part of me that grew up in the non internet world, non computer world,
*  you know, it says, Oh, kids these days with the video games, you know,
*  there's part of me that's like that. Um, but I think what's it,
*  when technology is best can bring out the best of humanity.
*  And so I think virtual reality, all of these things over time,
*  we'll figure out how to, how to fix it, to bring out the humanity.
*  So social networks, the, the, the first generation social networks, now Facebook,
*  Twitter and so on, they have so many problems.
*  They're bringing out the worst in people,
*  but I think we're learning from that and I think the next generation of social
*  networks will be better and better and better. And so I'm optimistic,
*  but of course, you know,
*  one reason we may have not seen aliens yet obviously like in a way that's
*  obvious is because once you get clever and smart and have all this cool
*  technology, destroy yourself. And we sure as humans are pretty close to that.
*  Yeah. Yeah. There might be that limit that is hard to get right.
*  I'm hoping we get all our aggression between nations out through arm wrestling
*  competition. Right. Just all of that.
*  Oh my God. Wouldn't that be great if that was, if it was that simple. Yeah.
*  Do you know if there's another over the top type movie to be made? Oh yeah.
*  Yeah. There's always stuff in the works. Um, there's actually a, there's the,
*  there's a tournament called over the top in Australia.
*  That's a couple months away. I think they're doing it all the over top scene,
*  but, uh, there are arm wrestling movies that are being made right now.
*  Actually, I'm, there's a documentary that's filming me for this whole LaVon
*  thing, but, uh, yeah, we're probably due for another big one. Yeah.
*  But you're also just with your YouTube channel, you're doing a lot for the sport.
*  That's really cool to see just being genuine, but just being like, uh,
*  looking not like you're looking today, but just like, yeah, yeah, the beard.
*  Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
*  That's like sleepy, you know,
*  and just putting yourself out there completely as you are.
*  That's a beautiful thing.
*  The best thing about the sport is it brings people together. That's it.
*  Yeah. The community, the folks that got to interact with just so awesome,
*  so excited, so full of kindness.
*  I'm definitely going to find the club here and, uh, and start working on my,
*  uh, on my arm wrestling game. Uh, Devin, this is such a huge honor.
*  You would, uh, spend your valuable time. You come down to Austin,
*  you would, um, hang out with me and, uh,
*  do this conversation. Super cool.
*  As I mentioned, uh, in case people, you know, people I'm sure will tell me,
*  so I hang out with Joe Rogan all the time. He's a friend.
*  I told him that he should talk to Devin. He's going through some stuff currently,
*  you know, uh, but I'm sure that I hope the conversation between you,
*  Devin and Joe happens eventually.
*  He's a, that would be Epic as well. Cause he's a, um,
*  yeah, I sure fighting. He loves fighting. He loves wrestling.
*  He loves strength. And, uh, I think all of those are, um,
*  like so perfectly encapsulated in the sport of arm wrestling.
*  So thank you so much for talking to me. Thanks so much.
*  Thanks for listening to this conversation with Devin Larratt to support this
*  podcast. Please check out our sponsors in the description.
*  And now let me leave you with some words from Miyamoto Musashi.
*  The only reason a warrior is alive is to fight.
*  And the only reason a warrior fights is to win.
*  Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
