---
Date Generated: April 11, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 8948s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence', 'artificial intelligence podcast', 'documentary', 'film', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex podcast', 'mit ai', 'movies', 'oscars', 'refugee crisis', 'skye fitzgerald', 'world hunger', 'yemen']
Video Views: 116572
Video Rating: None
---

# Skye Fitzgerald: Hunger, War, and Human Suffering | Lex Fridman Podcast #278
**Lex Fridman:** [April 20, 2022](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dHTgffkpeYo)
*  we would come up to these rafts and these boats that were in really dire shape,
*  and people would be pushed off, and people would jump off, and people would fall into the water,
*  and some of them couldn't swim. And so we found ourselves in this moment where we had a choice.
*  We could film someone drown in front of us, or we could put our cameras down and pull them out of
*  the water. The following is a conversation with Sky Fitzgerald, a two-time Oscar-nominated
*  documentary filmmaker who made the films Hunger Ward about the war in Yemen, Lifeboat about the
*  search and rescue operations off the coast of Libya, and Fifty Feet from Syria about the war
*  in Syria. This is the Lex Friedman Podcast. To support it, please check out our sponsors in the
*  description. And now, dear friends, here's Sky Fitzgerald. Nearly 811 million people worldwide
*  are hungry today, and 45 million people are on the edge of famine across 43 countries.
*  How do you feel? How do you make sense of that many people suffering from hunger and famine in
*  the world today? I don't know if I can make sense of it, Lex. I mean, I think it's deeply disturbing
*  to me that as a global community, we've allowed this number of people to go hungry when the food
*  to feed them exists and the resources to feed them exists. I think the thing that disturbs me
*  most about those figures is that many of those who are starving today or going hungry today
*  are the net result of war and intentional acts by leaders to starve entire populations. And that's
*  the most deeply disturbing part to me. You know your history, and we all know that deeply embedded
*  in the Geneva Conventions post-World War II, the intent of one of those articles was to ban the
*  use of starvation as a weapon of war because of what Hitler did during World War II. That's been
*  reiterated multiple times over the years in international humanitarian law, including in 2018
*  because of the Saudi blockade over Yemen. And yet to this day, starvation as a weapon of war continues
*  to be used in Ethiopia, obviously in Ukraine right now, and in Yemen with the blockade over the country.
*  That disgusts me that the law is in place, but it won't be enforced by the international bodies
*  and the nation states that make up the international community.
*  So the starvation is a result of human actions, human decisions that's especially
*  painful to make sense of.
*  For me personally, yeah. I think that if you and I sit in here, didn't eat for three days,
*  and had to lay our head on the sidewalk for a couple nights, I think we would take hunger
*  and homelessness a lot more seriously. And I think that's for some reason that's missing
*  at this moment in history tragically. And I think until that we can generate enough empathy
*  that's immediate for all of us to understand what that means to go hungry. I'm not sure we're going
*  to sort of marshal the global community to solve it.
*  I did just that by the way, fasted for three days recently. It's fundamentally different,
*  I think, because the thing that would be terrifying to me is not the fasting, but the
*  hopelessness at the end of the fast. I wouldn't know when the next meal is coming. I always had
*  the freedom to have the meal. The fear, not just your own ability to eat and survive,
*  but your family's. If there's loved ones, that's the other thing I don't have. I'm single.
*  So I feel like the worst suffering is watching somebody you love that you're supposed to be a
*  caretaker of, and you can't take care of them. And if all of that is caused by leaders in
*  as a weapon of war that is especially painful. So how can we help? What are the ways to help?
*  How do we alleviate this suffering? Well, I think on the humanitarian front,
*  we have to be aggressive and attentive and intervene in significant ways. And I think
*  on the political front, we have to hold players accountable for their actions.
*  So the leaders that start the war. So when you say we have to speak up about the decisions and the
*  humans making those decisions that lead to the starvation. For example, let's make it concrete.
*  When I was filming Hunger Ward in Yemen, I met a mother who when she gave birth,
*  the mother weighed 70 pounds. And so her daughter was starved in the womb. When she was born,
*  she was born into a world with no breast milk, very little formula. So she was starved before
*  birth. She was born into a world where she continued to be starved by a mother who herself
*  was starved. I watched that child, her name is Asila, die in front of me. Asila had no chance
*  for all those things we hope for, for a child in this world. She didn't have a chance to grow up.
*  She didn't have a chance to discover love. She didn't have a chance to have a career. She was
*  robbed of all of those things because of the insidious nature of hunger that she was born into.
*  She didn't have to die. She was not starving. Her mother was being starved because of the
*  blockade over the country. Now who instituted that blockade? MBS in Saudi Arabia with the
*  reinforcement and sort of tacit approval of the United States, our own government here.
*  And so there are people who are responsible for the starvation of children and I think we need to
*  hold them accountable. Now that's incredibly difficult to do, but just because it's difficult
*  doesn't mean it ought not to be done. And we'll talk about many cases like these throughout
*  history and going on today. Let's talk about Hunger Ward. Let's dive in. You've been nominated
*  for an Oscar twice. This is one of the times for a documentary. Can you please tell me what Hunger
*  Ward, The Last Hope Between War and Starvation is about? Hunger Ward is a short documentary
*  that really is an attempt to illustrate the effects of the conflict on Yemen,
*  specifically on civilians. And we document it in both the north and the south of the country
*  because it's a bifurcated country. The south is held by the globally recognized government in the
*  south, which up until last week was run by, at least on the surface by President Hadi,
*  holed up in Riyadh. He was essentially removed from office last week by, most people would agree,
*  the Emiratis and the Saudis to put in place a presidential council. So we wanted to show
*  that starvation was happening in very similar fashions, both in the south and the north.
*  And we wanted to do this film because so few people in the west know anything about the
*  conflict in Yemen, nor the US's complicity in it. And so my intent with the project was
*  try to bring it to a larger Western audience as an attempt to intervene and change the political
*  status quo, which allows the use of starvation in Yemen to continue. So US complicity, who are the
*  bad guys? Now the world unfortunately cannot be painted in black and white of good guys and bad
*  guys. But for the purpose of conversation, who is causing suffering in the world in this situation?
*  Who started the war? Why? And then of course, the roots of war go back in history.
*  Let's start at the top. Well, there are bad actors and there are less bad actors.
*  I think that's always the case in war, probably. And everybody loses in war.
*  Yeah, I concur with that statement. In the case of the status quo in Yemen right now,
*  it's a completely asymmetrical war. And so the Saudi coalition, which is made up of primarily
*  Saudi Arabia, the Emiratis, United States, France, Britain, supplying weapons, but it's really driven
*  and catalyzed by Saudi Arabia. And it's asymmetrical to a great extent just because
*  of the incredible firepower by air that the Saudis use continuously to pummel Northern Yemen.
*  When I was there, the sheer volume of airstrikes is hard to describe. And we show the result of
*  only one in the film, really. But it's an asymmetrical war. The de facto authorities of the
*  North, Ansar Allah, also known as the Houthi rebel group, they don't have an air force. They have a
*  drone force, but they don't have an air force. And so from a military standpoint, it's completely
*  asymmetrical. The Saudis really don't commit troops to the ground. They use only proxies
*  to fight on the ground. What is the narrative they use to justify war? So there's a story on every
*  side in war. Some of it is grounded in truth. Some of it is not at all grounded in truth,
*  also known as propaganda. What's the narrative used by the Saudis for this war?
*  The Saudi line is essentially that the Houthis are an illegitimate government,
*  and that it's really a proxy war between Iran, who supports the Houthis nominally,
*  and the rest of the world. That's the Saudi narrative. The reality is something altogether
*  different. While the Houthis do receive support from Iran, this is a war started by and sustained
*  by MBS in Saudi Arabia. Who's MBS? Muhammad bin Salman. And who is he? He is the son of the ruler
*  of Saudi Arabia. What's his power? I'm asking basic dumb questions. He's the de facto ruler.
*  Of the military and- Yes, he seized control of the country several years ago, even though he,
*  on the surface, is not the ruler of Saudi Arabia, he is. He's the crown prince. I'm sorry to interrupt
*  often, but who is he as a man? What's your sense of-
*  Yeah, so I've never met him, and I likely will never meet him, hopefully.
*  But he is, I know a lot about him through his actions, sort of in the MENA region,
*  Middle East and North Africa region. And he is one of three, in my view, as an American sitting here
*  in the US, three people in the world that I think has caused such an incredible volume of
*  misery and suffering and murder on this planet that I think if he weren't around, the world would be
*  a lot better place. And I'm not a violent person by nature, but there are three human beings that I
*  think the world would be better off without. Do you mind, before I ask other questions,
*  mentioning the three? Oh yeah, Assad is one in Syria, and that comes out of an earlier project
*  that I did in Syria and Turkey, and what I saw Assad as a ruler do to his own people,
*  and Putin would be the third. Those three human beings are murderers on a scale
*  beyond imagining. On MBS, are you able to think as a documentary filmmaker, as a human being,
*  as a scholar, as a thinker, with an open mind about a man like that who does evil onto the world,
*  and what that must feel like to be inside the mind of that man? So basically, consider his worldview
*  with most evil people, with all people probably, but with people who do evil onto the world.
*  They think they're doing good. They're the hero of their own story.
*  Right. And so to be able to place yourself, I feel like for me to understand a person, I have to
*  literally, like the way actors kind of have to do, you know, live inside the body of the person
*  they're trying to study. Inhabit the character. Inhabit the person. So are you able to do that,
*  are you able to do that, or because you are also studying the people who suffer as a result,
*  as a consequence of their actions, you just, you put them in a box and you say,
*  I hate the person in that box. I'm going to move on.
*  This goes back to your black and white statement at the beginning, right? It's like,
*  the world as a whole, of course, you know, is every gradation of gray, right? My background is
*  theater. And so I was trained long before I picked up a camera to inhabit other characters.
*  Right. I have two degrees in theater. And so that level of sort of like walking in other people's
*  shoes and trying to understand and empathize with their worldview is fundamental to how I live my
*  life and how I do my work. So in the case of those three that I named, Assad, MBS, and Putin,
*  yeah, I can go there and think through how they came to be who they are, right? From afar.
*  Right. And after I go through that process, I still don't think there's any way that
*  one can justify what they've done. We're going to talk about each of those people.
*  Well, I'm not an expert on any of them. Well, you're a human being, which makes you
*  a partial expert on human nature because nobody's an expert. You're just as good as anyone else.
*  Anybody who actually cares a camera and listens and observe others isn't especially an expert
*  of human nature. Who's willing to take that leap and truly understand somebody of any level,
*  not leaders. I feel like to understand a leader, you have to first understand humans. And to
*  understand humans, you have to see humans that they're worse than their best. And so
*  which is something that you've definitely done. So let's stick on hunger ward. This lens that
*  you've chosen to look at this is through a single, maybe you can speak to that. You've mentioned
*  the starvation as a result of war. What is the documentary? What is the lens you've chosen to
*  give the world a peek at the results, at the suffering that's a result of this war?
*  Yeah. People a lot of times will ask me if they've seen hunger ward.
*  They ask where the hope is. You read the byline earlier, the last hope.
*  What I try to focus on in many of my films, including hunger ward, is in the very difficult
*  context of war as the case is in hunger ward in Yemen. I look for hope and I look for inspiration
*  and I do that through people who are doing incredible things under the most difficult
*  circumstances. So when I set out to do a film about starvation in Yemen, just listen to that
*  statement. Where's the hope there? And yet what I found, what I discovered were human beings that
*  we could tell the story through who are incredible, inspirational human beings doing amazing things
*  every day. One of those is Makiya Majhi, a nurse practitioner in the north of the country at a
*  small rural clinic. And another is Dr. Aida Al-Sadik, who's a pediatrician in the south
*  of the country. And so we chose to tell the story sort of through their experiences as caregivers
*  devoting their lives to try to save this entire cohort, this entire generation of children
*  that has been born into starvation. And that's an incredible difficult task, but equally
*  inspirational to watch these human beings devote every minute of every day to save a child.
*  In my view, nothing is more important than that action.
*  LW – Maybe on that point real quick. So there is suffering at scale, starvation at scale.
*  I mean the numbers, maybe you can mention in Yemen what are the numbers in terms of people
*  and starvation. But from a perspective of a nurse practitioner or a doctor,
*  you're always treating one person in front of you. So how do you make sense of that calculus?
*  Of like there's a huge number of people suffering and then there's just the person in front of you.
*  Is that all we can do as humans is just to help one person at a time? Is that the right way to
*  think and to approach these problems? Or can you actually make sense of the numbers?
*  Speaking just as a human being, I think the scale of suffering is so great in Yemen
*  that I think I'd be overwhelmed if I focused on that scale. You've probably heard that a child
*  dies every 75 seconds in Yemen from hunger. So we've been sitting here how long? 35 minutes or so.
*  That's a good handful of children that have already passed away. So to overcome sort of I think
*  that danger of psychic numbing, which can happen when you think about suffering on such a large
*  scale as a filmmaker, as a human being, I have to focus in on the individuals, on those human
*  beings in front of me. And I think that's exactly what Dr. Al-Saddiq and Makiya do to keep going each
*  day. And one of the amazing things about these two healthcare providers that we showcase in the film
*  is that they treat anyone who shows up. They don't have to have money. They don't have to
*  have any resources. They just have to get to the clinic or the hospital. And it's incredibly moving
*  to see sort of the flexibility of their thinking in terms of how they make that work.
*  Makiya, for example, I saw her in the north of the country. It's an incredibly rural clinic
*  that she works at. So it's like a magnet for all the cases in the north of the country.
*  People come from hundreds of kilometers away sometimes for specialty treatment of
*  pediatric malnutrition. And one time I saw a child come in and it was a male relative
*  that brought this young girl in. And just because of sort of the gender dynamics in Yemen,
*  there had to be a parent or a relative there to stay with the child while they're at the clinic.
*  And it was a male relative. And so what many doctors in that instance would do would just
*  turn them away. And instead what Makiya did is she walked into one of the rooms, talked to one of the
*  other mothers, and convinced them to become the temporary guardian, essentially, of this child
*  until a female relative could arrive. So she's flexible. She finds solutions rather
*  than allowing the problems to deter solutions. One child at a time. Yeah, yeah, one child at a time.
*  You mentioned that you saw a child die in front of you. So when you're filming this as a filmmaker,
*  what's that like psychologically, philosophically, creatively as a filmmaker, as a storyteller?
*  What do you do there as a human and as a filmmaker? What's that whole experience like? Because you get
*  to, like you said, you take it through the whole journey of a starving mother giving birth to a starving child.
*  It's not something I want to film. It's not something that I certainly wanted to happen or seek out.
*  But it happened. And the sad truth is that it happens every week at that hospital. And so
*  when it happened in this instance, I felt an incredible responsibility to do justice to that reality.
*  To acknowledge that a child had just died of starvation-related causes. And to find some way,
*  if the parents wanted us to, to integrate that into this story we'd bring back to a Western audience.
*  And I've filmed many difficult things over the years. And usually I really love filming.
*  And I didn't love filming Hunger Ward. It was not a process that I enjoyed on any way, show, perform, sadly.
*  Because of the content. Because who wants to watch a child die in front of them? I don't.
*  But I did and I had to. And when that happened, I felt an incredible responsibility again to go deep.
*  To go deep with that family. To go deep with that family. And I felt that I had to do that.
*  To go deep with that family. To tell the story of this hospital with every ounce of focus and
*  talent that I could bring to the story. Because people should know that children are dying of
*  starvation right now as we sit here. And that that doesn't have to happen. And it is happening
*  because of political dynamics that we can intervene on. Is there times you wanted to
*  walk away, quit the telling of the story,
*  come back to the United States where you can just appreciate
*  the wonderful comfort you can have just sitting there and having food and
*  freedom to do whatever you want. Those kinds of things. It doesn't have to be in the United
*  States. In a lot of places in the world. Well, that dynamic of sort of like survivor's guilt
*  on some level definitely exists. One of the hardest things from Hunger Ward actually was
*  eating. Because we were in these malnutrition clinics. They're called TFCs, Therapeutic Feeding
*  Centers. Where over a long period of time, children lost the ability to eat normal food.
*  And couldn't digest it. And just were literally starving. And the practitioners were trying to
*  bring them back to a state of thriving. But to leave those clinics. And to go to our camp or
*  go to our hotel. And then to have access to food. Because we could buy food on the streets and in
*  the hotels. It was a very intentional act throughout the course of the shoot to look at a piece of bread.
*  To look at a bowl of rice and think about that child in the TFC. And think about how
*  the privilege of having that bowl of rice that I could eat and digest. So it's certainly every day
*  helped me appreciate the privilege I had. Every bite you take. With every bite. Absolutely.
*  So I wouldn't call it guilt. It wasn't exactly guilt. But it was definitely mindfulness.
*  Meditate on the suffering of people who can't. That's right. Exactly. So that knowledge,
*  it was catalytic in some ways. It sort of moved us forward. Really wanting to shape the most
*  powerful story we could because we were surrounded by so much suffering every day.
*  How did filming that movie change you as a man? As a human being? You've filmed a few difficult
*  documentaries. That one is a heavy one. When you think of the person you were before you filmed it.
*  And now when you wake up every morning and look yourself in the mirror. How is that person
*  different? Every documentary I do changes me in a different way. I am not static in that sense.
*  Preformed. I change with every project because so many of them are difficult and challenging.
*  In order to do them I have to allow myself to change and be changed by them. In the case of
*  Hunger Ward, you may remember the girl Omeyma, who is the 10-year-old girl who we showcase
*  in Auden in the south of the country. We were there when she was admitted to the hospital.
*  When she was admitted, this 10-year-old girl weighed 24 pounds and she could barely stand up.
*  And we started with the permission of the family to start to document her treatment and to see
*  what would happen with this young girl who is so severely malnourished. And we watched her be
*  treated by the nurses and the doctors in Sadaka Hospital. And slowly over the course of a couple
*  weeks we saw her change. We saw her start to gain strength and start to recover. And she also
*  watched the caregivers very carefully. And I watched her watch them. And I will never forget
*  there was a moment where about two and a half weeks I think into her treatment, we walked into
*  a room and I saw her offering a capful of water to another younger child who was also starving.
*  The shot is actually in the film. And so to see Omeyma, this child who is starving,
*  giving sustenance to a younger, more vulnerable child who was also starving, moved me deeply.
*  So I saw her learn from the caregivers around her. And as a human being, as a filmmaker,
*  I was incredibly inspired by Omeyma. That capacity for compassion is there.
*  Even within a 10-year-old girl who is starving. And so you asked what changed me. That's one
*  moment. Rather than being crushed by such heavy content, it was actually the opposite where I came
*  away inspired by a 10-year-old girl. And I didn't anticipate that. I didn't think that's what this
*  content would do. But it's what it did. It reinforced for me this incredible capacity we all have as
*  human beings to do good. To even within the most difficult of circumstances to choose who we become
*  and what we do. And a 10-year-old girl taught me that or reinforced that for me.
*  Were you able to feel the culture of the people? So the language barrier,
*  were you able to break through the language barrier, the culture barrier, to understand the people?
*  Even suffering has a language of sorts, depending on where you are. The way people joke about things,
*  the way they cry, the way... This is an interesting thing I actually want to ask you. Sorry,
*  I'm asking a million questions. I find that the people... I've been talking to people in Ukraine
*  and Russia, but in general, I've gotten a chance to talk to people who've been through trauma in
*  their life. And there's a humor they have about trauma and hard times. It depends on the culture,
*  of course. Certainly Russian-speaking folk. I mean, the more suffering you've experienced,
*  for some reason, the more they joke about it. It's almost like they're able to see something
*  deep about humanity now that they have suffered, and they're able to laugh at the absurdity,
*  the injustice of it all. And you could also say it's a way for them to deal with it. But that
*  humor has a profound understanding within it about what it means to be human. To really
*  understand it, you have to know the language. I guess I'm asking, were you able to really feel
*  the humans on the other side of the language? I'd like to think so. As you noted, there are
*  universals in life that transcend language. I mean, suffering is suffering. Love is love.
*  Compassion doesn't take place only through language. It's through actions. And so,
*  was there a language barrier? Absolutely. Did we try to bridge that through other means and
*  universal emotions and experiences? Absolutely. That's one of the things I always think about
*  when I'm filming is how do we distill down to universals through imagery, through the vocabulary
*  of cinema? Because I believe so deeply that that vocabulary should be visual.
*  What's the most powerful way to express the universal? Is it visual or is it language?
*  Words? I think it's visual. And we're talking about the human face or human face, human body,
*  everything? Through actions as well. Actions, the dynamic. I'm thinking about a woman named Salha
*  in the film who isn't named, but you see her multiple times throughout the film. And she's
*  basically the matron of the ward in this house. And she's the gatekeeper for the ward. So no one
*  enters that ward without her permission. She's literally the gatekeeper at the door. So no one
*  comes in unless Salha allows them to come in. But then she also is the first point of contact
*  for compassion in the ward. So when mothers and families are admitted, she forms relationships
*  between the moms and the grandmothers, for example, who are admitted and who are living
*  there on the ward. And she does it through hugging. She does it through bringing them food.
*  And she forms these really rather quickly deep relationships of compassion with the families.
*  And so it's amazing to watch. And no language is needed to bear witness to this. And she also
*  suffers because of that. And so near the end of the film, if you recall, when another child dies
*  and the mother is wailing, we actually cut away to Salha, who's in the hallway, who walks into
*  another room and begins sobbing. She's not a family member, but she has a deep relationship
*  with that family that she forged as soon as they stepped into the ward. So that's universal,
*  to see a woman weep because a child has died, even if they're not related to that. That's a universal
*  emotional experience we can all relate to. So that's what I mean by visual vocabulary.
*  And it's especially powerful because she has seen much of this kind of suffering and she's still,
*  maybe she has built up some callous to be able to work day to day, but it's still,
*  there's still an ocean underneath the ice. She's kept her heart open despite all the pain that she
*  sees and feels every day. Somehow she's a human being who's able to do that, which is a very
*  difficult thing to do, right? She still allows herself to be vulnerable. And maybe that's why
*  she can do what she does. What lessons do you draw from other famines in history? So for me,
*  personally, one that's touched my family and one of the great famines in history is in Ukraine,
*  Holodomor in the 30s. 32, 33, right? 32, 33 with Stalin. Maybe you could speak to the universals
*  of the suffering here. What lessons do you draw from those other famines, if you've looked at them,
*  or in general about famine that are manufactured by the decisions of, let's say, authoritarian leaders?
*  Famine doesn't have to exist, or the bulk of famines on this planet, I believe, don't have
*  to exist. And most of them, or at least a good number of them, are manufactured by the leaders
*  that choose to use famine as a weapon. And Ukraine is one of the obvious examples right now,
*  with siege tactics that are happening in different parts of the country.
*  And we built international humanitarian law for a reason, right? Many years ago. And it continues
*  to be written to this day. And it's there to prevent what's happening in Ukraine right now.
*  It's there to prevent what's been happening in Yemen for seven years. And yet, there hasn't been
*  any teeth behind it. And that's what disturbs me, is that we can see how these famines are being used
*  as weapons in war. And yet, we aren't using the levers of power that exist
*  in order to call out in important and powerful ways those who are causing them, and to make sure
*  that we hold them accountable on the global stage. Now, to some extent, that seems to be happening
*  in Ukraine in a way that hasn't happened for a long time. And that gives me hope, right? And yet,
*  I don't believe we've done enough. And I think the international community needs to do far more
*  than we are, both in Yemen, in Ethiopia, and in Ukraine right now. There are certain kinds of
*  things that captivate the global attention. And it seems like starvation is not always one of them.
*  For some reason, murder and destruction gets people's attention more. The death, of course,
*  is easy to enumerate. But it's the suffering that's the problem.
*  When we went to film Hunger Ward, that was one of the creative questions that I was really
*  concerned about. Because starvation, it's not a quick action. It's a long, slow, insidious
*  process, just like hunger. And yet, when you're hungry, it takes you over. It becomes the most
*  important thing. It's just absolutely fundamental to life. It's like drawing breath. And so,
*  before I filmed Hunger Ward, I struggled to answer how we could creatively approach that. Because
*  someone sitting in a clinic, starving or being treated for starvation, that's a pretty static
*  scene. And what we found was that because of the volume of cases and because of the nature of
*  how quickly people were coming and going, it was more dynamic than we anticipated.
*  And there's something also about starvation. You get tired. It's almost like it's a quiet suffering.
*  Yeah. By the way, there's something about when I think about dark times, you'll hear me chuckle,
*  for example. I don't know what that is. It's almost like you have to laugh at, you can't help
*  but laugh at the injustice and the cruelty in the world somehow that helps your mind deal with it.
*  I mean, I see this all the time. When you're struggling, you can't feed your family,
*  you lost your home. The last thing you have is jokes about humor. It's like,
*  the fucking man fucked me over again. And there's jokes all around that. And then you laugh and you
*  drink vodka and you play music. I don't know what that is. I don't know what that is.
*  Gallows humor, right? It's a way of, I think, simultaneously acknowledging and allowing
*  yourself to move forward, right? Beyond the pain and the suffering.
*  So you mentioned Ukraine and you mentioned Putin. What are your thoughts about the humanitarian
*  crisis and generally the suffering that's resulting from the war in Ukraine?
*  Well, first off, I think the conflict is just going to exacerbate
*  sort of the global challenge we have with displacement. The last entire trilogy I did
*  was about displacement to a great extent due to war. And this is a huge displacement of human
*  beings regardless of the cause. And that is going to sort of have a ripple effect across the globe
*  for many, many years to come, regardless of even if the conflict ended today.
*  So there's that. That's going to set up a whole other strain on sort of the global
*  resources that come into play to deal with refugees. You know, there were 79 million
*  displaced people on this globe prior to the Ukrainian conflict, right? You probably know
*  the numbers better than I do in terms of what the current estimates are for displacement from
*  Ukraine. So what are we up to now? 73, 74 million individuals on this planet now who
*  are displaced. That's a significant bump. I wish that the levers of power were used differently
*  in situations like Ukraine and Syria, for example. So what are the levers of power?
*  Well, military might. Let's take that for one. Right? So I have always felt after working in
*  Syria and Turkey that we completely missed our opportunity as a player on the global stage with
*  military capability to prevent the killing of hundreds of thousands of civilians in Syria.
*  We had the ability and we didn't leverage that ability. You know, the fact that I talked with
*  so many Syrians during the course of doing that project, who told me their stories of
*  living in their house, right? And having a Syrian helicopter fly over their house
*  and drop a 55-gallon drum full of explosives and shrapnel in their neighborhood over and over
*  and over again. Not focused on any military targets, only meant to kill and sow fear.
*  And early in the conflict, we could have stopped that. Before Russia got involved,
*  we could have intervened and created a no-fly zone. We, the United States, or coalition that
*  we were a part of. Yeah. And we didn't do it. And we could have. And I think that's an example where
*  we have the military capability to actually do good in a situation like that. And we don't usually
*  use it for those purposes. And I think that's what a military ought to be used for beyond just
*  defending our borders, is to save others with the privilege that that power affords. What do you
*  think about the power of the military versus the power of sanctions versus the power of conversation?
*  They're all different tools, right? To be used at different moments. But if words fail, if sanctions
*  fail, I think there are moments in history where power is justified. And I think Syria was one of
*  them. I think when barrel bombs were dropping on civilian neighborhoods for months and months and
*  months with no intent to do anything other than kill Syrian civilians, that's an instance,
*  I think, where might is justified to shoot those helicopters out of the sky.
*  Here's the difficult thing. We talked about Yemen. Where's the line between good and evil
*  for US intervention in different countries and conflicts in the world? It's easy to look back
*  10, 20, 30 years to know what was and wasn't a quote unquote just war. In the moment, how do we know?
*  I think it's incredibly difficult to answer that. And I think that's why leaders make the wrong
*  choices so often, is they second guess themselves. I think you take all the data at your fingertips,
*  all the intelligence that you have, and you look at it all very carefully and you make a decision.
*  There are some instances though where it's very clear what's happening,
*  and leaders still don't act. In Yemen right now, for example, it's very clear what's happening.
*  Children are being starved because of a blockade. All the US would have to do is ensure that blockade,
*  now there's a two month ceasefire in place now, but remains lifted beyond the ceasefire and children
*  will stop starving. That's pretty simple. You can trace it's a direct connection.
*  We haven't had the moral wherewithal to make that decision because we're too
*  interested in maintaining positive ties with Saudi Arabia where oil flows from and so much influence
*  because Saudi Arabia has so much influence throughout the MENA region.
*  We want to keep that relationship tight despite the moral wounds that come from that.
*  About half the world is under authoritarian regimes. Everybody operates under narratives,
*  and there's a narrative in the United States that freedom is good, democracy is good. I
*  have fallen victim to this narrative. I believe in it. I'm saying this jokingly, but not really.
*  Because who knows the truth of anything in this world? I eat meat, factory farm meat,
*  and I seem to not be intellectually and philosophically tortured by this, and I should
*  be. There's a lot of suffering there. What do we do to lessen the suffering of the people
*  under authoritarian regimes? Again, the same question, military conflict,
*  diplomacy, sanctions, all those kinds of things. Does that lessen suffering or increase the
*  suffering from what you see in Yemen? Is it something that has to be healed across generations
*  or can be healed on a scale of months and years? I'm just a guy with camera.
*  But as a guy with camera, I've seen a lot of things in a lot of places,
*  and I've seen the effects these decisions made by authoritarian leaders have on their own citizens.
*  And that's what drives my thinking on this, and that's what drives and motivates me each day
*  to raise the red flag through my films and say, listen, Biden, you campaigned for precedent,
*  in part on a platform that said that we would regain our prominence on the moral stage of the
*  world and that we would prioritize a moral paradigm over relationships with authoritarian
*  regimes, Saudi Arabia being one. And yet, when the CIA report came out that clearly articulated
*  in detail that MBS was responsible for Khashoggi's murder and for cutting his body into pieces and
*  probably burning it in the backyard of the embassy, what did Biden do? He didn't really
*  make a pariah out of MBS like he said he was going to. What if he'd done something else and
*  actually done what he said he was going to do, which was make him get, what if he would
*  remove the ability for MBS to fly to the United States, for example? Now that's a sanction.
*  That's a sanction that's individual and concrete and would be hugely embarrassing for MBS.
*  That would have been Biden saying, this is unacceptable behavior. This is something which,
*  because you executed such a horrendous act on someone living in the United States,
*  right? We are not going to give you a stage here at least, right? Within the borders of our country.
*  Those are the things that leaders can do that I don't think they do often enough. And certainly
*  our leader right now isn't doing it in the way I wish he were. He certainly has taken a different
*  stand on Ukraine and been very vocal, but there's so many instances we could talk about where I feel
*  like the political gamemanship often falls into maintaining relationships like with MBS and
*  Saudi Arabia rather than doing the right thing. Rather than as a nation, a leader of a nation
*  saying, this is unacceptable. We have a higher standard than this. Because I think when leaders
*  do that, it becomes aspirational, right? It becomes aspirational for other leaders
*  in the progressive world at least. And also it rings the alarm bells for other authoritarian
*  leaders and says, you know what? There are lines, right? There are things that can't be done or
*  there will be significant consequences. Like you will not be able to fly into our space anymore.
*  And sanctions I think need to be concrete and individual to some in addition to the larger
*  scope. But when they're concrete and individual, I think often they're felt in a different way.
*  You mean felt obviously by the individuals and so the ripple effects of that might have
*  the power to steer the direction of nations.
*  Because of the nature of authoritarian regimes, right?
*  Individuals have so much power.
*  Exactly. Right. So if Putin is put on trial in The Hague at some point, or at least there's
*  the threat of that, right? Now that's likely never to happen, of course, because someone has
*  to be in custody to go on trial, right? And he's never going to allow that to happen. But just
*  knowing that danger exists is going to change his travel plans in the future, right? MBS not being
*  able to fly to the US, he's going to feel that and be embarrassed by that. So I think they have a
*  special meaning and consequence in authoritarian regimes because of that. You said you're just a
*  guy with a camera. I would say you're a brilliant guy with a camera. I'm also a kind of guy with
*  a camera. You guys have a couple of cameras. A couple of mics too. You got a couple of mics,
*  a couple of cameras, a robot over here. When you can't beat them with quality,
*  you bring the quantity. That's right. So to me, that's also an interest, partially because I also
*  speak Russian and a bit Ukrainian. I want to study that part of the world. I want to talk to a lot of
*  people. I want to talk to the leaders. I want to talk to regular people. To be honest, and I'd love
*  to get your comments on this, the regular quote unquote people are way more fascinating to me.
*  As a filmmaker, how do you figure out how to tell this story? I'm sure a guy with a camera, you're
*  looking at war in Ukraine, but also what's going on in Yemen and Syria and other places in the
*  world. I mentioned North Korea. That's a super interesting one. Hard to bring cameras along.
*  China, like in Canada, the truckers, there's all kinds of fascinating things happening in the world.
*  So you as a scholar of human suffering and human flourishing, how do you choose how to tell the
*  story? How do I choose a story? How do I choose how to tell the story? Both the story and how,
*  I assume those are coupled. So how do you choose which story to tell?
*  How do you choose how to tell that story? Well, in terms of how to choose which story,
*  it's a bit of a mystery potion for me, frankly. I go off and not an instinct, but there's also a
*  highly intentional piece of it for me as well. The intentional piece is, I guess I'd call it
*  the do I care threshold or the so what threshold. You personally, something in your heart just kind
*  of gets excited or hurts or just feels something. One of the things that disturbs me about American
*  culture, Lex, is that we seem to be a people that's fascinated by reality television, for example.
*  Look at how many of us here in America watch reality television. That deeply disturbs me. Not
*  that I've never watched an episode. I've shot a whole season of it once to make a living. So
*  it's like I know it, but I feel like the things we should be paying attention to are the things,
*  personally, are the things I choose to film. As a human being, as a dad,
*  as a filmmaker, I think we should be paying attention to the fact that children are being
*  starved in Yemen. I think we should be paying attention to the fact that Ukrainians are being
*  displaced by the millions. So there's this so what threshold that I use. I feel like it has to be a
*  topic that if we don't cover and we don't put out in the world in the largest possible way,
*  in the hope of intervening, in the hope of marshaling maximum resources and attention
*  to solving the problem, that's what I'm dedicated to as a filmmaker. Because I didn't pick up a
*  camera initially to film puppy dogs, to make people smile. I believe the camera is a tool
*  for change. I believe the camera is a powerful tool that we can use to raise awareness and
*  marshal resources and help people understand the impact that these geopolitical decisions have
*  on real people's lives. That's the intent I create each film with. Now, how I choose each story,
*  that's the magic potion piece of it. Often one flows rather organically into another, frankly.
*  Like you said, you go with instinct a little bit.
*  To some extent, but oftentimes I choose the next project based on relationships I've developed in
*  the last film. One often flows into another through relationships I develop and then a colleague will
*  share a detail about something that's happening in a certain place and I'll go,
*  really, I didn't know that. Usually it's before it's hit the world stage in a big way. So I start to
*  do due diligence and often that it reveals it to be a much bigger and more pressing
*  topic that I want to learn more about. Before I talk to you about Syria and
*  Lifeboat, you mentioned a camera is the best weapon. Maybe just-
*  Well, it can't take out a tank, but it's a good weapon.
*  Second, top three. I love the humor throughout this. I really appreciate it. We were talking
*  about such dark topics. It resets the mind in a way that allows me to think. So thank you.
*  As a filmmaker, I almost want to talk about the technical details.
*  How do you choose to shoot stuff? Again, so maybe you can explain to me.
*  I work with incredible folks that care about lenses and equipment and so on. I tend to be somebody
*  that just wants to go as a gorilla shooting. Not plan too much, just go with gritty. I'm trying to
*  come up with words that sound positive. Do a positive spin on what I try to do. But gritty,
*  don't over plan, use- We had a big discussion if you see this light. It's on a stand
*  that's a very ghetto stand. You need a sandbag on that, man. Exactly. No sandbag and the stand is
*  actually bending under the weight of that thing. It could fall on us. It could fall. It probably
*  won't reach us, but it could fall. But the danger, live under that danger, embrace that danger.
*  Love it because that thing is easier to transport than a heavier one. Sandbag, that's extra weight.
*  So if you keep- People tell me there's the right way to do stuff. Here's these giant cases with
*  all the kinds of padding for transporting stuff. I transport most of the equipment in a garbage bag.
*  That's just a preference because that's somehow, that chaos allows me to ignore all the stupidity
*  of loving the equipment and focusing on the story. That said, I've never shot anything
*  like worthwhile. There is power to the visual. Definitely. And so finding a certain angle,
*  a certain light, whether it's natural light or additional artificial lighting, just capturing
*  a tear, capturing when the person forgets themselves for a moment and looks out into
*  the distance, missing somebody, thinking about somebody. All of those moments you can capture,
*  a lens, a camera, I can do magic with that. I don't even know the question I'm asking you, but how
*  do, both technical and philosophical, how do you capture the visual power that you're after?
*  Yeah. So many of my films, I think, are built on the premise of access,
*  right? Built on this notion that the biggest hurdle to the story is getting there,
*  being there in the room or being there on the boat while a crisis is unfolding. And that access
*  typically is really nuanced and difficult to gain. And then trust flows from that, right? Because
*  usually it takes a long time to gain that access. Because that access is so hard fought,
*  it necessarily informs how we film, right? To be in a room at Sadaka Hospital in Southern Yemen,
*  I can't have five people in that room, right? I can't have a boom mic over a scene.
*  Yeah. I want, creatively, the opposite of that as well. So it's not just a logistical question,
*  it's also a creative question. To capture intimate moments where families are dealing with suffering
*  children and dying children and caretaking is active and ongoing all the time, you don't want
*  to interrupt that moment. And so that informs how I do things. So we go fleet and nimble and small.
*  Those are all really good words for...
*  So it's logistical on the one hand, but it's also a creative choice, right? So when we filmed Hunger
*  Ward, two people were filming the entire film, right? Me and my director of photography.
*  The two people in the room?
*  Two people in the room. Yeah. That's it. The whole film, right? We had a field producer as well,
*  and he's part of the country. But in terms of camera, it's just two people. And we're doing
*  everything and we have lenses that are long enough that we don't have to move to capture
*  the film. So we can tuck into a corner sometimes, right?
*  So just what's long mean? That means they're standing farther away and they can...
*  Zoom lens. It's not a prime lens. So it's not a fixed focal length, right? Because a fixed focal
*  length, you have to move a lot more in order to capture action. With a zoom lens, maybe a 105 at
*  the long end, I can tuck into a corner and just film from 15 feet away instead of having to get
*  right up on someone, right? So you less like to interrupt the scene and you can become the
*  fly on the wall sometimes. So I'm very intentional about that piece of it so that we can capture
*  those vulnerable moments and not interrupt them. That's really fascinating too, because the access
*  I don't often think about this, but that's probably true for me as well.
*  Part of the storytelling is to be in the room. And that's the hard part. For me, most of my films,
*  that's the hardest part. Actually, as hard as Hunger Ward and Lifeboat were to film and 50
*  Feet from Syria, the getting there piece of it for the last two was much harder. Yeah. And it's also
*  it's a creative act. I don't know if it is for you, but it's the kind of people you talk to.
*  It's like how you live your life. The kind of people I talk to right now, they steer the
*  direction of my life and steer the direction of things I'll film. So it's not just like you're
*  trying to get access. It's everything. It builds and builds and builds and builds. It builds on itself.
*  Yeah. I mean, part of the thing, even saying, talking about some of these leaders and
*  conversations with them, it's almost like steering your life into the direction of the difficult,
*  of taking the leap. And if you're a good human being, and a lot of people know who you are as
*  a human, like not as a name, but as really who you are, that like putting that attention out there,
*  it's somehow the world opens doors where the access becomes the access that was once seemed
*  impossible becomes possible. And then all of that is a creative journey to be in the room. I think
*  probably is, I mean, it's true even for fiction films, probably is like
*  everything that led to that, like to be in the room, the journey to be in the room and to shoot
*  the scene is maybe more important than the scene itself. And like really focus on the creative act
*  of that. Yeah, that's really fascinating. And especially, I mean, with a documentary, you get
*  one take. Yeah, you can't say, hey, reset, right? Yeah, yeah, exactly. God, that is so interesting
*  as you were in some of the most difficult parts of the world in the room with some of the most
*  difficult stories to be told. And yet I think that's why I keep doing these stories, right?
*  Because once you have that lived experience for me,
*  it's moving. It moves me to bear witness to these inspiring people under difficult circumstances.
*  I can't come back to the US afterwards and walk down the grocery aisle where there's
*  50 different choices for canned peas, right? And not sort of feel that lived tension, right? That
*  lived tension of the privilege that I have here in the US. And then I have a choice about what to do
*  with that privilege, right? And the last thing I want to do is start, you know, doing stories about
*  dandelions, right? There's far more important things to do on this very limited time that I
*  have on the planet. And, you know, I think that's catalytic for me. Like, I feel that mortality
*  each day. And my goal is to tell as many of these stories before I'm gone.
*  Could you speak to the getting access? Is this just, you know, is there interesting stories of how
*  a weird or funny or profound ways that led you to get access to a room?
*  Each one is a different adventure. And it's just an adventure. Everyone's an adventure. Yeah.
*  Probably one of the easiest ones I ever had in the recent past was for 50 feet from Syria, where
*  you know, I literally broke my hand in a bicycle race. And after many months of trying to get
*  an appointment with an orthopedic hand surgeon, you know, a specialist, I finally did and he was
*  Syrian American. And the Syrian conflict had just begun and we started talking about it. And after,
*  you know, he looked at my hand in the first five minutes, he's like, yeah, you need surgery, right?
*  But then somehow we started talking about Syria. And like five minutes in, he just stood up and
*  like put the privacy curtain around us, supposed to be a 15 minute appointment or so. And we talked
*  for an hour. Right? So, you know, those moments of sort of mysterious confluence happen. Right? And
*  I think you have to be open to them when they do happen. Because I'm a storyteller, I'm always
*  looking as well. Right? So because he then contacted me later and said, Sky, I am going back to the
*  Syrian border to volunteer as a surgeon. Do you want to come with me? That was an easy one. That's
*  probably the easiest one I could give you. But it came out of this interesting moment, very personal
*  moment, right? Lifeboat and Hunger Ward were completely different. And I had to really work
*  hard to gain access to those stories. So you intentionally thought like what, I want to get
*  access to the story. And then what are the different ideas? And they often might involve
*  a doctor or a dentist or just being maybe intentionally and aggressively open
*  to experiences that lead you into the room. So it's funny you mentioned the doctor, because
*  I have similar experiences now. I've just gotten access to all kinds of fascinating people
*  in the same way. They're all around us. They're all around us. You just have to look. Right? It's
*  like there's fascinating people everywhere who are doing incredible things. But we have to be open
*  and keep our eyes open and realize that there are amazing human beings everywhere. Yeah. There's
*  networks that connect people just through life. You meet people, you share a beer or a drink or
*  just you fall in love or you share trauma together. You go through a hard time together. And those
*  little sticky things connects us humans. And if you just keep yourself open and embrace the
*  curiosity and then also the persistence, I suppose. How long have you chased access?
*  Does it take days, weeks, months, years? I'm not the most talented filmmaker in the world.
*  I'm not the smartest guy in the world. I think if there's qualities that have served me well
*  in my career, it's persistence and tenacity. I've always been a slow burn human being.
*  I would never hit a home run, but I hit a first, a single to first, and then I'd hit another single
*  to first. I ran a marathon when I was 18 and I think that is illustrative of how my career has
*  been. I just keep going. And I believe in this notion of incremental evolution that with each
*  project, I try to learn from it and take away lessons learned and improve my craft and improve
*  how I leverage that craft and improve how I tell the story from a narrative standpoint each time
*  so that on the next project, it's a little bit better. And that's the arc of my career is
*  learning, learning, evolving, evolving so that I can make a little better film the next time.
*  How do you gain people's trust? For example, there's a line between journalists and documentary
*  filmmakers. Nobody really trusts journalists. Exactly. But a documentary filmmaker,
*  of course, I'm joking, half joking. I don't know which percentage joking, but some truth.
*  But a documentary filmmaker is a kind of storyteller, an artist. And somehow that's
*  more trustworthy because you're on the same side in some way. I don't know. Maybe. Maybe. Is there
*  something to be said in how you gain the trust of people to gain access? Are you just trying to be
*  a good human being? Is there something to be said there? Well, so I do draw a distinction between
*  journalism and filmmaking because I think you're right. They're different. And there are some
*  filmmakers who do hue to sort of the journalistic tenants of who, what, where, when, why, fair and
*  balanced on both sides, right? Make sure everyone has a voice. I don't. If you say fair and balanced,
*  you're rarely either fair or balanced. I've seen that with journalists. Journalists often,
*  unfortunately, in my perspective, sorry to interrupt you rudely and go on a rant,
*  but they seem to have an agenda as opposed to seeking to truly tell a story or to truly understand,
*  especially when they're talking to people
*  who have some degree of evil in them. Well, we all have an agenda, right? I think in anything we do,
*  whether it's like to seek truth or some larger principle, I always have an agenda. I chose to
*  work with civilians and caretakers in Yemen on Hunger Ward rather than to go interview MBS,
*  right? That's what I'm interested in is bringing that to the world, right? But in terms of building
*  relationships and trust, it's really, I think about transparency as much as anything else
*  and going in in a collaborative sense. So I don't think of the people that I film with as subjects,
*  for example. I think of them as collaborators. So it's a different mindset that I go into projects
*  with. That's beautiful. And it's based on relationships, right? You have to build
*  relationships with other human beings however you can. And that takes time and it takes listening
*  and it's active. So I've talked about the notion of consent before, which is so important in
*  nonfiction film. And I hew to this idea that you don't just slide a piece of paper in front of
*  someone, have a lease form and have them sign it, right? And then you're done. That's not the
*  nature of true consent in my mind. You have to work on a foundation of active consent
*  every single day that you're working with someone. And that's based on relationship,
*  right? And it's based on dialogue. So it's trust that I'm always aiming for. It's the building of
*  relationships which I'm always aiming for, which is why yesterday I got a bunch of photos from Dr.
*  Al-Saddiq in the south of Yemen and she sends me photos all the time of the children that she's
*  currently treating because we have an active relationship that continues on and probably will
*  for many years to come. So it's going to continue and that's the only way that I can do these kinds
*  of films. Let me ask you about silly little details of filming before we go to the big
*  picture stories. Cameras, lenses, how much do those matter? You mentioned director of photography.
*  What's your... How much do you love the feel, the smell of equipment that does the visual filming?
*  There's some people, they're just like, they love lenses. How much do you love that versus how much
*  do you focus on the story or access and all this kind of stuff? I'm not a tech geek, but because
*  during the bulk of my career, I've worked as a director of photography myself for other people
*  in order to pay the bills over the years. I know the technical side of it because I've had to know
*  it and I've had to train myself and learn it. So I see them as necessary tools and again, because I
*  believe film and cinema is and should be visually driven and not verbally driven. I want the best
*  tools possible within my means and within the logistical ability of the project because we have
*  to go so small. I can't afford nor can I bring a huge $100,000 lens. So if I gave you a trillion
*  dollars. A trillion dollars? Yeah. Wow. Unlimited. There's still huge constraints that have nothing
*  to do with money like you just said. So what cameras would you use? You know what I'd do with
*  the trillion dollars? I could do a lot with the trillion dollars. You're only allowed to fund
*  the film and no corrupt stuff where you use the film to actually help children. No, you're not
*  allowed to do any of that. What I would do with the trillion is I wouldn't invest in it. Well,
*  I guess I would invest in it. I would increase capacity to do more films. I would buy basically
*  the perfect little mini equipment set, right? But then I would train three teams maybe to do
*  the same thing that I've been doing so we could multiply and scale up. More and more stories.
*  Yeah. That's what I would do with the money. But the actual setup? Would remain small and nimble.
*  Yeah. And what about lighting? Do you usually use natural light? Do you ever do? I mean,
*  sorry for the technical questions here, but highlighting the drama of the human face.
*  That's the visual. That's art. To reveal reality at its deepest is art. And do you use
*  lighting? Lighting is such a big part of that. Do you ever do artificial lighting? Do you try to
*  do natural always? You know the best lighting instrument in the world? Is the sun. At the
*  right moment of the day. And so I predominantly use natural light at certain moments and just
*  shape natural light during the course of these small human rights talks. That's not to say we
*  don't bring instruments sometimes, but when we do, they're very small and again compact.
*  So for example, I have this small little tube kit that's just three instruments, right? That
*  you can charge with USB. Because electricity is often a major issue where we go. So there's just
*  three little tube lights with magnetic backs that if we find in a situation where we can't get enough
*  exposure for a hallway or something and we have the time to throw it up, we'll throw it up if
*  people are walking, if collaborators are walking down that hallway a lot, for example, at night,
*  just so we can see them, right? So it's instances like that. Or if we do do an interview, which
*  we don't do very often, but if we do, just so we have a key light on the face, right? And always
*  bring a reflector or two, just to shape natural light as well in ways. But it's about shaping
*  rather than producing light for us. Got it. As we sit surrounded by black curtains in complete
*  natural light. So just so you know, this room is like a violation of the basic principles of
*  using the sun. So behind the large curtains are giant windows. So this whole-
*  Should I rip them open?
*  Exactly. How much of the work is done in the edit? That's another question I'm curious about.
*  And how much do you sort of anticipate that? Like when you're actually shooting,
*  are you thinking of the final story as it appears on screen? Or are you just collecting,
*  as a human, collecting little bits of story here and there, and in the edit is where most
*  of the storytelling happens.
*  I've developed this sort of mental paradigm for myself over the years that speaks to that.
*  And I call it the three creations, right? And so when I'm doing a film, the first creation
*  for me is my preconception or visualization of what the film is going to be before I shoot it.
*  So I have this entire vision of what a film is going to be. And sometimes it can be pretty
*  specific. I'll think through the scenes if I know the locations and everything. And I'll have this
*  idea of what I'm going to create. And then I'm there filming. And always, without fail,
*  reality is something altogether different than what I thought it would be.
*  But it's still good to have the original idea.
*  Yeah, but if I tried to hold to that original vision, and to create a film out of that idea,
*  they'd be crap. So I have to adapt. I have to evolve my approach and then embrace what
*  is actually occurring with the people who are actually doing it, and then re-envision.
*  So that re-envision is very active during the entire filming process. And so that's the second
*  creation. That's the rethinking and re-visualizing based on what we're actually experiencing and
*  seeing what this film is going to be. And then I finish filming, and we bring the hard drives back
*  and we plug in the hard drives in the edit bay. And oftentimes, because it's two of us filming
*  most of the time, I haven't seen all the footage. Because in the field, it's all about just filming,
*  and then just transferring the footage and getting it on safely cloned to multiple drives.
*  I don't have a chance to review everything. I can't do rushes like you do on a large feature.
*  Because I'm filming half of it, I know what I filmed, but I haven't seen everything the
*  director of photography has filmed. So the next stage for me is reviewing every single frame
*  of what's been filmed. And that's where discovery happens the third time, or second time rather,
*  is, wow, now I thought we'd filmed this, but actually there's this over here. And then I have
*  to open up this second vision and transform it into a third vision for the film based on what's
*  actually on the hard drive. So is this like a daily process?
*  So what I do, my process is that if it's a really difficult project, I'll take a break before I go
*  through this, just for healing and some space away and fresh eyes. And usually that's about a month.
*  And then once I re-engage, I re-engage whole hog, I re-engage fully, and I review every single frame.
*  And as I do that, I create a spreadsheet. And for Hunger War, that spreadsheet was, I don't know,
*  1500 lines long or something, where it's basically log notes. And I watch every scene and I take notes
*  and I know really what we have. And once I've gone through that process that takes about a month
*  and I really know what we came back with, I create an outline for the film from that. And that's the
*  third visioning, right? That's usually completely different than my original vision for the film,
*  to some extent, right? But I have to stay open to that entire process, or I'd be trying to create
*  something that I can't really create. So I think those are the three creations for me.
*  That's so cool to know what we have, just to lay it all out and to load it into your mind.
*  Because this is the capture of reality we have. It's a very kind of scientific process too,
*  because in science you collect a bunch of data about a phenomena. And now you have to analyze
*  that data. But now your phenomena is long gone. Yeah, right. Now you just have the data.
*  Just the data. And you have to write a paper about it, analyze the data. It's similar things.
*  You have to load it all in. Where's the story? How do you, that last probably profound piece of
*  doing the editing in your mind? How to lay those things out?
*  Well, it's almost like the scientific process. I have a hypothesis, a creative hypothesis,
*  not a scientific one. But then I'm testing the hypothesis during the course of filming,
*  right? And I have to stay true to what the data tells me in the end, creatively. So it's very
*  similar to the scientific process. I don't know what we should probably coin that. Creative
*  scientific process or something like that. But then you actually do the edit and then you watch.
*  That's also iterative in a sense. Because maybe when you have a film that's 20, 30, 40 minutes,
*  or if it's feature length, do you ever have it where it sucks? Like it's not at all-
*  Is there a stage where it sucks? Like a stage where, right. Like is where you say,
*  no, this is not what I was meant. Like when it's all put together in this way, this doesn't,
*  this is not working right. This is not right. Or do you, is it always like an incremental step
*  towards better and better? It's incremental. Yeah, it's incremental. Yeah. And there's always
*  some moment in the editing process where there's a breakthrough, where suddenly I understand how
*  it fits together more fully. And you have to be, like you said, resilient. You have to be patient
*  that that moment will come. Yeah, exactly. Are you ultra self-critical or are you generally
*  optimistic and patient? I don't think those are mutually exclusive. Right. So you just oscillate
*  or you, or they're like dance partners or something? They're dance partners. Yeah.
*  Yeah. Definitely dance, you know, all the way through the process. By way of advice,
*  you know, to young filmmakers, how to film something that
*  is recognized by the world in some way. I would say, you know, first off, learn your craft,
*  right. Because I think craft is incredibly foundational, right, to creating a powerful
*  story. And sorry to interrupt, but when you say craft, do you mean just the raw technical,
*  the director of photography, like the filming aspect? Is it the storytelling, is it the access,
*  the whole thing? I think craft is more than just knowing how to push record on a camera or what
*  lens to use, right. That's part of it, right. But I think, at least in nonfiction, you know,
*  I'm a product to some extent of having to know how to do it all, right. Having to teach myself
*  how to do it all. Because I didn't go to film school, you know, but I became so
*  enamored of telling stories through a camera. Where was the leap, by the way, from theater to
*  storyteller? Oh, I just had needed an extra class in grad school. I was in an MFA directing class
*  and I needed an extra class and I just sort of like talked my way into a television directing
*  class and fell in love with it. And the actor became the director. Yeah. Well, yeah, I mean,
*  I wasn't an actor, but I had to act and I had to know the craft of acting because I was in the
*  theater, you know, to work with directors. Did you love it though? Did you love, did you love acting?
*  The theater? Yeah, the theater. The first, yeah, as an undergraduate, yeah. But then I learned
*  pretty quickly that I was pretty bad at it, or at least not very good, and that my skills lay
*  elsewhere in more sort of behind the scenes and shaping a story. When you started, you know,
*  taking a class, but also telling stories as a director, did you quickly realize that you're
*  pretty good at this or was it a grind? That's a good question, Lux. I think, I definitely knew
*  right away that it was more my wheelhouse, right? And I think part of that was because I grew up in
*  sort of a world of imagination and I think that active imagination as a child really lent itself
*  well to the skill set that a director needs, right? To shape story, to shape narrative,
*  to shape performances. So I think it was a much more natural fit for me. Was I excellent at the
*  beginning? Heck no. No, you know, I think few people are, but I learned. Where was the biggest
*  struggle for you? Is it, so your imagination clearly was something that you worked on for a
*  lifetime. So I'm sure that was pretty strong. Books, came from books. Books. But the actual
*  conversion of the imagination, you said shape the story. Where was the skill most lacking in
*  the shaping of the story initially? Technical side. Just technical. Yeah, like, you know,
*  because I taught myself everything. What kind of microphone should I use? Right? What kind of camera?
*  What does this lens do? What's that lens do? I didn't know any of that. And so I essentially was,
*  I have been self-taught, technically. How do you get good technically? Would you say when you're
*  self-taught? Just doing it over and over again. And what kind of stories were you telling? Like,
*  I began shooting local commercials for money. For money. Yeah. Yeah. So you're doing professional
*  projects. Yeah. Yeah. And so I kind of learned on the job as I did it. How many hobby projects
*  did you do just for the hell of it? Or were you trying to focus on the professional? Well,
*  I was trying to make money, right? Right out of grad school just to pay the rent. And that,
*  you know, that's a forcing function to, I mean, I personally love having my back to the wall or
*  financially you're screwed. So that's nice. I mean, I lived out the trunk of my car for a couple
*  years after grad school, just freelancing, you know, just like, but that couple years really
*  helped me learn fast because I had to learn fast, you know? So I did a couple voyages around the
*  world for this group called Semester at Sea that is a floating university that where they go out
*  three and a half months at a time with about 500 college level students and about 35 professors.
*  And so you're shooting every day for three and a half months in like nine different countries. And
*  so that really was like instrumental to me becoming a pretty good camera person pretty quickly. And
*  you were doing most of the work yourself? One man. One man bet. Yeah. The second voyage I at
*  least had an editor with me. Yeah. But I was shooting everything. Yeah. What's the perfect
*  team? Is it two people for the, for nonfiction asking for a friend? Yeah. So I'm kind of
*  interested in some storytelling, not of the level and the sophistication that you're doing, but more.
*  I think you have to allow the story to dictate what the size of the film should be for these small
*  human rights docs. I do, I think two or three, you know, it means you work your butt off, right?
*  Cause you're doing everything, right? But it allows you to tell intimate stories and have that access.
*  I'm doing a film this summer. That's a, that's a scripted piece where we'll probably have 25
*  crew people. Oh, wow. Yeah. So it's completely different, different endeavor altogether,
*  but doing it yourself. What do you think about that? Even though you, you have that trillion
*  dollars. Oh, I have that trillion dollars against, you can write that check before I leave. I will.
*  I've never seen a check for that thing. That's really interesting. How many zeros is that?
*  I write them so often. I've lost track or the United States government sure as heck writes them
*  often. Okay. Anyway, I mean, like, is there an argument, can you still man the case for single
*  person? You know, not for me, not for me. And, and here's why. What I found is that by, by being a
*  team of two filming with a field producer, by two people filming, it allows us to double our footage
*  first off. Right? So we have twice as much footage in the time we're filming to come back with,
*  as opposed to one person film. So you're each manning a camera. Yeah, constantly. And how much,
*  how much, sorry to keep interrupting, how much interaction interplay there? Sometimes the director
*  of photography is in another room, filming a different scene. If it makes sense, sometimes
*  we're cross shooting in the same room. Right? It just depends on the needs of the moment.
*  So, so we come back with double the footage is one thing, but as a director, so that's,
*  you know, and given how access is some, sometimes shaped by the events so that we can only something,
*  you know, in lifeboat, for example, you know, a rescue operation may only happen three, three days.
*  Right? So you want as much footage of that as you can. But the other piece of it that's really
*  critical for me, I found is that by having another human being I'm filming with, who I'm
*  co-shooting with, it frees me up as a director to not always have to be shooting either. I can do
*  all the other work to build relationships, right? To have side conversations with people, to, to
*  sort out the right way to tell a story, right? Or to transfer footage, knowing that the director
*  of photography is still filming during all that. So it frees me up to think of a, as a director
*  rather than just an image acquirer. Yeah. Cause there's also, I don't know how distracting is,
*  you've obviously done it for years, but setting stuff up, it, uh, pre- it, it preoccupies your
*  mind. Like pressing the record button and like framing stuff and all that, that's still, that
*  takes up some part of your mind where you can't think freely. That's my choice. Right? That's how
*  I work best. That said, the caveat there would be, that's not the only way to do it obviously.
*  Right? Like one of my favorite documentary time, documentaries of all time, um, is, is a documentary
*  called A Woman Captured Shot in Hungary, uh, by a single filmmaker with a single camera,
*  with a single lens. Right? Um, and it's brilliant and powerful and moving and interventional.
*  It's, it's incredible filmmaking and it was a single human being who created that film
*  with, with, um, with a collaborator or a subject. So it can be done. It's just not how I work best.
*  Yeah. How much personally would the other person,
*  how important is the relationship with them outside of the filming? Like, uh,
*  with the director of photography, the director of photography say like,
*  uh, how much drinking and if you don't drink, whatever the equivalent of that is,
*  do you have to do together how much soul searching or is it more like two surgeons getting together?
*  Is it, is it surgeons or is it a jazz band? Well, it could be either. Right? Hopefully not
*  the same time though, because I don't think surgeons and jazz bands go well together.
*  They're both good with fingers. Exactly. But I'd rather maybe not playing jazz while they operate
*  on me. Um, but, but I think, um, for me, um, I think there are moments of both, but usually
*  not at the same time, right? There are surgical moments where the moment is so pressing. You
*  really have to be that task driven, right? To capture as thoroughly as possible, whatever's
*  unfolding. Right. Um, but I think there's other times where you do improvise like jazz, right?
*  And where, where you have a lot of choices ahead of you and, and you're doing it, maybe a dance
*  with the other camera person, right? In order to capture a scene as creatively and fully as possible
*  during a fixed duration. How much you said shaping, cause it is nonfiction, but I feel like there's
*  so many ways to tell the same nonfiction that is bordering on fiction. Yeah. It's as well,
*  it's storytelling and how much shaping do you see yourself as doing? Like how important is your role
*  and how you tell the story? Um, I suppose the question I'm asking is how many ways can you
*  really screw this up? Every day you can screw it up. Um, I mean, that's really the, what I think
*  what you're asking about is really the ethos of documentary filmmaking, right? I allow a lot of
*  things to guide my choices. Um, one of them being, am I being fair? Right? Not balanced,
*  right? But I, am I being fair to what I'm witnessing? There's a camera capturing in a fair way
*  the truth of the reality. Some, some fundamental. And it also speaks to consent, right? Um, am I
*  being fair in a sense of consent? Do I have active consent in this moment? Right? Regardless
*  of whether I have a signed piece of paper, I always find some way to document it, whether it's just
*  direct address to camera or, you know, um, a translated release. So there's actually,
*  that's an interesting little, so they, they say something to the camera that they consent or they
*  sign the thing. Yeah. So for example, you know, I think the large, you know, broadcast companies
*  have this formalized process where they present a piece of paper, right? Yes. And the subject reads
*  it and they sign it and then you have permission and that's irrevocable, right? So it'll hold up
*  in court. That's not how I operate, right? And so, um, it's, it's just, for example, that doesn't
*  work if someone's illiterate and can't read that piece of paper, right? Right. And what if they
*  don't know how to sign their name, right? So instead you have to have a conversation,
*  ask questions, have them ask questions, come to a complete understanding before you even know
*  whether they understand what you're asking. Right. And then in that case, if someone's illiterate,
*  then you have that conversation, you just sit down and it takes a long time sometimes, but you have
*  to do it. And then if they still want to participate and they give you their consent, you know, they
*  can't sign a piece of paper, right? So then you just do in their native language, right?
*  Direct consent to camera in their language. Interesting. But also you're speaking to the
*  consent. That's just a human placing trust in you. You make a connection like this. That's the most
*  important concern. Right. Yeah. I hate papers. I hate papers and lawyers because they, they,
*  I'm sure you can't answer that, but I will force you. What are the top three documentaries of all
*  time, short or feature length to you? This is not your opinion. This is objective truth.
*  Maybe the top one was the greatest. We've got, let's see, March of the Penguins. That's probably
*  number one for me. Really? No, I'm just kidding. I don't know. I do seem to, the metaphor of penguins
*  huddling together in a hard, cold, like in the harsh conditions of nature. That's something
*  that's kind of beautiful. I don't love all nature documentaries, but like something about March of
*  the Penguins, I think Morgan Freeman. Yeah. He narrated it. So maybe everything, just any
*  documentary with Morgan Freeman. I'm a sucker for that. Warner Herzog, Life and the Taiga,
*  the simple people. I love Grizzly Man. I love Grizzly Man. I think that's one of his best works.
*  Yes. I think that's Joe Rogan's favorite documentary. It's both comedy and, and I mean,
*  it's tragic comedy. Tragic comedy. Yeah. Yeah. Is there something that stands out to you? I mean,
*  I'm joking about like best something that was impactful to you. Just to put it out there,
*  I don't think there's any way to say that they're objectively, you know, the best three
*  documentaries all time. But for me, and you may find this interesting given your background, is that
*  I think my top three are all from the Eastern Bloc actually. So, so Aquarella by Kosciowski,
*  Victor Kosciowski is one of my favorite. It's a couple of years old now, which is sort of a
*  meditation on the place water has on our planet and on our lives. I think A Woman Captured that
*  I mentioned, which was shot in Hungary. Is it a feature length one? Both are feature lengths. Yeah.
*  It is just brilliant. And it I think has yet to find distribution here in the US, you know,
*  but it's the perfect example of what they call, you know, verite or direct nonfiction filmmaking.
*  A European woman, this is the synopsis, a European woman has been kept by a family as a domestic
*  slave for 10 years, drawing courage from the filmmakers presence. She decides to escape the
*  unbearable oppression and become a free person. Wow. So the filmmaker is part of the story. Part
*  of the story becomes, it didn't start that way, but during the course of the story, the filmmaker
*  comes to understand that this is actually modern day slavery. And rather than just allow it to be,
*  actually enables and assists this woman to free herself from slavery and become a free woman.
*  I wonder, sorry, on a small tangent before we get to number three, like Icarus is interesting too.
*  How often do you become part of the story or the story is different because of your presence?
*  Like you, you changed the tide of history. Yeah. Well, back to like one person at a time that we
*  keep talking, you know, we keep coming back to that theme on some level. So, so this could tie
*  in interesting to one of my, one of my favorite films actually. So the last two films that I would
*  mention for my top four list would be the third Eastern block one would be a film called Immortal
*  in 2019, which was shot in Russia by a Russian woman that sort of, you know, examines the place
*  of the state in, in shaping individuals to be vehicles for the state. I mean, that's my own
*  synopsis, but that's one of my takeaways from the brilliant 60 minute doc or so. Again, Russian
*  filmmaking is really quite, quite good and powerful. The fourth one would be a Frederick
*  Wiseman film, Titigat Follies, which was filmed in the U S decades ago, inside basically the bowels
*  of a, of a insane asylum or a mental health institution. And, and I bring up Wiseman because,
*  you know, he is really the, the Godfather, so to speak of, of direct cinema or cinema verite.
*  And I went early in my career, I really believed in what he expressed as the place of the verite
*  filmmaker, which is simply fly on the wall, which is only observational nature. Right. And,
*  and I believe that that's how I should be as a nonfiction filmmaker, that I was there only to
*  bear witness, to observe and not to intervene in any way, shape or form. And, and that was the
*  sort of foundation for how I operate for many, many years. And then some things happened. So
*  one of those things that happened was I filmed Lifeboat. And during the course of filming Lifeboat,
*  which, you know, covered rescue operations in the Mediterranean off the coast of Libya,
*  in the first three days of that rescue mission, you know, we came upon over 3000 people, asylum
*  seekers floating in flimsy rafts in the water. And we were on the Zodiacs and we were filming.
*  And within the first couple hours, you know, we would come up to these rafts and these boats
*  that were in really dire shape and people would be pushed off and people would jump off and people
*  would fall into the water. And some of them couldn't swim. And so we found ourselves in
*  this moment where we had a choice. We could film someone drown in front of us,
*  or we could put our cameras down and pull them out of the water. And so that's what we did.
*  We put our cameras in the bottom of the Zodiac and just started pulling people out of the water.
*  And, you know, if I was Wiseman, right, according to his paradigm, then we should have just filmed.
*  And I didn't anticipate that moment beforehand. I had no sort of foreknowledge that I was going
*  to find myself faced with that dilemma of the moment as a documentarian. But there was no
*  question in my mind that I had to put my camera down and pull that fellow human being out of the
*  water. And I don't regret it at all. So I've come to a different place. I've evolved to what I
*  believe for the kind of film that I do is more appropriate, right? Like I can go to sleep at
*  night knowing that regardless of how the film would have been different if I hadn't made that
*  choice, I made the right choice as a human being. So I think of it as being a human being first and
*  a filmmaker second in moments like that. That's beautifully, beautifully put. But I also think
*  you could be a human being in small ways too, like silly ways and put a little bit of yourself in
*  documentaries. I tend to see that as really beautiful. Like the meta piece of it?
*  Yeah, just put yourself into the movie a little bit because break that third, fourth, whatever the
*  wall is, is realize that there's a human behind the camera too. For some reason, me as a fan,
*  as a viewer, that's enjoyable too. I think there's a real authenticity there behind the straw,
*  especially with these hard stories that you're doing that there's a human being struggling too.
*  Like observing the suffering and having to
*  bear the burden that this kind of suffering exists in the world and you're behind that camera
*  living that struggle. And there's small ways to show yourself in that way.
*  As you know, I don't do that in a big way. But there are subtle moments where I allow
*  that presence to live just for a second. I hate belly button docs. That's what I call them. I
*  don't know what's a belly button doc is. Naval gazing, right? Where sort of a narcissistic
*  filmmaking where someone just studies their own place in the world. I think my
*  you know, I'm more concerned with how I can intervene.
*  Yeah. Well, you're trying to really deeply empathize.
*  So like, if you do empathize, who am I?
*  I don't want to center myself in these stories. It's not about me, right? I am so unimportant.
*  What is important is what's happening. What's unfolding in the world that we need to act upon.
*  I think it's selfish and narcissistic to push myself into these stories unnecessarily.
*  Now that said, I think there is some small value in what you're saying just to remind viewers that
*  there's obviously a filmmaker at play. So sometimes the way that I do that is just like
*  through a question on camera. I'd allow the audio to live of a question or during a conversation
*  I'm having with someone so they can just hear how it's posed, for example. And to me, that's
*  enough. Yeah, I do like moments when people recognize that you exist. They look at the
*  filmmaker past the camera and yes, you ask the question in the interview or something like that
*  and they respond to that. Yeah. Like they respond to this like new perturbation into their reality
*  that was created by this other human. Yeah. And I especially like when those questions or those
*  perturbations are like a little bit absurd and like add something very novel to their situation
*  and that novelty reveals something about them. So as opposed to capturing the day to day reality
*  of their life, you do that plus the perturbations of like something novel. Yeah. But of course,
*  there's all kinds of ways to do this. What was number five, by the way? I only gave you four.
*  You just. I'm sorry, I gave you four. There's a short doc I like, I mentioned,
*  they're called The Toxic Pigs of Fukushima. I know. I apologize. I know. It's dark. It's a great title,
*  though, right? It's a great title. It's, it's no one's seen it, but it's great.
*  It says what it sounds like. Yeah. Yeah. It's exactly what it sounds like, but really brilliantly
*  executed. Well, let me ask you about Lifeboat because it's extremely,
*  I don't, it's a really moving idea. Just, just the fact that this exists in the world, that there's,
*  as a metaphor, as a reality, that there is a set of people trying to flee desperately,
*  is the desperation of it. And now with these refugees, the desperation of that, of trying
*  to escape towards a world that's full of mystery, uncertainty, doubt, could be hopeless at times,
*  and you're willing to do a lot for your own survival, for the survival of your family and
*  all those kinds of things. That's kind of the human spirit. And you just capture it
*  in Lifeboat. Can you tell me the story behind this film, as you started to already tell,
*  can you tell me what is it about? So Lifeboat really seeks to sort of lift up and showcase
*  the asylum seeker crisis in the Mediterranean when it was at its height in 2016. And it's
*  in 2016. And it came to be for many reasons, but one of those reasons is colleagues in the NGO
*  community really shared with me that when the borders between Greece and Turkey were shut down,
*  that the flow of Syrian asylum seekers that was initially going across from Turkey to Greece
*  was going to shift westward across the Mediterranean. So I started to research
*  that and discovered that was exactly the case. And then further stumbled upon the fact that
*  nation states hadn't really stepped up to address it, and that there were hundreds of asylum seekers
*  often drowning in these flimsy crafts that were pushed off from the shores of Libya
*  because the EU wasn't doing its duty to patrol those waters from a humanitarian standpoint.
*  And so the net result of that was that this whole sort of humanitarian community sprung up,
*  and it was civil society based that tried to meet the needs of those asylum seekers to just ensure
*  that fellow human beings weren't drowning, simply put. And one of those was this small little NGO
*  called Sea Watch, which when they discovered what was happening just cobbled together a coalition of
*  volunteers, bought a research vessel, retrofitted it, and motored down off the coast of Libya to
*  start pulling people out of the water. And again, I found that inspiring. I found that inspiring that
*  this group of volunteers was doing something that our leaders wouldn't. And it was something as
*  basic and simple as saving human beings. And I thought there was an inspiring story there,
*  and as it turned out, there was. Have you ever saved someone's life
*  as part of making these documentaries directly? And directly, I think you probably have
*  countless lives, but directly. Will you put in that position?
*  I don't want to. I mean, I certainly poured people out of the water who couldn't swim.
*  I did that. And that's again, speaking to the basic humanity. Put down the camera and help.
*  Yeah. So this is people coming from Libya, trying to make it across the Mediterranean Sea
*  on a crappy tiny boat. From a filmmaker perspective, how do you film that? Was there decisions
*  to capture the desperation? Well, we were going back to this idea of
*  access and how that's so fundamental to my approach. We were bound by the strictures
*  of the rescue operation on this SeaWatch vessel, which was 30 meters long. And we were two of a
*  crew of 15. So we had to multitask all the time because the only reason we were on that boat was
*  by agreeing that if needed, we would do whatever necessary to help. And so it was very active on
*  multiple levels. And we were making decisions each and every day that were not only filmmaking and
*  creative decisions, but also decisions about how to live that duality of being a humanitarian and
*  a filmmaker simultaneously. And the greatest example I can share of that was with my director
*  of photography in that project, Kenny Allen. Kenny's a big guy. He's got arms like tree trunks.
*  Because he was so physically able and strong, the head of mission really tasked him to be on
*  the zodiacs to pull people out of the water because he could literally with one arm reach down and
*  oftentimes pull someone out. Whereas usually it would take two or three people.
*  And so when we were at the height of triage and there were people in the water all over and
*  rafts were sinking, Kenny was out pulling people out of the water. And this went on for 24 hours.
*  And at the end of that first day, I remember looking over on the deck and seeing Kenny
*  held people up from the ladders to walk them back. And his camera was nowhere to be seen.
*  And so I walked over to him and I just grabbed him by the shoulders and said, Kenny,
*  where's your camera? And he didn't know. He had no idea where his camera was. And so I just said,
*  Kenny, we're here to do what you're doing, but we're also here to film it, to make sure that we
*  document what is unfolding in front of us so that we have a record of it. So we can bring it to a
*  larger audience. So you need to go find your camera so we can also document it. And that pulled him
*  out and he went and got his camera and started filming again. But that gives you a sense of this
*  world that we had to live in, in order to get the story done. But I think to be a great director
*  of photography, to be a great director, you have to lose yourself like that in the story too.
*  But usually with a camera in your hand, right? But sometimes you forget the camera. I mean,
*  I feel like if you're obsessed with the camera too much, you can lose the humanity of it. You
*  get obsessed with the film and the story. It can become clinical. Yes, absolutely. And I don't want
*  to become clinical in my film, certainly. Let me ask you a strange and perhaps edgy question.
*  So some filmmakers believe it's justified to break the rules in order to tell a powerful story.
*  Werner Herzog, I read this somewhere, teaches young filmmakers to pick locks and forge documents
*  and so on. Oh, I didn't know that. Interesting. What do you think about that? Bending the rules
*  in service of telling a story? You would of course never break the law. But is there,
*  does that just generally speaking, bending the rules and so on? To elaborate on this question,
*  perhaps, I'm distinctly aware that there's parts in the world where the rule of law is not
*  like enforced as cleanly as it is in the United States, as fairly as it is in the United States,
*  that there's a lot of bribery. There's a lot of, you don't really know to trust, you don't know if
*  you can trust the cops or basically anybody. So the rules are very hazy kind of concept.
*  And a lot of them, especially, it's funny, but authoritarian regimes often have a giant bureaucracy
*  build up that's full of rules. There's more rules than you know what to deal with. And you can't
*  actually live life unless you break the rules. Anyway, laying that all out on the table,
*  do you ever contend with that on what are the rules I can break or should break
*  to keep to the spirit of the story? I think you have to ask yourself, are the rules just
*  and why are they in place? So for example, coming into the airport in southern Yemen,
*  right? If I just tried to walk through the airport with all my equipment, even with all the
*  permissions beforehand, like we had, without having a fixer at the airport beforehand to make sure we
*  didn't go through the standard line, right? We would have been caught up for three hours at least
*  negotiating over our equipment and eventually paying a bribe to get it through. That's just
*  reality in a place like Yemen. And so of course, knowing that, having talked to colleagues who had
*  taken that path previously, I took a different path. Where we hire a fixer beforehand to sort
*  it out beforehand, rather than spending three hours of our time and paying a series of bribes.
*  Instead, we're going to get it fixed beforehand so that we can walk through a different line
*  and have no one look at any of our equipment. That's a pretty good trade-off in my mind.
*  What about security when you're traveling in these places? Do you ever have bodyguards?
*  Well, several questions around that. Are you ever afraid for your life
*  when you're filming in a war zone? Is there any way to lessen the probability of death?
*  I don't have a death wish. I try to mitigate risk however I can, however I can. But one of the ways
*  I can't do it in a conflict zone is by having armed security with me. And the reason for that
*  is because, especially in a place like Yemen, if you have armed security, you become a target
*  in a way that if you're operating under the auspices of international humanitarian law,
*  I actually have more protection. So I don't bring security. If you're working in
*  northern Yemen, for example, you're going to have someone from the de facto authorities with you
*  anyway the entire time you're there. So the authorities are with you in form anyway. Regarding
*  fear? Yeah, of course. I mean, fear is a natural human emotion, right? And I think we have a weird
*  mindset, this sort of heroic mindset surrounding fear in the US, which I don't pay tribute to.
*  I believe as a natural human emotion, it's an alarm bell that I need to pay attention to,
*  and I think rather than pretending to be brave, I think you have to just acknowledge that
*  fear has a place to keep you alive. And I think it's a matter of not letting the fear arrest you,
*  and allowing the fear to live, and then acting anyway.
*  Don't you think as a documentary filmmaker, the fear is a really good signal for potentially
*  a good thing to do because there's a story there? So is fear an indicator that you shouldn't do it,
*  or is it an indicator that you should do it? It's probably an indication you should do it,
*  right? And strangely, I think that's why, if there's something unusual about the work I do
*  in some part, it's because of these types of stories, right? They're hard to access,
*  but you also have to have a threshold of willingness to do them when you can't.
*  There is no guarantee of physical safety, right? And maybe that's why you should do them.
*  I'm very much motivated by the things that scare me, that they seem to direct
*  the things that are worth doing in this all too short life. How often do you interact with
*  our friendly friends at the police departments of various locations? Because of the humanitarian
*  nature of your work, are you able to avoid all such friendly conversations, or are you often
*  into making friends with our... I try to avoid the friendly police people all over the world as much
*  as possible. But in some instances, it's important to be proactive, right? And make sure that they
*  know what you're doing before you do it. So it's all about the context and the situation.
*  For example, working in Northern Yemen, you couldn't film for five minutes if you didn't
*  have paperwork, because you'd be taken away. So you have to make sure you have all those
*  permissions ahead of time. 50 Feet from Syria. I would love to talk at least a little bit about
*  this film. First, can you, high level, can you tell what this documentary is about?
*  Yeah, it was early in the Syrian uprising, and we returned to the Syrian Turkish border
*  with a Syrian-American orthopedic surgeon who was volunteering, operating on refugees as they
*  flowed across the border from Syria into Turkey. And it was an attempt at the time, before a lot
*  of films had come out about the conflict, to really show again the effects of the war on
*  civilians. You've heard me echo that sentiment multiple times now, but people knew there was a
*  major conflict in Syria, but didn't really understand the form that that was taking and
*  the impact it was having. And so we embedded into the, at the time it was the only clinic in Turkey
*  that was sanctioned by the Turkish government to treat Syrian refugees. And so we filmed there with
*  surgeons as they operated on war victims. And we also went into Syria, into some of the camps as well.
*  So in this film, there's a man who crosses the border every day to retrieve the wounded
*  and fair them safety and care. And you also mentioned about heroism in the United States.
*  Can you tell me about this man and just people like him? Like what's the heroic action
*  in some of these places that you've visited?
*  So in that instance, you know, I thought of him as the Turkish Schindler, right? Because he was a
*  human being who, of his own volition, no one was paying him to do this, but he was spending
*  much of his time. He was just a local businessman who really saw the need in the camps right across
*  the border, 10 K away. And he saw the medical need in particular and how hard it was to get
*  people in desperate medical conditions across the border where there was a clinic just right across
*  the border. But because of the security and the layers of security, they couldn't get out by
*  themselves. So he took it upon himself as a Turkish person to build relationships with the
*  Turkish guards, which was relatively easy. And then he built relationships with sort of the guards in
*  the no man's land between the Syrian guards and sort of those who lived in the middle area. And
*  then also with the Syrian guards at the camp. And he would drive out there daily and bring them food,
*  right? Talk them up and build relationships. And every day he would bring these guards food
*  and build relationships with them. And what that meant was eventually, right, he had this avenue
*  of access to and from the camps. And so he started using it and he would drive this avenue of access
*  through the three layers of guards each day. And then they would open the gates for him because
*  he had made himself trustworthy in their eyes. And he would receive the most desperate medical
*  cases that were coming from all over Northern Syria, right? To receive medical treatment.
*  And he would, as you see in the film, he would ferry them into the back of his car, right? And
*  then drive them to the hospital where they would receive operations. And then he would bring them
*  back if they wanted, after they'd healed and recovered, back to Syria, if they wanted to
*  return post-recovery. And he didn't get paid for that. He was spending his own money to do it
*  because he saw other human beings in need. And it's like we were talking about earlier.
*  That's heroic, right? That's selfless. That's aspirational for me, right? Here's someone who
*  is spending their time on the planet doing something of value and good to other human beings.
*  I mean, if you draw parallels to Schindler, I feel like the fascinating thing about
*  Schindler is that he's kind of a flawed human and is not the kind of human that does these things
*  usually. But you just can't help it. And that's like the basic humanity. Despite who you are,
*  the basic humanity shines through. I think the whims of war test people in those ways, right?
*  They ask of you things that you may not even know were going to be asked of you. And then it speaks
*  to who you are fundamentally as a human being. They reveal who you are as a human being, just as
*  you said. Let me ask a kind of stupid technical question about publications of movies and so on.
*  I've been recently becoming good friends with Thomas Tall, who was the producer. His company,
*  Legendary, funded some of the big sort of blockbuster films and so on. And so obviously,
*  money is part of filmmaking. It's interesting. But also the release of movies and me as a consumer,
*  you know, with Netflix, with YouTube, you know, that's one of the reasons I'm a huge fan of YouTube
*  is it's like out in the open. Yeah, access, especially historical access, like over time,
*  you can look back years later, if you pay some money, you can watch some of the great films
*  ever made. YouTube, Hulu, Netflix, I don't know what other services there are HBO, Paramount,
*  Paramount Plus, Paramount Plus. Anyway, there's all these platforms, Spotify now.
*  I understand they want to create paywalls and so on. It makes sense. But I'm a huge fan of
*  openness. And I'm really kind of torn by this whole thing. Anyway, that's a discussion for
*  perhaps another time. But the the short question is, why is it so hard to watch your documentaries
*  and other films, other incredible films on the internet? If I want to pay unlimited amount of
*  money, I want to pay a lot of money to watch it. Why is it so hard? Well, Lifeboat is streaming
*  free on the New Yorker. Yes, I saw that. But it's the which is interesting. That doesn't make any
*  sense. And then also Hung Award is on Paramount Plus, but also Pluto TV. It's streaming free.
*  So you can either go through a paywall or you can watch it with ads. With Big Macs interspersed.
*  Big Macs. Sometimes. Yeah, the contrast is really. Well, it really reveals the power of the
*  documentary. Yeah. No, but like it's still not even those platforms are I mean, they're not
*  they're not as easily accessible because you have to like, you have to use you have to think
*  and you have to chase a particular you have to chase it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I guess from an
*  economics standpoint, the answer that is pretty clear, right? It may not be what people want to
*  watch. Maybe people want to watch reality. Maybe people want to watch animal rescue shows, right
*  here in the US. Which is exactly why, in part, I think it's so vital that we continue to do
*  stories on things that aren't about flowers and puppy dogs, right? I would push back on that. So
*  there's TikTok. And you could say, well, look, humans just want to watch really short content,
*  because they seem to be addicted to that. Yeah, that's partially true.
*  But they also watch two, three, four, five hour podcasts. And on TikTok? No, there's different
*  platforms for that. It's a place called YouTube. I'll teach you about it. Okay. Yeah, I've never
*  heard of it. It's a good place to publish documentaries, I think. I, you know, humans
*  are interested in a lot of things. And I've seen many times, a thing that you think is a niche thing
*  become a very big thing. But for them to become mainstream, they have to have a platform that
*  allows for the mainstream to happen. The access. The access. The dumb, simple, frictionless access.
*  The frictionless access is a really important thing. You know, pay walls create friction.
*  And not just because of the money. It can be free, but if you have to click on a thing,
*  or maybe sign up, or put your email, it's just not, it creates a, it prevents you to enjoy the
*  thing you would really enjoy. And you know you would enjoy, but your baser human nature prevents
*  you from enjoying because you can just open up TikTok and keep scrolling. So that's just something
*  to say about platforms because I think the things that need platforms the most are things like your
*  films. The things that I think a lot of people would love watching. They're very important and
*  they can have viral impact on the world that is fundamentally positive. You know, it's just, it,
*  it makes me sad that there's not a machine for celebrating those films.
*  There are lots of machines to celebrate them, but they're just not as always accessible as
*  YouTube, right? I mean, as soon as you write me that check for a trillion dollars when I walk out
*  of here, then I'm going to put all my films on YouTube because then I won't have to worry about,
*  you know, selling them in order so I can make the next film because, you know, film is not just an
*  art. It's also an industry, right? And that tension between the two is a constant interplay
*  that is a reality for me. So I always have to think about how can I access the largest audience,
*  but also, right, go out and shoot the next film. So that longevity question is also an issue and
*  the finances are part of that sort of equation that I constantly have to rewrite over and over
*  again. How often as a creative mind do you feel the constraints, the financial constraints?
*  I wish I could do a lot more films that I can't always because of financial constraints.
*  So it's the number of films.
*  Yeah.
*  And is a film that you do currently, is a film that you do at any one time as you're filming it
*  already funded or is it the funding from previous stuff that you're trying to use?
*  Before Hunger Ward, I would just take a flyer on my films, right, where I would just say,
*  this meets the so-what threshold. This is a story that has to be told and I want to tell it.
*  And then I could just go shoot it and usually on credit, usually on a credit card, right?
*  So based on a belief that Lifeboat was done that way.
*  Yes.
*  50 feet from Syria was done that way.
*  So you're on a boat broke.
*  Yeah. But it's free food, right? And free lodging because there's a bonk on the boat.
*  I do that not intended to stay broke, right? But based on a foundational belief that
*  if I bring to bear all of my sort of quiver of creative arrows to it, right? That I can create
*  something of value, right? In the world, but hopefully also financially that then I can sell
*  to someone. And you know, every time I've done that, Lex, I've gotten into the black.
*  So it's a risk and I have to have a certain risk threshold financially to do that. But I believe
*  so deeply in these stories that I'm willing to do that. I didn't have to do that with Hunger Ward.
*  Luckily I had funders for that film.
*  Yeah. Yeah. Take risks in this life. It's going to pay off. Which reminds me of, let me ask you,
*  I already asked you for advice about, for a filmmaker, how to win an Oscar.
*  Well, I haven't won an Oscar.
*  How to get nominated for an Oscar. That's true. Or just how to make great documentaries,
*  how to make great film. But let me ask even zoom out bigger.
*  You mentioned some of these things, doing the things that you think matters. What advice would
*  you give to young people, high school, college, dreaming of living a life worth living? What
*  advice would you give them about career or maybe just life in general? How to have a life they can
*  be proud of? Yeah. I don't know how you're going to react to this given sort of your expertise,
*  but I would say put down the smartphone. Step away from the monitor. Because real life
*  is not a screen. I believe that the foundational skills which are conducive and important to
*  success aren't necessarily those technical skills which we're going to learn in trade schools or
*  university. I think they're more foundational than that. They're learning how to interact
*  and listen. With humans?
*  With humans. Yeah. To really see and listen. And observe.
*  And observe. And how to step out of your door. And if the electricity goes out
*  and you're five miles away from your house, you don't need a smartphone to get home
*  because you've set visual markers for yourself on how to get back to where you live. I think we're
*  in danger right now of living in a world where if the satellite stopped functioning, then a whole
*  lot of people become completely dysfunctional because we're so reliant upon the screens in our
*  lives. So I think there's a lot of foundational skills that have nothing to do with technology
*  that we need to learn and everything rests upon those. So I would say learn those foundations.
*  Learn how to write well. Read a lot. It's a different kind of knowledge and wisdom that
*  comes out of that. So reading is kind of the equivalent of listening and observing and writing
*  is kind of integration of all of that that you've observed and listened to and tried to express
*  something with that. I think my training in the theater has served me so well in the documentary
*  world. Because it's all about interaction and listening and talking and dialogue.
*  And that's what I do in documentaries, is I listen. Yeah. We mentioned fear. Being an
*  introvert, I'm very afraid of people, but I'm drawn to them and fascinated by them because of that.
*  Enjoy listening to them. And observing them. And you mentioned reading. You mentioned books
*  as a catalyst, as a stimulator of your imagination. Is there books in your life,
*  a couple, one, two, three, that kind of left an impact or a little bit of spark of inspiration
*  early on in life that stand out from your memory?
*  I was given The Prophet by Killio Debron as a graduation present from my high school English
*  teacher. And I still have that book in a special place on my bookshelf because I think it speaks to
*  the nature of human experience. And I return to it all the time because there's wisdom there.
*  But there's many, many books.
*  Fiction or nonfiction? What connects with you usually? In the past?
*  I read mostly nonfiction most of the time. Ten Points is a book I love a lot.
*  What is Ten Points? Ten Points is, I think his name is Bill
*  Strickland. He was the editor of I think Bicycle Magazine. And it's sort of his personal memoir of
*  his experience growing up with a lot of abuse and how that transformed him as a human being.
*  You know, one instrumental book for me that I bumped into in my early 20s,
*  boy, these are all nonfiction, except for The Princess Bride. I have to mention, it's an outlier.
*  No, no, The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People. I read that in my early 20s. And I found
*  so many of the principles in that book.
*  What are the habits from that one?
*  I've held onto some of those principles through my life as well, for sure.
*  What have been, you've observed suffering darker aspects of human nature in your own personal life.
*  What has been some of the darkest moments in your life, darkest times in your life? Is there
*  something that you went through and then perhaps you carry it through your work?
*  Probably one of the darkest moments was an experience that I had, again, in my early 20s.
*  I was living in Southern California. The Pacific Coast Highway that goes north and south along the
*  beach, and there's that little concrete path that people jog and ride their bikes. I was riding my
*  bike on the PCH. I was coming up to a corner on it and I heard this tremendous crash. It was really
*  loud. I came around the corner and it was a car accident, a car crash. It was a multiple vehicle
*  crash. What had happened is that a Volvo had hit another car and then when it hit it, it went over
*  the top of the car and hit a Volkswagen van. It peeled away the top of the Volkswagen van when
*  it hit it and then landed. Three vehicles and it just happened. Lying in the middle of the road
*  was a body decapitated and there was another person from one of the cars lying in the middle
*  of the road, still alive. Then on the hood of the Volvo was this woman who had come through the
*  windshield, just a mess, blood everywhere, moaning back and forth. A bystander ran into the middle
*  of the road and started administering first aid to the person lying in the road. I stood there
*  watching this scene and every fiber of my being wanted to run to the woman on the hood of the Volvo
*  and do something, anything, just to be there. It was obvious to me that she was going to die,
*  but I felt like at least if I ran there, I could offer some comfort for her last moment. Right then,
*  the sirens started to blare and I knew that there'd be paramedics there within minutes,
*  that people would come to help. I froze and I was scared and I didn't do anything. I watched
*  and I watched while this woman died on the hood of the Volvo.
*  That experience is sort of seared into my consciousness. The fact that I watched and
*  didn't act, I feel is one of the great failures of my life, that I wasn't able to act in a moment of
*  need, no matter how small. From that, I made a decision out of that experience that if I ever
*  found myself in a situation where I had the ability to act and I could act to help another
*  human being in such need, that I would act. That I wouldn't let fear freeze me. Instead,
*  I would allow that fear to catalyze me into action and do something and intervene in whatever way I
*  could, even if I didn't have the skillset. In some ways, all of that echoes in your documentaries.
*  You're not going to let fear stop you from trying to help.
*  I think that experience of failure, what I framed as just human failure on my part,
*  is foundational probably to my work. I don't want that to happen again,
*  I don't want to be that person who watches. I want to do what I can when I can.
*  If we zoom out, you were just one human that witnessed that, that trauma. You're one human
*  that witnessed so much suffering in different parts of the world. As we zoom out across space
*  and time and look at Earth, why do you think we're here on this Earth? What's the meaning
*  of human civilization? What's the meaning of your life, of individual human life?
*  And broadly speaking, what is the meaning of life, Sky Fitzgerald?
*  Oh boy, yeah. For me, I can speak personally on that only. And that's that I believe that the
*  I believe that the meaning of my life is to try to make the world a little bit better before I go.
*  When I was in theater in grad school, I directed a play called Shadowlands by C.S. Lewis.
*  And there's a quote from that, it goes like this, we're like blocks of stone,
*  out of which the sculptor carves the forms of men. The blows of his chisel, which hurt us so much,
*  are what make us perfect. Now, I would take away the perfect part, right? But I think I've
*  remembered that quote for so many years, because I believe in the underlying notion that the blows
*  of the chisel, which are the experiences that we go through, shape us, right? Necessarily so.
*  And hopefully shape us into a better human being. And in my case, a human being that I hope can make
*  the world a little better, you know, through those blows. Before it's over. Yeah, before it's over.
*  Before you go, as you said, do you think about that? You think about the going part,
*  and your mortality, you ever think about that? You said you don't have a death wish, you tried to
*  minimize risk, but eventually it's going to be over. Yeah, for all of us. Absolutely.
*  I'll speak for yourself. Well, you've got other plans. I tend to merge. I'm going to merge with
*  the robots. I mean, body, no, not at all. Yes, for all of us, unfortunately or fortunately,
*  or who the heck knows. But do you ponder your mortality? Are you afraid of it?
*  I live with my mortality knowing that it's fleeting, that my life is fleeting, and that
*  I'm going to go into the ground just like everyone else, or maybe as ashes, you know?
*  So I live with that knowledge every day, but I don't allow it to stop me or hold me up. Rather,
*  I really, it drives me. It drives me to try to get as much done as I can before I go.
*  Yeah, so the knowledge of your death is a kind of dance partner, and you try to dance beautifully.
*  Sky, you're an incredible human, incredible artist and filmmaker, and it's a huge honor that you would
*  spend your really valuable time with me today. I really, really enjoyed this conversation.
*  Thanks for having me, Lex, and thanks for doing what you do.
*  Thanks for listening to this conversation with Sky Fitzgerald. To support this podcast,
*  please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, let me leave you with some words from
*  Elie Wiesel. The opposite of love is not hate, it's indifference. The opposite of art is not
*  ugliness, it's indifference. The opposite of faith is not heresy, it's indifference. And the opposite
*  of life is not death, it's indifference. Thank you for listening. I hope to see you next time.
