---
Date Generated: April 10, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 8488s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence', 'artificial intelligence podcast', 'cash', 'daniel negreanu', 'gambling', 'kenny rogers', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex podcast', 'mit ai', 'online', 'poker', 'ranges', 'solvers', 'theory', 'tournament', 'wsop']
Video Views: 2426541
Video Rating: None
---

# Daniel Negreanu: Poker | Lex Fridman Podcast #324
**Lex Fridman:** [September 27, 2022](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rKnoNfajUgM)
*  You could be the seventh best player in the whole world, like literally seventh best player, but if you're playing
*  With the other six you're the sucker you are you are the like the worst player in the game, right?
*  So like there's a lot of players
*  For example like the dan blisarians of the world, right?
*  He's not a top level player like, you know, these guys you see on tv
*  But he probably makes more money than they do because he plays with people that are far below his skill level
*  so part of the part of the skill of being a poker player is finding situations where
*  You're profitable, you know regardless of your skill level
*  The following is a conversation with daniel nagrano one of the greatest poker players of all time
*  This is the lex feedman podcast to support it. Please check out our sponsors in the description and now dear friends
*  Here's daniel nagrano
*  Everything everyone does at the poker table conveys information. So let me ask sort of the big overview question
*  What are the various sources of information
*  That you project and others project at the table that convey information. Well, there's several different things
*  There's the ones that are conscious and then there's the ones that are subconscious, right?
*  Like on the conscious level it might be something someone says
*  Right, you know you ask them a question and they say oh, you know, you shouldn't call me here. You should
*  So there's the verbal tells there's also the more, you know subconscious stuff body posture, right?
*  The eyes the throat the pulse
*  Um various things that are you know, less controllable
*  I find I use a combination of both to try to gain information
*  But generally when I have somebody more comfortable
*  They give off more when like everyone has a different approach phil ivy likes to intimidate. I go the other way
*  I want my opponents to be relaxed so that they'll give me more in that regard
*  So phil ivy likes to perturb the system like
*  Mess with it to see what comes out
*  I think phil has an aura about him where he wants you to know that he's watching you
*  Be afraid be uncomfortable because when you're uncomfortable, I got you right and that's sort of his schtick where he you know
*  And people do like when you sit at a table with phil ivy. It's it's intimidating
*  He likes to rule by fear and you like to rule by uh, what is it love?
*  That's a really good way to put it. I never had anyone put it like that, but it makes a lot of sense
*  Yeah, you know fear phil ivy and then with me, it's fine. Don't worry. I'll take your money, but you're gonna enjoy it
*  Yeah, so that's what the talking at the table is about is getting to be relaxed and get some of that
*  Gray area between the conscious and the subconscious to reveal something
*  Yeah, there's that too and also just you know, and this is just part of who I am anyway
*  Like I like to talk to people but one of the byproducts is the more I know about you
*  The more I likely know about how you think about different situations, right? So what do you do for a living?
*  Oh, i'm a lawyer. I defend criminals. Okay, so this guy probably spends a lot of his time twisting the truth
*  Trying to find you know, and then so then you know
*  You already have a mindset of like this guy might be more likely to bluff or he's probably comfortable doing that
*  very subtle things like that and you start to uh pick up cues on what
*  Nervousness looks like for this person what the nervousness communicates all that kind of stuff. So we're talking about physical tells here
*  Yeah, physical tells is a secondary thing. I was more specific like player profiling, right?
*  And sort of understanding the type of mind that i'm dealing with right?
*  So again somebody who's a lawyer is is used to trying is fine with being deceptive as part of a game, right?
*  Whereas maybe somebody's a sunday school teacher
*  And you know, they don't feel comfortable they maybe they think bluffing might be dishonest, right?
*  So they're less likely to try some shenanigans against you
*  so and then the other thing too is what type of person is this in terms of
*  their um
*  You know the out view out like view on life, right? Are they positive?
*  Do they feel like things go their way or they're not right?
*  There's those people that always well, of course I lost I always lose with this hand and those types of people you can manipulate
*  because when a card comes
*  That you don't you don't have them beat right? But you can pretend because they'll believe it like of course you beat me
*  So you bet all your chips against them knowing that you can scare them because they're they they already feel like they're going to lose
*  The inherent like the cynicism
*  Exactly cynicism is easier to play against because you can convince them that their cards suck
*  Yeah
*  When somebody believes that they're a loser or they're unlucky, right?
*  And that bad things happen to them always and they never catch a break. Well, you know, you can just help them make it true
*  What do you think about the rounders teddy kjb when he does the oreo tell?
*  Do players at the high level communicate that kind of stuff?
*  Do you think it's realistic to be able to have a tell like this that's partially subconscious?
*  So first of all, I I love brian koppelman who made the film and uh,
*  I think what they were going for is something obvious to the general visually right? Like okay, it's very clear
*  You know he eats the cookie. He doesn't eat the cookie and it means one or the other at the highest levels something that
*  You know blatant you're not going to find you're going to find a lot more subtle things maybe with posture or or timing or you know
*  Different things like that, but at the lower levels, you know
*  You know you might see some you might see you know with a lot of people when they're in a hand and they've bet
*  Whether they drink water in the hand is going to tell you something generally speaking
*  It's such an intimate part of the human experience that I feel like if you have food
*  You're going to reveal something about yourself through the way you eat
*  I feel like that's a dangerous thing to have at the table
*  Well, the thing is generally speaking people don't eat food in the middle of a hand
*  Like they're not going to bet and then just like any burger, right?
*  What they will do though is you know, they bet and it's up to you and then they're whether they're on, you know
*  Uncomfortable or they do it unconsciously. They just want to do something to make themselves look relaxed or whatever
*  And you know, they grab a water where they don't really need it in that moment
*  But they're trying to take your mind off of the situation
*  so they
*  In the movie wanted to show a simplistic version of something that does happen something that's
*  Visually sort of clear. Yeah, because I think one of the things rounders got right is that it's a poker movie, right?
*  But you don't have to be great at poker really understand poker to enjoy the movie and that you know, oreo cookie
*  Tell like everyone gets that like, okay that's simple if he would have went with something more subtle
*  You know like licking your lips or looking to the right and I think it might have been lost on the audience
*  And they didn't actually explicitly
*  Say that that was a tell I don't think
*  They thought they did everything to let you know right with the music and
*  Slow motion and he's staring at it and he's like, aha. Yeah, but they didn't actually say
*  you know, this is an obvious tell like uh
*  My name is character at the very end of it. You know after he he says how the fuck did you lay that down?
*  The monster right and he's like
*  He's like he's like you're not hungry not hungry. He's like I keep on but you know
*  So he sort of references it and then he takes the cookies
*  He notices he's like, ah, he got me and he breaks the you know
*  The racket well, probably if you had that kind of tell on him you wouldn't in mad dame his character would not reveal
*  Well, he says in the movie he says normally I wouldn't reveal a tale, but I don't have that much time
*  Like i've got to rattle him some way. Yeah, so that that was one way to do that. How hard is it to do that to?
*  In a kgb accent, uh to lay down a monster in those situations in general
*  How hard is it to lay down a really strong hand just psychologically?
*  Yeah, no, I mean, I think it's incredibly difficult for the vast majority of people
*  You know part of what makes professionals really really good is recognizing a situation
*  That's very very dangerous and they need to you know jump ship
*  Like what happens to a lot of players is you get married to a hand
*  Let's say you have pocket aces, which is the best possible hand, right?
*  But the board runs out where it's seven eight nine and then there's a jack and then there's a six
*  It's like you have a great hand to start but you don't anymore
*  so one of the difficult things for the average player is
*  You know once they've put money in
*  Cutting their losses and saying okay, let's move on to the next hand
*  It's very very difficult thing for a lot of people at every stage of like pre-flop
*  Yeah, all the way through be able to just make a decision on
*  At that moment. So yeah, essentially not being attached. Okay, i've already put in
*  $40,000 in this pot and this guy's bet another 20
*  Well, I mean I gotta get my 40 back right except you know, in some cases you have to reassess
*  Individually this situation and realize all right. Well, this is a bad investment. So I gotta cut my losses
*  By the way, I should I should mention that you have
*  You have an incredible youtube channel where you explain a lot of stuff
*  You do a podcast you do a lot of really awesome stuff my probably favorite thing that you've done is your master class
*  Um that people should definitely check out masterclass.com slash lux
*  There you go
*  Uh, no, but it really is
*  One of my favorite master class courses, but also just a great introduction overview of poker
*  It's great for people that like me who are beginners essentially, but it's probably really good for intermediate people, too
*  I mean, there's a lot of really good detail there. Anyway
*  What are hand ranges and uh, how do you begin to estimate the range of hands that your opponents have?
*  Yeah, so I actually did you speaking to youtube I did a video on specifically this
*  Yes familiar with rangers and essentially, you know back in my day the old days
*  We didn't talk about poker that way. We're like, I think he's got this or I think he's got that right
*  Uh, nobody thought of like the range of hands a player can have
*  So I guess the best example is imagine like all the potential hands is being a part of a grid, right?
*  So the first player to act they could have any one of those hands
*  Right anyone randomly dealt right, but let's say now that that player raised
*  To three thousand dollars. Okay
*  Well, you can eliminate now from this grid a whole bunch of hands that this player can no longer have
*  Because if they had a two and a three they wouldn't do that
*  So you can say okay. He probably has a big pair. He has ace king
*  You know you've you've narrowed the range of hands down, right?
*  Now through every action on the flop on the turn and on the river based on the decisions they make you narrow it down even further
*  So the range of hands is the whole
*  Uh the entirety of all the possibilities that this player you believe could have and sometimes they fool you or they have a hand
*  That you don't expect them to have in their range and you know, maybe a little bit, uh
*  Unorthodox doing some things you don't expect to throw you off
*  But a range is essentially all the possibilities and it narrows as by the time before the flop it's endless
*  Player raises. Okay, it's minimized. You know player bets the flop. Okay, it's minimized further and then by the river
*  You know you can narrow down
*  The entire range to you know, just maybe even a few hands. Is it always shrinking or is there
*  Sort of as you get surprised. I mean it's always just an estimate. So
*  Does it ever expand based on sort of chaotic?
*  Unpredicted
*  Surprising behavior of the players it really should never expand the range of hands should always get smaller, right?
*  Like again, we start with the the full the full scope and then you should factor in like, okay
*  These are all the possible hands you can have on the flop now, right?
*  We can't have new hands on the turn and if he if he if you get to that point where you think oh
*  Well, maybe he has this hand then you then you sort of misjudged his range prior
*  So you're not thinking clearly it should always shrink from the full scope to you know, hopefully just a couple
*  Well in that video you also talk about it used to be that you would play your hand
*  But now you're playing a range that you're representing a range. You're not even just playing your hand
*  So what does it mean to represent a certain range?
*  Yeah, so that's another big thing that's different about poker from you know, my day to today
*  Is that back in our day?
*  We would like put people on one hand like you probably have king nine or you have jacks or something like that
*  Now people are cognizant of the idea that you could have an entire range of hands
*  So then you ask yourself in situations. All right, I know what I have but
*  What I could have in his mind or my opponent's mind is any one of these hands
*  What would I do with the entirety of these hands?
*  And so a lot of people that are trying to play optimally, you know game theory optimal
*  They think in terms of what their range of hands would do rather than their very specific hand
*  So is is bluffing in that context essentially?
*  Misrepresenting the range of hands that you have no is that how you think about it?
*  Not exactly because so an optimal range like if I bet the river if i'm playing game theory optimal
*  A portion of my range is going to be I have it
*  I got I got the best hand and a portion of my range is going to be bluffs and they'll be balanced
*  So in theory no matter what you do, okay, no matter what you do if you call or you fold in theory
*  It's just uh, you're printing a zero as we say
*  You're not you're not getting gaining or losing an ev if you were to do it that way. What's ev?
*  Ev is expected value, right? So every play that you make, you know, it either is going to in the long run
*  You know make you some money or it's it's just a losing play and as a professional you try to make
*  The fewest amount of minus ev plays you can and the only reason you would make these minus ev plays
*  Is potentially if you were trying to set up your opponent for something later, right?
*  So I might make some minus ev plays right so that I can exploit you later, right? So you're building up building up an image
*  A player profile that's false in some way something that i'm going to i'm going to plant seeds in your mind
*  So that I can exploit them later. So for example, why would players like show a big bluff?
*  Like what would be the reason for that?
*  They show a big bluff so that you know that they're capable of it, but maybe in their mind
*  They're never gonna do that again, but now they think you know, he bluffed me last time
*  Maybe he's doing it again, but that's a what we call like a level a leveling more
*  Because it you know, you can go back and forth with whether or not
*  Okay
*  This guy might know that like he showed a bluff because he's never going to bluff me again
*  So that that's where it gets a little so that's a little bit different though when we're talking about hand rangers. That's different than
*  Building up a mental model of what your opponents what your opponents think of you
*  And what your opponents think that you think of them and and so on so forth are you trying to construct?
*  Those kinds of method models and is that separate from the hand ranges they go hand in hand, right?
*  So if any given in a given situation, right my range has this many value hands and this many bluffs, okay
*  So in theory if I want to be balanced, you know, this is my range and this is what it looks like
*  I'll bet this 50% of time bet this 50% time. However, if I know that you
*  Think that I bluff too much
*  Right, then i'm not going to bluff as much
*  I'm going to start instead of betting these hands that I would 50 50 now what i'll do is i'll do like
*  70 30 where i'm basically value betting most of the time against you, you know or vice versa if I know you always fold
*  Because you think I have it i'm going to veer the other way and instead of bluffing 50 i'll bluff 70 80 percent of time
*  To take advantage of your perception of me. So to be successful. Do you have to
*  construct a solid model of all the players
*  In the game or can you ignore them?
*  I think it's really important like when I play I have in my phone
*  I have a player profile with everyone that I play with whenever I pick up whether it's physical tells or
*  Tendencies they like to you know
*  That that they have um and overall that's just gonna you know, that's gonna allow you to exploit more, right?
*  So like if I played with somebody i've never played before
*  I'm probably just going to play optimally or at least as optimal as I know how until I start to
*  You know gain some information on that player so that I can start to exploit them
*  So what's the when you say optimally? What does optimally mean versus so game theory optimal versus?
*  Exploitative yeah, so that's like sort of the big debate in poker. We call it for short gto game theory optimal versus
*  exploitative play
*  So gto game theory optimal is the idea that no like i'm going to set up my play so that no matter what you do
*  You cannot exploit me so essentially that's playing rock paper scissors, right and throwing
*  What 33 of each every time right? Nothing you do can beat that nothing. You'll never be able to beat that right?
*  Exploitative play is starting to notice that okay. Well, you know what this guy loves rock. He loves playing rock
*  So i'm gonna go paper a little more so i'm gonna take advantage of them
*  So I won't be through but now all of a sudden when I do that
*  I'm no longer playing optimal because if you knew that I was making that adjustment
*  Now you can exploit me
*  So that's where the sort of what we call the leveling war happens where people veer from you know, the optimal line of okay
*  33 percent each for each one. You can't beat that
*  But you also can't win with that either
*  So you're always trying to be at the at the cutting at the leading edge of suboptimal play
*  Yeah, you're going back and forth and listen at the highest levels like online that these guys play like they're trying to play pretty close to
*  Like game theory optimal because it's very difficult to do first of all
*  No human being will ever be able to compute at the level that computers can it's just never going to happen. So
*  That's where like the human mind has to come into play and say all right
*  Well, you know if I was playing against the robot I would do x but i'm not i'm playing against you
*  So I have to adjust so does game theory optimal only look at the the bedding and the hands in the current
*  hands
*  in the current
*  hand
*  Or does it look at the history?
*  So if you were to play optimally optimally would you need to look at the history of the individual players or just every hand is
*  taken afresh see that's why I love playing exploitatively for the most part because
*  With gto it anything that's happened in the past has no bearing on this situation
*  It's simply based on what is the optimal play in a vacuum in this spot?
*  Whereas exploitatively, okay, this guy bluffs way too much in these spots
*  So now I can make an adjustment and call more, you know based on past information
*  Gto doesn't take into account history at all. So like in a tournament
*  How quickly can you construct a player profile that you've never played before?
*  Depends on the level of the buy-in really right? So the higher the buy-in
*  Generally speaking you can assume if they're professionals that they're going to have pretty similar profiles because you know
*  Everyone's playing you know, if you're playing this game well, it looks similar right at the lower levels
*  You know playing say in a 1000 or 1500 dollar buy-in or less
*  You know within a half an hour an hour
*  I have an idea of all right just by seeing how some players played a few hands
*  That you know
*  So here's the thing with poker it's like I can see one clue of what he did
*  And it tells me so much about what he'll do in a vast number of scenarios
*  And you're saying at the high level people don't give too many clues. I mean well at the highest level
*  Is people are so much more similar in terms of their style of play
*  They try to find some kind of balance between the gto and now with all that we've seen on tv, right?
*  Like people get to watch streams and whatever so you get to watch all the top players play
*  So if you want to learn how to play better guess what you do you copy what they're doing essentially like oh
*  He's only raising this much. I'm gonna do the same. They're betting this much. I'm gonna do the same. So
*  as a result what you end up having is sort of uh,
*  You know every everyone deciding like I guess it's similar in chess with openings right people figure out
*  Okay, this is an opening. This is what you do and that's it
*  You know and then everyone's similar to that and then you have of course the outliers who try to do things a little differently
*  and confuse people
*  It seems like the outliers like we talked offline that magnus in order to win magnus carlson
*  Has to play suboptimally in the openings to to take it take his opponents out of the comfort zone
*  So he can play what he calls pure chess as quickly as possible was just both short and deep calculations
*  purely what you're looking at the board versus memorized openings and memorized lines is it the case that
*  The best poker players are the ones that are able to at the right time
*  play really suboptimally or really
*  um unorthodox
*  Yeah, specifically there's one guy who last year sort of took the poker world by storm and his name is michael adamo
*  And he was doing things like I said
*  You know most of the top pros play very similarly with the way that they you know construct ranges and their bet sizing and all
*  These kind of things he was doing some crazy things that nobody else was doing
*  So he studied, you know sort of a different form of poker and it it was unorthodox
*  And it you know, it throws people off because he's in his comfort zone with these bet sizes and different things
*  Whereas everyone else they're they're not well studied in those spots. So
*  As a result of him being unorthodox
*  He became like a monster and very difficult to play against because he really knew what he was doing with it in
*  Tournament or cash games. It was tournaments. Yeah, he was crushing tournaments
*  He was going against the norm in terms of what is like, you know
*  This is what you should do as a poker player in this spot. He wasn't doing that
*  He was doing what he thought was best and he was doing things outside the norm that again in a vacuum
*  You could look at that and you go that's incorrect
*  That he should not do that is a clear-cut mistake even you know
*  The solvers or the computers or game theory would say this is wrong what he's doing
*  But it's not wrong if he's doing it in a way that he's exploiting other players tendencies
*  So for example with him say he's playing far too aggressively. Okay, that's not good
*  Unless your opponents are playing way too passively
*  So if your opponents are playing passively the answer is to be more aggressive with them and that's I think one of the
*  You know biggest advantages he had was he was willing to do that
*  so bet
*  Big big pots bluffing huge so in a spot where somebody would make it a thousand he's he's he's making it 22 000
*  What what is this? This makes no sense and then people kind of know he has nothing but they they're too afraid to uh call him
*  On it. Well, and then sometimes what happens is this is where the leveling comes in. You're like, oh man, this guy's crazy
*  He's bluffing like nuts then he bets the 22 000 and you say ah i'm taking my stand I call and then he shows you
*  Like, you know four of a kind or something like that
*  So he gets people out of their comfort zone and I really enjoy watching him play. He's probably my favorite player to watch
*  Today watching a guy like that. What aspect of his play have you been able to incorporate into your own?
*  Like what do you learn from that because you're constantly learning you're constantly adjusting
*  Yeah, well, no, and I love it
*  And as I said, so I think a lot of players sort of come to the same conclusions about this is how you play the spot
*  But he doesn't and I love watching and thinking in terms of like why he's doing this and one specific thing for example is
*  He's willing to really go for it. So in a spot where let's say he bets 2000. He knows he'll get you call 2000, right?
*  But he wants it all
*  He wants it all so he says you know what?
*  I'll give up the 2000 that's guaranteed and i'll bet
*  50 000
*  And maybe if you call that now, you know, so listen you lose the 2000 seven eight times
*  But if I get called for the 50 just once, you know, i'm profiting from that and it also sets the uh,
*  You know the template for you to really sort of be a player that people are afraid of plugins
*  He knocked me out in a tournament very early on in a huge event and he had he was so far ahead
*  He was one step ahead of my thought process in hand and he did something that makes no sense whatsoever
*  I looked it up on the computer huge mistake if you will but not a mistake because he was taking advantage of my tendency
*  Do you remember the cars? Is there an example? I remember the whole thing
*  Yeah, I remember like this yesterday
*  Can you take it like through an example hand that really demonstrates it? So i'll explain the hand here
*  So I uh, i'm on the button and I have ace king which is a very good hand
*  And I raise and he calls from the big blind
*  The flop is nine seven five. So I have nothing really here. He checks I check behind the turn card's an ace
*  He checks
*  I bet half the pot there were six thousand there. I bet 3000. Okay
*  Now this is not a typical thing you see people do but he raised me to 36 000
*  Massive raise bigger than the size of the pot. What was the flop again?
*  Nine seven five. Okay, turn an ace. What is he representing exactly?
*  Well, he could have a straight he could have three three of a kind he could have you know aces up
*  He could have a whole bunch of hands. So he checked raises me big to 36 000. I call the bet
*  so now there's something like 75 000 the river is a
*  Five so the board pairs. Okay
*  He thinks for a while and he bets all of it, which is three times the pot he bets 225 000
*  There's only 75 000 out there, right? And in theory, he should never ever have a hand that can do that
*  Right, so it confused me and I was like, okay. Well this guy's aggressive
*  He likes to bluff and all this kind of stuff
*  So I made the call with the ace king and he turned over six eight. So we had a straight
*  But here's the thing in theory
*  That river card is bad for him
*  When I call the turn I have a lot of the time three of a kind two pair that just made a full house
*  So he was risking that and the reason he did it was because he thought I would
*  Perceive him to be bluffing a lot
*  So he just went for it and it worked he was able to double up right away
*  And knock me out of the tournament like an hour in do you think he thought you might fold like what I think specific
*  I think it was it came down to this. It's as simple as this
*  He was cognizant of his image as being a wild aggressive bluffer, right?
*  And he was fully taking advantage of me
*  Knowing that my tendency in these spots is to be curious and I want to call and I want to see it
*  So he was fully taking advantage of the fact that he thought I would call too often
*  Because otherwise his play makes no sense a small bet a medium-sized bet those make sense
*  But the bet that he made
*  In theory is indefensible. It's just like clearly a mistake
*  But that's why poker's so fascinating because he makes this play and it wasn't a mistake
*  It was above the rim is what it was. Do you think he put you on ace something?
*  I think exactly what he thought I had was ace king or something like that
*  You know, oh that is so fun. That is so fun that the two players at such a high level were able to
*  Mess with each other's mind. How old is he? Is he young? He's in his 20s
*  Yeah, I feel like that takes a lot of guts to uh, take risks like that
*  Well, that's what's great about him
*  He's certainly never accused of not having the guts to put it in and that's scary to play against right?
*  The easiest opponent to play against is one who's just straightforward passive, you know, not wild and crazy playing against him
*  He's going to put you in the blender as we say
*  How can you control
*  what
*  You're perceived as representing what hand you're perceived of as representing. So if we're if the game of modern poker is
*  Others are representing certain hands through the information they convey and you're representing a certain hand range. Sorry
*  uh through your play, how can you control that or is that not
*  Is that the wrong way to think about it? But isn't
*  Bluffing and bet sizing and all that kind of stuff essentially controlling
*  What others perceive as the hand range you have?
*  Ultimately
*  In terms of like controlling people's perception of you. You can't fully control it, but you can do things to um
*  Sway it right as I said earlier showing bluffs and things like that, you know leads your opponent to think maybe you do this
*  More often than you're supposed to or whatever the case maybe but in terms of like controlling
*  um, you know
*  What your opponent can think about your hands in certain spots? I don't really think it equates that way
*  It doesn't really you know, I think what people do when they're playing a hand is they think in terms of all right
*  What does my range look like here?
*  Okay, so my range has value so you you look at you know, the actual hand you have secondarily
*  So you say okay. Well, I could have this I could have this I actually have this
*  Right, but I could have all these hands so my opponent if he's thinking on a high level
*  He knows I could have all these hands and I have this one
*  So what do I do with this one right in the bigger scope of things? I guess i'm trying to understand
*  If you're betting
*  Isn't a bet pre-flop
*  Your bet doesn't that narrow the hand ranges?
*  Doesn't matter what you have. Absolutely it narrows the and absolutely and if you bet big
*  combined with
*  Um, the perception of you at the table doesn't that represent the hand range?
*  Absolutely, so like you can with betting essentially control what people estimate you to have sure so that makes it so yeah
*  So that's that's true. So for example, one of the most extreme examples is
*  We have uh, we do there's like there's there's spots where there's a bet that's considered polarizing, right?
*  so
*  Let's say there's a thousand in the pot and you bet 10 000 which is crazy big, right?
*  That's saying one of two things I either have the absolute best possible hand or absolutely nothing
*  Because any of the hands in the middle I wouldn't do that with
*  So i'm essentially telling you when I bet that i'm like you I either got it
*  Or you know, I got I don't have a mediocre hand like just a pair of nines or a pair of tens
*  I have a royal flush or have nine high so with my bet sizing I can control
*  How my opponent is perceiving what my range is going to be? So for example, you know, similarly if I bet small
*  Right. Well, that could be a lot of hands, right?
*  That can represent a big part of my range
*  The bigger the bet the more the narrower the range apparently the more polarized it is. Yeah. Yeah
*  How far could you get without looking at your cards? Do you think how well could you do?
*  It depends on who i'm playing with right? So if I was playing in a tournament with mediocre or weak players
*  I think I could probably do pretty well, but even like world class world class
*  I don't think you'd have much of a chance really
*  I mean the question is trying to get it like how important is it the actual hands you have versus the the the hands you're representing?
*  Right. So that's the question of essentially if you're not looking at your hand pre-flop
*  You're basically giving up a fundamental advantage, right?
*  Where you're you're going to be playing way suboptimally in terms of your hand selection, right?
*  Because if you don't look at your hand, you might have a two and a three that's not good, but now you're playing it
*  So you've invested whatever two three thousand bucks with absolute garbage and it's very difficult to climb that hill
*  Right, so it's much better to actually look at your cards and go. Okay
*  I'll throw away the two and three and i'll play the ace king
*  Speaking of garbage, uh, you're you've said that 10-7 is your favorite poker hand to play is that still the case and what aspect of it?
*  Is that you enjoy? Yeah, so it's one of those viewer discretion is advised like 10-7
*  I've just noticed throughout my life, you know, it's a tendency thing that i've been lucky with it
*  Yeah, so that's just sort of but it's not like i'm gonna look at 10-7 and go. Oh, wow
*  You know i'm gonna call it all in or anything like that. I'll play it in situations where it makes sense
*  But you know, it's rare because it's not a very good hand
*  but is there
*  some aspect of
*  belief
*  In the magic of this hand manifests quality of play
*  Or is that a little bit?
*  So here's the thing it's you know poker players some have said it's unlucky to be superstitious
*  But we're all a little bit superstitious a little bit, you know
*  And so I don't know maybe it is a case where when I have 10-7 I feel
*  Somehow energetically that you know, i'm more likely to catch something which may actually make me more apt to be aggressive and confident
*  In the hand, but but you really shouldn't let yourself do that like you're not supposed to fall in love with any specific hands
*  Yeah, but
*  You know uncertainty
*  Is ruthless
*  it's you know, the the fact that it's a
*  A game of statistics it
*  It can be too painful for the human psychology. So maybe you have to hold on to certain
*  superstitions
*  because
*  You know, I mean there's there's a cold absurdity to the fact that you can play up you can play extremely well and still lose
*  I mean the
*  actually this year
*  you've played the
*  What is it 50 days of world series of poker?
*  And it seems like at least from the perspective of me looking at it through the internet
*  It seems like there's a lot of hands that you were like 70 30 80 20
*  All-in hands that you just did not you were not going your way that can sort of break you mentally. Absolutely
*  Yeah, one of the hardest things especially about playing because cash games and tournaments are different
*  One of the most difficult things about you know, being a tournament player is resilience because more often than not like so if there's a tournament with
*  Thousand people to win the tournament. You have to get all of the chips. That means there's one winner and 999 losers
*  So it's very rare that you actually like win all the chips
*  So you're essentially at some point in every tournament you play going to deal with like really bad luck and disappointment
*  And sometimes those streaks can have you question yourself and be introspective about okay, so I think i'm 47 now
*  I think i've gotten better as time went on between distinguishing. Okay. Am I losing right now because of bad luck?
*  Or is it fundamentally decisions i'm making are not very good, right?
*  And that's one of the hardest things for anyone who plays poker to get to right?
*  Why am I losing am I losing because of
*  My opponents being better. I'm not playing well or am I losing just because of luck and because there's so much variance in poker
*  A lot of players can be confused with on both sides of the coin one guy's winning and he thinks he's great
*  He's really not wait till the cards break even as we say, you know
*  I think there's a lot of parallels to life as well
*  You don't if you get screwed over over and over it's hard to know if you're doing something wrong
*  Or if it's just bad luck. I think they did a study
*  I remember there was like a study it was supposed to be related to gambling but it was mice and they put them in a little
*  Maze and they'd go down these three tubes and they'd go down this one tube and there'd be cheese
*  Right, and then they'd go down again cheese three times in a row. There was cheese there, right?
*  The next time there was an electric shock there not cheese
*  The rat went, you know, he the mouse went to get zapped. He got zapped
*  Okay came back
*  He kept going back to get zapped until he died like he kept going because he found cheese there
*  He has won there. So he continued to go chase that win despite it being you know now all of a sudden
*  Not worthwhile till uh till they died and essentially what they said was that is essentially how they uh compared it to like
*  You know the gambling brain and how people think about gambling you're chasing the wins
*  You learn too much you sort of overgeneralize the lessons learned from the times you've won
*  I say yeah, like beginner's luck can be detrimental if you if you have some early luck
*  And you believe that this is just the way it's supposed to be forever
*  You know, it can put you in a delusional state
*  Where you know you you feel like i'm i'm just great, but no you're not you were just lucky in the beginning
*  I actually played poker once in vegas. It was a um, it wasn't a tournament, but it was a kind of
*  tournament like
*  Style, I already forgot what it was. But what I do remember is I had four of a kind
*  So the last hand i've ever played
*  In poker was I got a four of a kind and there was a
*  A couple of others with really strong hands
*  So everybody went all in and I think you get some kind of bonus for getting four of a kind bad beat jackpot
*  You were playing it. Yeah, so something like this. I apologize if I don't know the details
*  But I just remember winning a lot of money
*  And I walked away from the table. I said i'm not playing poker again. This is great
*  I'm gonna hit it up top because I started to feel like this is your I started to think even though
*  I haven't really played poker at all that i'm i'm good and that was a really dangerous feeling
*  And everybody was really mad for walking away from the table
*  One of the other things that I think's interesting about poker too is good is relative, right?
*  so
*  You could be the seventh best player in the whole world like literally seventh best player
*  But if you're playing with the other six, you're the sucker
*  You are you are the like the worst player in the game, right? So like there's a lot of players
*  For example like the dan blaserians of the world, right? He's not a top level player
*  Like you know these guys you see on tv, but he probably makes more money than they do
*  Because he plays with people that are far below his skill level
*  So part of the part of the skill of being a poker player is finding situations where you're profitable, you know
*  regardless of your skill level
*  Another connection to life. Uh, do you think dan balsarian is telling the truth about having made
*  What is it 50 100 million dollars just a huge amount of money playing poker considering what I know about the private games
*  And the types of players who play in these private games and the stakes that they play
*  I absolutely believe you know dan has made I don't know how many millions but you know, whether it's 50 whatever
*  But it wouldn't surprise me that if you play in these games within a year or you you know
*  You find the right businessman who has way too much bitcoin money, you know
*  And you know in one night you take him for 20 million. I absolutely could see it
*  I don't see any reason why listen where he got his money initially, you know, that's up to
*  Interpretation from his father or whatever. But what but has he made a bunch of money playing poker?
*  Absolutely, no question. Did do you feel like as somebody who loves the game?
*  Do you think there's something almost ethically wrong?
*  in playing people much worse than you
*  so yeah, that's a good question because
*  You know part of the reason I played poker and wanted to become professional was like I wanted to be make my mother proud
*  Right, and I don't think she would be proud of me taking like grandma betty's like last five dollars
*  You know and again down the street, you know sending her broke and taking her pension check
*  So I play at the highest stakes against people who can afford it they know who I am
*  I'm not a hustler
*  I'm not pretending i'm bad at poker to squeeze in like I was thinking about this just yesterday because I played in a game
*  that
*  If I played that sort of role where a lot of guys do pros that sort of play down their skill level
*  Pretend they're just one of the guys these guys can make 20 30 million dollars in a year
*  Legitimately, like I believe that like if I did that if I said, you know what?
*  I'm gonna go down that path get into these games in la, you know
*  Travel and do all this kind of stuff. I can make 20 million a year, but it feels a little greasy
*  Right. I don't like to kiss anyone's ass. I don't like to ask it for anyone for a favor or things like that. So
*  but but yeah, like
*  I I feel
*  Listen a rich guy who wants to sit down with a million bucks and get drunk and lose it
*  I have no empathy for that. I'm like, I don't have any moral qualms with that. So grandma betty is a billionaire
*  Uh, okay, send it send it right, you know
*  Absolutely
*  um
*  Well, let me ask you about a tough period of your recent life. You had a rough like we mentioned the world series of poker
*  Losing 1.1 million dollars over 48 days. What were you going through mentally during that?
*  So here's the thing, you know, I do like you said I do a youtube vlog every day
*  So I kind of share my thoughts and listen I can edit that thing and keep out the bad stuff
*  But I think it's more authentic and genuine to show people the actual struggles and the pain that I go through
*  You know without it and i'd say the one thing i'm most proud of throughout the entire thing is the resilience because there are moments
*  You see me where i'm broken. I'm just like I can't take it
*  I broke a selfie stick this year like I was filming it because you know
*  I do for my vlog I smash the stick through it in the corner, right? It's just that was my like
*  Hit rock bottom moment and then I put the camera on me and I was like, all right
*  I let people see it but mentally it was very difficult because
*  There was a feeling of hopelessness
*  where
*  You can I was making good decisions like I genuinely felt like i'm playing really really well
*  But every time my money went in my opponent's money went in and say I was
*  60 70 80 for about a two-week stretch. I lost every one of those and you start to wonder you like
*  I can't win if I never win, you know in these spots. So it was difficult. Luckily I have you know
*  20 odd years of experience and how to deal with it. And so as I said, I wake up the next day
*  Ready to go
*  So as if nothing happened to a certain degree obviously, you know
*  The more the more it happens in the higher binds like the one where I broke the selfie stick
*  I lost 500 000 in that tournament, right? And it was like the last card. It was painful. I think he lost
*  Yeah, that's great that video
*  I think he lost
*  What led up to the selfie stick gate like what you just lost your shit for a like
*  100 milliseconds
*  Like it was very brief. You're just like what the world wasn't making any sense
*  Like how like do I keep losing kind of thing? How did you why did you lose your shit?
*  You should never really think like this but part of me felt like I deserve to win this. Yes, right?
*  So part of me was like listen, i've lost so many in the last two weeks
*  All right, let you know the poker gods be kind to me right now. Let me win this and it looked good
*  Yeah, I was in a great situation on the flop great situation on the turn. I'm about to be a competitor
*  I'm gonna be a contender in this tournament to win a big prize pool and turn the whole thing around
*  It's all there for the taking and then boom the last card it just
*  You know
*  It was a couple weeks of frustration in the moment of filming that I just had, you know
*  Sort of a visceral reaction, you know
*  And I smacked the smacked the selfie stick and then like I it was I see a cornered safe
*  I threw the selfie stick on the ground and of course social media blows up about how you know, I was a violent act
*  Yeah, you know, I mean it's like have you never watched sports?
*  Have you never seen a guy on the golf course smack his club or throw their helmet like
*  You know, there was the there's a guy Justin Bonomo is a poker player. Yeah, and he's super
*  How to for lack of a better word offended by everything and he was equating my throwing a stick on the ground to violence against women
*  domestic abuse and the idea that like
*  This makes women feel unsafe to play poker
*  And so that was kind of a running joke for the last two weeks where every time I sat at the table
*  The guys be like, oh I feel unsafe
*  Yeah, can you take me through the hand? Do you remember what the hand was? Like what was the yeah?
*  So it was a you know, the player on the button raised
*  David Peters very aggressive player. He he went all in from the blind and I had a pair of pocket tens
*  So I went with my tens and he had queen ten of spades
*  So I was good I have way the best hand and the flop was like king nine three one spade
*  Turn was like the eight of spades. So now he has a flush draw and the river was another spade
*  So he caught spade spade and he made he made a flush. Wow, but statistically you were winning the whole time
*  Yeah, I was winning it up until the last card. What did he go all in on?
*  Was it a bluff?
*  He made what's considered like a pretty standard play in modern poker where you know a guy raised and he was just trying to pick
*  Up, you know, what was there and he ran into a hand in the big blind and you know, he got lucky
*  So what was the throughout?
*  The strategy of preparation the strategy of play so you're playing so many days
*  Is are you trying to ignore the results and stick to a particular strategy?
*  Yes for the most part, you know
*  what i'm trying to do is like
*  I formulate a strategy for the whole seven weeks because there's a very there's a varying degree of buy-ins too
*  Like you have small ones like 1500 then you got like 250 000 buying so I map out
*  The seven weeks and right i'll give a little bit of mental energy to the 1500
*  Which means i'll be on my phone. I'm not gonna I don't care as much about this one, but the 250k fully engaged
*  Fully focused, you know up against obviously the higher the buy-in, you know super top competition and
*  You know as far as strategy goes
*  Focusing on each day playing the best I can not the result like because if you focus on the result
*  You're you're focusing the wrong place. Your focus should be on the decisions you actually make
*  Right, and if you're making good decisions consistently you have to continue to do that
*  The frustrating part is this with poker unlike chess or other things making the best possible decision doesn't mean you win
*  Often you lose you don't chess
*  well, I did magnus
*  carlson has also talked about that I
*  I get there's some
*  Non-deterministic thing about chess too given the limited
*  uh cognitive
*  Capacity of the human mind so he he says that the world championship should have 20 30 40 50 games not
*  Not the few that they have it's too low of a sample. So in that sense the high stakes
*  Poker tournaments are very too low sample. Sure. Yeah, well when you think of the world series of poker
*  So you like as you said, I lost about 1 million right in one tournament that was 500 000
*  So then you know like a few others here of high buying tournaments
*  so the sample or the amount was
*  You know 40 50 total tournaments with you know high variance
*  And if you don't run well or do well in the highest buy-ins, you know, you're gonna have a losing summer
*  So you did a podcast on the mental game a few years ago, but that's just something you really care about
*  So what aspects of the mental game in poker is most difficult to master?
*  I think the most difficult thing for people is self-awareness
*  Right and and resilience self-awareness to know. Okay
*  So, you know again, is it am I am I not doing as well as I could be because of luck?
*  Or is there things that I can learn and I always look to mistakes as opportunities
*  I really do when I make a mistake in a poker hand, right?
*  Call it a breakdown or whatever
*  That's where breakthroughs happen. I'm like, oh, you know what? I could have done here
*  I could have done this and that would have been really good and i'm going to do that going forward
*  So I think like with anything, um, you know when you start out playing golf
*  Like your goal is to just hit the ball, right?
*  Then you try to hit it near
*  Then you're trying to hit it straight then you're trying to hit it on the green
*  Then you're trying to hit it closer to the green to the point where the pros get where
*  You know, they're so finite. They're trying to hit it 63 yards and spin it back three yards
*  They're in it's imperfect like they don't hit the perfect shot because the perfect shot for them is it goes in
*  But they try and make the mistakes smaller and smaller and smaller poker is the same
*  We all make mistakes consistently. The goal is to minimize especially the big ones
*  What was the lowest point for you psychologically?
*  In poker in general actually maybe it was this year. Maybe it was in general. Do you remember there was times in your life?
*  Speaking of resilience that were extremely difficult to you mentally
*  Yeah, so early on, you know as basically as you know as a teenager
*  I was playing toronto and then in my early 20s i'm like i'm going to vegas right and I thought I was the best
*  I'm like 21 years old. I'm like check me out right show up with three thousand dollars 24 hours later
*  You know money's gone
*  And I remember I remember the moment
*  Vividly it was at the binyons horseshoe. It was about three in the morning. I was playing with seven other people
*  You know, I lost my last chips. I went to the bathroom washed up
*  Got out
*  They all left
*  And it was like a moment where I realized like okay in toronto. I was the big fish
*  But here they were playing because of me. I was the sucker
*  I remembered every one of their faces and then I remember not having enough money to get back to budget suites where I was staying
*  so
*  I walked I didn't you know, I walked and in that moment I was thinking about like is this something that i'll be able to do
*  Am I good enough?
*  You know, what am I going to do now i'm in vegas. I don't know anybody and I have no money, right?
*  So that was certainly like what felt like a low point walking back behind paradise and twain
*  Which is not a great part of town
*  Where did you find the the strength to answer? Yes to that question that you can you can still do good
*  I think this has been sort of a pattern in my life where like in the evening after it happens like I don't have it
*  You know, I don't have that feeling of hope or you know
*  Resilience if you will i'm allowing myself to experience despair, which is exactly where i'm at
*  But then a good night's sleep
*  Wake up the next morning and just within me. I have that inner confidence to say you know what fuck it
*  Get back on the hobby horse find a way make it work
*  Right and I but I do believe it's really therapeutic and worthwhile to allow yourself to feel and vent
*  So many people today the instagram culture world I call it
*  It's like they want to act like they're perfect. Nothing bothers them bullshit, right? You're pissed off. It's okay to show it emotions
*  Fine, we all have it. There's no reason you have to suppress it
*  Obviously, you don't want to have guys throwing selfie sticks around the room every time they lose a pot, right?
*  Yeah, but but you know, you're gonna make everybody feel unsafe. Yeah, exactly that happens
*  Yeah, so you're saying um, there is a culture of saying, you know stay positive all this kind of stuff
*  But you know when you feel despair don't resist it
*  Ride it out because it doesn't go away
*  Right that feeling, you know, you think you put it away in the pit of your stomach and you think you know, it's gone
*  It's not it's still there. Let yourself go fuck. Yeah, you know, it's all right
*  You know it
*  There's nothing wrong with being a little bit emotional because once you've experienced it you let it out
*  Now you can move past it. Yeah, and I feel like as long as your brain chemistry can support it
*  You can usually learn a good lesson from it like you become stronger. You become more resilient through it
*  It's really interesting and a good night's sleep can really help. Absolutely. Yeah
*  so through 2022
*  And in general, what is a perfect day in the life of daniel negrano look like when you're
*  Like on a day when you have to play a big game
*  Big turn of game and so on so like what what time do you wake up? What do you eat for breakfast?
*  So my life is twofold like one when i'm playing
*  Hardcore and one when i'm not
*  And they look very different, right? So i'll give you a quick glimpse of like when i'm not
*  up at 10
*  You know breakfast in the gym at noon, you know
*  post workout
*  uh
*  meal coffee
*  Walk like, you know, I try to get that's what I do for cardio, you know, and just very like home-bodied
*  I don't leave the house. It's very like boring and mundane right long distance walk
*  So like what do you do when you're walking you're thinking about stuff?
*  Well, no, honestly, I just walk on the treadmill
*  I try to get 15 000 steps a day and I just walk for basically like an hour while I watch a show or i'm on
*  The computer or something like that, you know, i'm on the treadmill. Why walking not running?
*  Well, I mean I think
*  Walking I mean I do a little bit of running but hardly any I don't enjoy it
*  Like I just like walking and frankly for fat loss when it's usually what i'm doing after big poker tournaments is getting back in shape
*  That walking is ideal for it, right? So essentially it's like the tale of two during the world series of poker
*  All my sort of structured life throwing out the window. There's no walking
*  There's very little walking. There's very little working out. There's very little anything I go into the world series
*  You know like this year I went in around
*  157 and I expected to gain about 10 pounds during the world series not good pounds wasn't muscle
*  But that's about what I did 165 and then I spend the next month trying to you know lose it
*  But during the world series when i'm playing the most important thing
*  Without question that I have to focus on and this is why I stopped focusing on working out all this stuff is sleep
*  If i'm not rested i'm useless if I only get five six hours and I have to go back the next day and play 14 hours
*  The chances of me being at my best very very slim. So sleep is a priority
*  What's the perfect amount of sleep for you on those days eight?
*  So eight hours is my go-to every night during the world series of poker
*  It's just not possible because of the way that is structured. Sometimes the tournaments end at 2 15 a.m
*  I get home
*  about three o'clock
*  Takes me 30 minutes 40 minutes to get to sleep. So now let's say i'm in bed by four
*  Well, the tournament's at you know
*  Two so I have to get up and whatever so it's very difficult to get exactly eight a lot of the time
*  You know and also get back there in time. Is there any hacks to uh, quiet the mind?
*  because
*  You're going on a pretty intense roller coaster mentally when you're playing
*  Was is there any tricks to get into sleep?
*  Given i've been very lucky like i'm blessed. I don't know if it's because of diet or what but i've always been a very good
*  Sleeper you just shut off. I get to sleep and I sleep like a baby, you know
*  And I also nap really well like during the world series
*  Sometimes what will happen is let's say I get knocked out of one event at 4 pm
*  And there's another one that I can jump in instead of jumping right into it
*  I'll go into like a private room and take 45 minute nap
*  And you know and give me enough energy to to continue and sort of reset my mind
*  Yeah, and it solves a lot of problems with the nap too. It does. Yeah, I feel like the nap
*  Is is a magical trick in life
*  What else diet wise? What do you uh?
*  Your your mind is going
*  You know, uh pretty intensely all day
*  Yeah, so during like like I said when i'm not playing i'm super regimented
*  You know, I have I literally measure everything
*  You know, I count calories I count macros. I I follow it to a t pretty balanced diet or any i'm a vegan vegan
*  So it's you know, vegan diet like but balanced in terms of carbs and yeah. Yeah. No, I mean I eat a healthy amount
*  I'm doing probably 150 grams of protein
*  And uh like 60 grams of fat 50 and then about and try to measure it all out. I do
*  Yeah, I basically I created a meal plan
*  So what I did for myself is because i'm really anal and i made a spreadsheet
*  With like a day's food and I have six different ones
*  So I just follow it like I don't it actually makes my life so much easier
*  When I don't have to think about what i'm gonna eat for lunch or what i'm eating for dinner
*  I already know what i'm gonna eat
*  I already wrote it down and it doesn't get boring because i'm switching it up every day
*  You know every six days and again, occasionally i'll
*  You know splurge or do something different during the world series of poker. I eat whatever the fuck I want to eat
*  Like it's at 2 a.m
*  I don't crave like a broccoli carrot salad like I want chocolate
*  Candy and chips so i'll just do it. So you listen to the cravings
*  Yeah, I realize like it's surprising because like you're so regimented. Yeah outside of that
*  It's really difficult like i've done it before where I played the world series of poker and
*  I made it a point to work out every day. But what that did was it sacrificed sleep
*  Yeah, so then I found like at 1 a.m. I would be more tired
*  You know because I've expended more energy than I would otherwise so I essentially like look at the world series
*  It's six seven weeks where my body's just gonna take a beating not like a ufc fighter
*  But like a different kind of beating and that's okay because I have so much confidence that within six weeks
*  Of just like eating right and working out I can get back to where I was
*  It's just hilarious to me that you'd be eating chocolate what eating chocolate in bed as you're trying to get to sleep
*  Is this like literally a bag of like chips or chocolate?
*  Like on my way home and before bed, you know, just whatever
*  This is what the professional athlete does at the the highest most difficult event of his career. Okay, so
*  What else is there in terms of mental preparation?
*  And focus and meditation those kinds of things leading up to the games
*  Is there anything you like to like any rituals you you like to follow?
*  So yeah
*  I have dabbled in the past with like meditation and different things like that and I know that there's health benefits to it
*  And I and I understand that a lot of people get a lot from it and i've done it for
*  Good amount of time like long periods of time. I found that for me
*  I think it was predominantly placebo like it it really wasn't doing anything
*  Yeah for me that I felt like it was it felt like I was doing something
*  But I really I didn't see the any specific results from it. So, um, so I don't really do that too much
*  One thing that I will do
*  For me is is leading up is there's so much footage now
*  That i'll make it a point to like watch my opponents and then
*  With like my phone i'll take notes
*  And i'll keep track of different things that i'm seeing and that sort of and then what i'll do is i'll formulate a game plan
*  Like i'm playing the poker masters coming up in about a week
*  And i'll look to see the tendencies of what my opponents are doing and then i'll come up with like some some things that i'm going
*  To do some tricks of the trade if you will not game theory optimal stuff stuff that I think oh
*  They're making a mistake here that I can exploit
*  And then I look to do that in different ways and always look to you know, throw curveballs
*  How hard is that that process?
*  Uh, do you enjoy it or is it like really hard work to analyze the players to try to understand?
*  What are the different holes? What are the different mistakes? What are the strengths to avoid that kind of stuff?
*  I think the only thing that makes it harder is when you're young
*  Right, you're in your 20s and you're trying to make your nest egg. You're like you're trying to make your retirement money
*  You're hungry, right? You're like clubber lang and you know the gym you're hungry
*  Whereas, you know rocky's in there taking pictures and smiling and doing commercials stuff like that. So I am 47. I'm financially
*  Okay, I don't need to win. I don't need to compete at the highest levels. So I think it was a boxer
*  I don't remember which one
*  When asked this he was asked the question, um, you know
*  How do you get up in the morning, you know still and and do those morning runs and he says you know what?
*  I'll be honest with you. It's a lot more difficult doing the 4 a.m. Run in silk pajamas
*  Right. It just is right, but i've always
*  Been self-motivated and i've always found a way so it's harder in the sense of like
*  It's not a need I can still get by without it
*  But so in that regard it does feel like a little bit of work. We're like, oh my god
*  That's a lot of footage. I got to get through and I don't know that I have the time or I don't know that I want to spend
*  10 hours of my day doing that when I could be doing other things
*  I mean, what do you still love about poker when you said when you enter like the times you catch yourself just uh,
*  Being able to sort of take in the awe of it
*  What aspects do you love? I think that like for me i've always been really competitive
*  But I was never going to be a professional athlete or professional snooker player. I wasn't good enough at any of that stuff
*  I didn't have the body type whatever
*  But poker it sort of levels the playing field, right? You're six five two forty big deal, you know, we're not we're not fighting here
*  We're we're fighting a different type of war. So the competitive aspect I also
*  Have always been fueled throughout my career
*  by by doubters, so this is probably unhealthy, but
*  Every time people say like you're done. You're washed up. You can't win anymore. It just makes me want to prove them wrong
*  Yeah, right. So I have a little bit of that in me
*  Which again you're reading the comments and all these kind like i've been told many times throughout my career for the last 15 that
*  I'm done. I can't compete anymore
*  And uh, and I and I enjoy
*  You know proving them wrong
*  Yeah, uh the game has changed so much
*  Uh the the the greats of the past surely cannot be the greats of the present those that that that kind of commentary will continue
*  For every sport and certainly for poker because poker really changed a lot or the past couple decades
*  Can you speak to how much has changed? Yeah, because he's been at the top for so long
*  Yeah
*  So complacency is a big issue for for people who make it if you will right so in my era of the poker boom
*  Around the early 2000s there was a group of players who were the big names the stars of the game
*  Well, a lot of them
*  Had their egos out out of black where they just felt like okay. I'm the best. That's it like no
*  There's young guys learning there's new software. There's solvers. There's all these kind of things
*  And if you're not keeping up, then you'll get surpassed and I remember
*  Myself at a very early age saying I never want to be that guy and it was one of my first events in the late 90s
*  I was the young buck
*  Playing with the tom mcavois and brad dowdy the guys of the era, right?
*  And I was doing things more aggressively and they were scoffing at all these young kids with their aggressive three and all this stuff
*  And they were sort of mocking it, you know, and I thought never be that guy
*  Always have the humility to be introspective and always have the respect for your opponents
*  That while while you're think you've got it all figured out they're learning new things and you can learn from them
*  So i've always been willing to sort of swallow my pride and get coached
*  By younger players who I might even be better than but they see blind spots that that I have that I might not
*  And they you know, they help me improve my game
*  I've always been willing to sort of look every six months or a year and say is what i'm doing working
*  And if not, how do I make how do I get better?
*  but
*  most people for my generation
*  They they go the other way. I don't know. They just have this idea that they figured it all out
*  Once you feel like you've mastered it. There's nothing left to learn. That's the moment where everyone else starts to surpass you
*  Uh, that's the moment where you lose the mastery
*  Uh, because it's always evolving. How has the game changed?
*  So the game has changed in terms of the way people learn it, right?
*  When I started out the only way to learn how to play poker was to sit your ass on the chair
*  And play and person yes in person play maybe you jot down hands on a notepad
*  We didn't even have cell phones back then right so right I would write notes
*  I actually brought a notepad and then you know analyze it and sort of try to figure it out that way and
*  think about
*  You know maybe talking to friends and different players like when I grew up there was john juanda alan cunningham and phil ivy and we would
*  Sort of create like a little bit of a master mind
*  Well, how would you play this hand? What would you do here? That was a scent that was the extent of it, right?
*  We never had the correct answers. We always had theories about what might be right not until about five six years ago
*  Where everything changed?
*  Where you know artificial intelligence created solvers that will specifically say okay, this is the optimal play
*  This is the game theory optimal play. So now it introduced poker to a whole new group of
*  Like personality types in my day. It was people that were dregs of society
*  That didn't fit in not college goers with a degree. These are people who were street hustlers playing pool
*  They found poker, you know, they had these unique lives, right? Yeah, but now
*  Because poker can be studied much like you study, you know university or college you had for example
*  The german contingent who was literally analyzing data and coming up with strategies based on this and it's like what?
*  You know and the old guy like, you know, gotta play by feel or whatever and they're like they're learning
*  So I guess the way that you describe it is like in the old days it required skill and talent a card sense
*  Right. That was the only way to become good and today that's not the case
*  Good study habits a good work ethic in that regard can make you look a really good player
*  Even if you
*  Aren't all that talented or gifted part having a good work ethic is a talent, right?
*  Not necessarily card sense
*  But if you're able if you're able to put in the work and and study from these solvers
*  You essentially have the perfect study tool now that you know that we didn't have in my day
*  So what do the solvers give you?
*  Do you start to memorize the optimal play for every single hand?
*  You you try your best. So again
*  Solvers are imperfect as well in terms of the way the humans, uh
*  Utilize them right because you can give solvers
*  A certain number of inputs in terms of what you want it to solve but a solver can think on many many levels
*  So for example, the way that a typical player would do a solve is to say, okay
*  What does a solver think is the best play here?
*  Bet one third pot bet two thirds pot or bet one and a half times pot. Okay, you give it three parameters
*  It comes out with an output and it tells you what what you should do with all the different hands, you know
*  You have however
*  That's a simplified version of what a solver would really do because a solver might decide that seven times the pot is best
*  10 of the pot
*  But but when you're putting in a solve you can only put in, you know specific parameters
*  So that's why frankly that's typically the number one third two third and one and a half times pot is what people often do
*  so they sort of have a gate of a vague idea of what a solver wants but again imperfect in terms of the uh,
*  implementation of it, right and
*  Memorizing all the variables like that king jack offsuit with the king of diamonds is 13%
*  To no one no human brain can do that. So what you do is you bucket it like you bucket it into say instead of
*  10,000 variables you have 10 buckets and you say okay with these hands
*  We do roughly this and we do roughly this and you try your best to you know, stay within those lines
*  But again what I love about live poker partly is that nobody will ever be able to master game theory, you know
*  And mimic a solver, but you also have to incorporate
*  Your position
*  Where you are and obviously what cards you have but also the size of your stack
*  how much money you have and also whether you have the ability or
*  Desire to buy in all those kinds of things. So you have to calculate all of that, right?
*  So the you know, so the solver will do that right and essentially you don't put your hand
*  It tells you you'll look at you'll look at the grade and be like, oh this is my hand
*  It tells you what it is, but it tells you what you what you would do with any hand
*  Right. It gives you the full output and that actually gives you a better idea because you're ultimately like you said
*  Playing a range of hands not not a hand and the solvers do things that are really interesting
*  You've seen alpha go I would imagine brilliant film, right? I thought and I thought what was interesting is there was
*  You know accepted theory from all the top go players that this is what you do
*  but
*  The ai was doing things way different and they're like this has to be wrong, but it really it wasn't
*  So for example a solver may say this right?
*  You let's say you bet on the end
*  And you bet a lot and a solver may say you should fold here with a pair of kings and a queen kicker
*  Which is you know a pair of kings but call with a pair of fours and an ace
*  So it's essentially telling you that you should fold this hand that is much better than this
*  So it begs the question why?
*  Because what the solvers do is they use the information of your own cards
*  To formulate all the possible hands your opponent can have
*  So if your opponent is
*  So basically if you had the king queen
*  You know it may say
*  For a lack of a better nerdy term it blocks potential bluffing hands that your opponent can have
*  So let's say if your opponent would bluff with queen jack, but you have a queen
*  So there are less combinations of queen jack, so it will find a better bluff catcher if you will
*  So that's what's really not intuitive to poker players poker players usually think like well this my hand is pretty good
*  So I got a call but that's not how a solver would think solver uses
*  You know common atrix and you know
*  And sometimes it's tough to get the good why answers you just did for why a solver thinks something is better
*  Or maybe in poker it's a little bit easier, but in the case of go and chess, it's not always obvious why
*  Because it's not going to explain stuff to you
*  I think what's the I think one of the best ways to learn poker is when you see a solver output
*  And it tells you one of these things try to figure out why
*  Why does this solver do this?
*  Why does it want you to call with this and fold this and try to think about it on a deeper level and you go?
*  Aha probably because this card that I have here
*  You know changes the range of my opponent's you know potential
*  I'd love to give your opinion on and your relationship with solvers because for example magnus doesn't use them
*  His team uses them because he feels like he's going to rely on it
*  Too much and you can't use it when you're playing
*  what you really want is to build up extremely strong intuition without the
*  Help of a solver. Is there some aspect of that that rings true to you?
*  Absolutely, I totally can relate to what magnus is saying first and foremost because when solvers were first introduced
*  I didn't come from that world. I didn't I was so intimidated because I didn't know how to use it
*  I don't I don't know how to do an input
*  So I had two guys one guy's a data scientist and you know and other guys like a
*  Poker savant if you will and they coached me and they did it
*  So today if I was in a tough spot, you know, and i'm like, I don't know
*  What would a solver do?
*  I will send them the hand and they'll run the solve for me and then sort of give me the parameters of what to do
*  When I was playing, you know
*  Regularly using solvers with them. We were spending six to eight hours a day going over all these solves
*  So intuitively I started to think and learn about what the solver would want
*  But I sort of understand where magnus is coming from in that you don't want to become a slave to the sim as I say
*  Right. There's one kid. I know I joked with him his name's landon tice
*  And uh, you know, he made a play that the sim, you know would say this is a good play
*  But i'm like, it's a good play, you know in in a simulated world against the robot
*  It's not in practice against the human right? You don't need to be doing that
*  So if you become a slave to the sim and always do what the sim says
*  You you're you're handcuffed to a certain degree is there some
*  At the highest level plays there's still a role for feel 100% intuition
*  Absolutely, if you're not doing that because here's the thing right no human being
*  Plays perfectly balanced in game three optimal like a robot would they're not they're not right?
*  So there are opportunities there to take advantage of the things that they do that are slightly
*  Too aggressive or less aggressive, you know, for example
*  Say most human beings don't bluff enough in a certain spot
*  So you don't have to call with the correct range of hands
*  You don't have to because they're not bluffing at the optimal frequency
*  So you don't have to call at the optimal frequency
*  You'd be making a mistake frankly if you did
*  What's the difference between?
*  in person and online play
*  Given that context. Yeah. Well online poker and live poker. It's the same game, right?
*  Same it's poker, but it's different in so many levels, right?
*  um
*  I think playing online you have to focus far more on fundamentals, you know on game theory
*  You don't have the added bonus of looking across the table and getting any sense of whether your opponent is strong or weak
*  They're bluffing whatever, you know
*  and also
*  Because online poker those that play it
*  You play far more hands like some of these guys are playing 10 20 tables at the same time
*  Yeah, right. So you're just you're hitting the long run really quickly and you're creating a database on your opponents, right?
*  So let's say if you know online I can see your data. I'm like, well this guy he's playing 40% of hands
*  He's betting the river 80% of the time. So now I can use that data
*  And you know exploit you that way when you play live you don't have that
*  Do you enjoy playing online?
*  I enjoy so with online poker I enjoy the convenience of it because you know
*  You can be on your couch in your underwear not leave your house
*  Do you also play multiple games at the same time or do you try to play one game?
*  I typically like to play one or two, but I can play up to four. I find that past four
*  Uh, it's hard for me to keep up and keep track of what's actually happening
*  You know, it's a different mindset required like a lot of these young guys. They're accustomed to 20 tables at a time
*  It feels like the purity of the game is gone
*  I mean it's much more robotic right? So if you're playing 20 tables, you're just making decisions based on like what you you know
*  You're not thinking about the the depth of the situation and what just happened 15 minutes ago
*  You don't even know what happened because you can't pay attention to all that at once
*  And some of the magic of poker is the low sample. I agree like for example
*  And sorry to be bringing up magnus so much, but there's so much parallel between the two of you and the poker and the chess world
*  he hates
*  Olympics and world championships and all that kind of stuff because it's so low sample
*  But to me that's part of the magic of it there's the world series of poker the main event
*  There's a magic to it
*  I agree. Yeah, and I don't know what that is exactly because so much to the stake is so rare
*  so much drama
*  And heartbreak leading up to it that all somehow
*  Yeah, it it it accumulates to
*  That magical moment when somebody wins, especially that event the world series of poker main event historically like that's it, you know
*  That's the pinnacle. That's where like mainstream watches. That's where people are tuning in and the gravity of the moment
*  You know, it's so much bigger than people like everyone gets the opportunity to play armchair quarterback too, right?
*  Oh, he should do this. You're not there. You're not under the lights. You're not under the pressure
*  You know, it might seem easy for you at home to be like well they have because you can see the whole cards
*  you know, they can't certainly the idea of
*  the small sample with tournaments, I like the idea that
*  you don't have to
*  Worry about oh, well if I do this now then in the future
*  You know, I won't be balanced. I have to be balanced here or anything like that
*  That's like really boring and lame, right?
*  Again, that is kind of the way the younger generation learns how to play the game being balanced in every spot
*  um
*  And then randomizing, you know like oh i'm supposed to do this 50% of time
*  Okay, so if my left card is red i'll do it and if it's black I don't so you're not even making
*  You're no longer making actual decisions for yourself. You're just randomizing
*  And that's way less fun for me than tailoring it to the situation
*  And the final table at the main event, there's none of that you have to I mean it's it's all or nothing
*  Well, you shouldn't be but there are like again, I think a lot of the young guys they are thinking in that regard like oh
*  Randomization maybe at that table the final table at the main event
*  uh, what's a hand that stands out to you that was especially gutsy and powerful or memorable?
*  For that you've seen in the history of poker
*  Well for me the one that stands out and probably because I was so young
*  And it was my first year like one of well, I won a bracelet that year was I was friends with scotty win the prince of poker
*  And he was heads up against the guy named kevin mcbride and I was on the rail, you know
*  I'm like wow, he's gonna you know, he's heads up and he was so cool
*  Like he had a mullet, but it's perfect, right? He had the white shirt the black thing
*  He's drinking a micolobes smoking a cigarette whatever, you know all chill
*  He bets it all on the river and the guy's thinking and he psychologically
*  Owned him and he said he goes with his beard. He goes you call gonna be all over baby
*  That's right
*  Okay, so this guy who was an amateur?
*  heard that
*  And it was like there's so much pressure in this moment right now
*  I can't handle this pressure, but scotty just told me if I call here, it's the pressure's gone
*  I don't have to be under it anymore. So he sort of hypnotized him into making the call
*  You know and scotty had it scotty had, you know the full house and it was over for the guy
*  You call gonna be all over baby. It was I just I love that aspect sort of the table talk dynamic which
*  Isn't as prevalent today as it was back then
*  But that one sticks out and it probably because it was one of my first so
*  The few words you say at the table can it can completely affect a hand like that
*  That's that's almost that's scary
*  It was just so cool to me, you know, like just how he was so calm and I think that too
*  Added more pressure to the amateur and I think like again part of it is
*  Even back then it was 1998. There's still a big rail of people and there's lights and they're you know
*  They're filming and all this kind of stuff and it's a lot of pressure for a guy who's never been in this environment
*  And now i'm telling you it can all be over soon
*  It will all be over soon. Just call it's finished
*  Yeah
*  Something about that accent too. Um, now you're a master at table talk as well. Do you have
*  Do you just kind of go with your gut with you flow with it?
*  Or is there a deliberate strategy with this sometimes like there's usually some sort of strategy that I think about in terms of
*  What I want to say and whatnot, but a lot of the time I just go I go with it
*  You know the more you talk the more information you get
*  Yeah, but in some cases
*  Against really good players. You're just giving away information
*  Right, like if i'm playing against phil ivy, i'm not engaging in anything because he can read through it
*  He can sense based on what i'm saying
*  You know the clues and where i'm trying to take him and he reads through
*  He sees the tree through the forest or whatever you want to call it the forest through the trees and uh, you know
*  so then I would just be like
*  Allowing myself to be exploitable is some of it just
*  For fun because at the end of the day if you're having fun, you might be at the top of your game
*  I've been thinking about this a lot lately. Actually, it's funny you bring this up because i've been thinking about when i'm at my best
*  And I think i'm at my best when I am comfortable like that, right where i'm not so stiff. Yeah and worried about you know
*  Checking properly and worried about reading people. I'm like no i'm me. Yeah, all right. I'm gonna play some book
*  What do you want to do? You want to call me call go ahead do what you want, right?
*  Because then I realized, you know ultimately is like i'm comfortable in that my opponents aren't as comfortable in that
*  They're comfortable with this, you know the robot thing
*  But I thought more about that and how especially with some tournaments coming up I plan on really kind of
*  Sort of getting back to my roots in that regard
*  I love it from a spectator perspective. I love it, but it's also interesting whenever you see a daniel and go on a quiet
*  That's an interesting like um
*  Like it feels like a calm before storm of sorts, so i'm sure that's also part of it
*  Yeah, like i've gone i've i've flowed like I said, you know
*  I took on some coaches and I was really learning game theory because I felt like it was important to always
*  Stick, you know keep up with what's going on and then I do feel like to some degree
*  It sort of
*  Took away a little bit of my own
*  um
*  Instinctual ideas in terms of what I should be doing right? So I think like the most dangerous
*  Version of myself is a deep understanding of the game theory
*  with
*  My wisdom of many years of and comfort of just sort of like being myself at the table and being relaxed
*  Relaxed letting your mind flow. Let me ask you the the greatest the goat question greatest of all time. Can you
*  Make the case for a few folks. So first you you tweeted referring to phil ivy as the goat
*  Saying the goat doing goat things. That's a recent tweet
*  so
*  Can you make the case for phil phil ivy or maybe who is the greatest poker player of all time?
*  Would you put phil?
*  For me until someone knocks him off the podium the king of poker and the goat is phil ivy
*  Okay, so and the reason I say that is I think of poker is more than just one game, right?
*  There's different variants, you know, there's hold them omaha stud triple draw all these different types of games and phil in every arena
*  Has been dominant whether it was tournament poker dominated it mixed game high stakes poker in bobby's room dominated
*  Online poker against all the wizards
*  Dominated made millions in every arena and you know
*  He sort of took a few years away from poker with his legal troubles and things like that
*  But he's back, you know, he's been playing in the high roller series again
*  And you know, he comes from he's cut from a different cloth
*  But he has a tenacity and a focus that's unparalleled
*  I think when he's in the zone, I mean for lack and this has nothing to do with race
*  It really has to do with mannerism
*  But he does remind me of like a a combination of michael jordan and tiger woods in the way that he approaches it
*  He's very intense. Yeah, and he outworks everybody, you know
*  And I think frankly a lot of his mannerisms do come from them because he's young watching these guys on tv
*  And a lot of his ways of being you know
*  He's learned behavior I think probably from from people like people at the top of their sport
*  And people that are tiger woods and michael jordan aren't just at the top of the sport
*  But they kind of dominate the sport to some kind of aura that there's a uniqueness to them. They're not built like us
*  They're not you know, they're not like I wish I I wish I could have the kind of focus that phil ivy has
*  You know and see everything that he's saying. I just that's not me, you know, I I don't have that and he he does
*  He has that that gene whatever it is, but they also look like they're not having that much fun. They're more
*  Focused on the perfection like a dogged pursuit of perfection and you know, that might even be true
*  It might not be as fun, you know, I don't know like I have fun at the table when you look
*  Outwardly you look at someone like maybe he is having a blast. Maybe that's just the way that he likes
*  Like his tiger woods having fun when he's like on 17 about to win a major doesn't look like it
*  Theoretically, well if you look at michael jordan, I don't know about tiger woods, but I think
*  They're more focused on every single mistake they make
*  I think they're more obsessed about not making a mistake and
*  Hating every time they make a mistake that's probably like 99 percent of their mental
*  Energy, I think that's part of what makes them great, right?
*  They don't look past the mistake and just let it's whatever they're like they they want to correct it and and
*  Yeah, there's a tension almost like a trade-off. I wonder if that's always the case between sort of greatness and
*  And happiness. I remember huxied who you know when I was a kid growing up. He was like the poker idol
*  He won the world championship in 1996 and I was lucky enough to hang out with him a little bit and he would go
*  Through these streaks where?
*  He had an a game and he had an f game his a game was unparalleled
*  Nobody could beat him right but his f game was so terrible that he was just a fish
*  You know, he was playing terribly and I remember him saying and it was exactly what you're saying
*  He'd make like one little mistake
*  Right, and then he would go off
*  And I was like why do you do that? Like, you know, your b game would be just fine. He's like well if i'm gonna make a mistake
*  What's the point?
*  What's the point right of trying?
*  Like if you can't play perfect, there's no point in playing at all
*  Yeah, so he was that he was extreme in that regard in the way that he viewed it
*  And depending on the sport those folks like in chess certainly the case they that kind of minds that can destroy you
*  Absolutely. No, I totally see that because a sequence of mistakes
*  Like the kind of year you had with the world's biggest poker can completely destroy a human being
*  If you're not able to see the bigger picture of it. Yeah
*  Uh, you said that phil ivy is the hardest, uh, the your toughest opponent the the toughest person to play against why is that?
*  And how do you beat him?
*  Because phil ivy's just he's seeing things that nobody else is seeing really like subtle things where i'm putting my hands where i'm looking
*  You know my pulse like stuff that I don't even know i'm giving off. He's so engaged and so focused and has such a
*  just a
*  He's fearless, right? A lot of people, you know, they'll play poker and be like, you know
*  I don't think this guy has it but do they have the guts?
*  Do they have the cojones if you will to actually do anything about it?
*  Right and stand up to this person. He does
*  You know, I forgot the hand that you tweeted about the the goat doing goat things
*  This was it wasn't even that big of a goat hand. It was pretty impressive. There's hands where like there was a famous one in australia
*  Where the flop was like jackjack at nine
*  And phil check raised the flop with six seven nothing just absolutely nothing and the guy re-raised him
*  Right and phil just knew
*  He went all in with nothing if the guy calls he's done
*  He's cooked but he was so tuned in that this guy's not strong that he just you know
*  He did things like that and it's tough to play against a guy like that
*  So, uh, he gets great reads and is able to execute on them has the guts to execute on it
*  He's got experience. He's got work ethic. He he also I think one thing i'm underselling too
*  Is his strategic mind right like I believe that
*  You know
*  Like I said the new age player they learn how to play through a very smith systematic approach. Okay, let's look at the data
*  Make up a game right now
*  Three cards we each get three cards jacks are wild sixes are you know?
*  Six of hearts is wild right just make up that game phil will figure it out
*  Intuitively very very quickly right without having the answers for him, right?
*  So that's like the difference between the players of my generation we had to figure this stuff out on our own today
*  Well, I want to know the answer I go ask the computer and the computer tells me
*  So I really believe like if you created a game from scratch that phil ivy would be my horse that I wanted playing it
*  So he's in some sense in tune with some deeper thing within he has what we would what we used to call card sense
*  Card sense
*  Can you try to make the case for some others like dwale brunson phil helmuth?
*  Uh daniel nagrano and maybe one of the modern guys like justin bonham or something sure. Oh, so let's start with dwale
*  Okay, like what dwale has going for him above all above and beyond is twofold really longevity
*  I mean he's eight in his late 80s and last time I played with him. I was
*  I'm like, how is he getting better? Like I really felt like he was playing better than he had, you know in the previous years
*  um, but also with dwale like
*  Doyle had to figure you know, we talked about my generation of him to figure it on her own
*  I mean he they really had to figure it out on their own
*  Like they didn't have any computer simulation to tell you ace king was a favorite over pocket sixes
*  They didn't so we know what he did
*  He would take a deck of cards and they would deal out same and they were the notepad right?
*  Okay, ace king one and then they would do like a hundred of them be like, all right ace king won like 53
*  So it must be a favorite and he did it manually, you know
*  And he did it in a time when it was very very difficult
*  And he's seen poker evolve and change throughout the years now
*  Listen, is he gonna be able to compete against the top players in the world today? Absolutely not, you know
*  But how many people he's the he's the best 88 year old player in the world by a mile
*  Okay, that's not even close and dwale again. He's another guy who plays all the games. He's played high stakes cash tournaments
*  You name it. He's iconic, you know, he's the godfather
*  So but there's also an element to that so the iconic element like you're a personality in poker. I mean
*  Not to romanticize this thing too much but
*  Poker is also a game of personalities
*  I mean, it's part of the greatness is like
*  The uniqueness of the human being yeah, I think also yeah
*  I mean if you like looking at it from that perspective in terms of like goat like goat in terms of what you represent
*  Yeah, cowboy the godfather, you know, he's been around, you know, we played in the 60s and stuff like that
*  It's just something like incredibly cool
*  Like I often think about if I could go back in time
*  And like visit, you know an era i'd love to go like to vegas in the 70s
*  Just like i'm probably I really like I can think of what it would smell like probably not ideal cigarettes and you know
*  The leather jackets and just the vibe of what it must have been like with the mobsters and things like that
*  You know, he's lived through all that all the cool movies we've seen like dwale talks about some of those films
*  He's like, yeah that guy off. He said he was gonna stab me in my stomach, you know, he he knows these people it was
*  He's like a a source of history really. Yeah when poker was uh, a game
*  For the mob and the degenerates and all that kind of stuff before transitioning into professional sport
*  Yeah, a professional game. Yeah, so he was there through the whole thing. He he's been there through the whole transition
*  He's seen it all. Yeah, and then to the online world. So, uh, what about?
*  um
*  I can't even say without smiling phil helmuth. Okay, so phil here's the thing with phil
*  He takes it very personal when I say this
*  And he doesn't hear the compliment
*  He only hears the negativity because phil wants to be considered the greatest of all time hashtag positive
*  He wants to be the greatest of all time. Yes, but i'm like phil. Here's the facts
*  You have the best absolute greatest
*  Resume at the world series of poker of anyone in the world. Is that not enough?
*  Right, that's what you have. You have that right now. Do I think you're the best no limit holding player in the world today?
*  No, do I think that you know
*  You can play high stakes mixed games with the best players in the world today and win
*  No, right
*  So he wouldn't get as much flak on this topic if he wasn't so boastful and like, you know demanding like you never hear
*  Phil ivy say i'm the best in the world like his peers do right but phil wants to make the claim and I simply say
*  I beg to differ right? I beg to differ like I don't think you are the
*  The best player in the world if who can linger on the compliment so he can hear it
*  What makes him so good because um, it seems like a lot of times his play is not optimal
*  Yeah, he definitely has his own brand of and style of play, right? He does not adhere to he's never used a solver in his life
*  He doesn't know he's not in that world, right?
*  He phil does phil has a lot of faith and a lot of confidence in what he does and that he will be successful
*  And I think there's something to be said about that, right? He doesn't ever lack
*  In self in belief that he can win and he finds a way to do it his way
*  And frankly a lot of what he does is very effective against specific types of players
*  Who are intimidated by him?
*  But whether it's his resume or his demeanor or his attitude sometimes right?
*  Like if you're an average player and then you know, you you beat phil in a hand
*  You're gonna hear it this idiot from northern europe and beat me in this pot like and for some people
*  They don't they don't like that. So he can use that
*  against them, but I also think too like
*  he
*  Cares so much
*  Right and that leads to trying really really hard like he sees these moments and he doesn't phone him in like whatever brand of poker
*  He plays he tries his best at all times to to succeed and to win and there's some
*  Even though like he's fundamentally flawed and a lot of things that he does compared to some of the bigger players
*  His effort and will and like his determination to stick around is you know is is up there
*  And he is somebody who seems to really hate losing
*  Yes, yeah, he like, you know
*  He he's got this he feels like he deserves to win. Yeah, right in all cases and if he loses it's
*  You know, it's not as he joked around that you and him might do an anger management
*  Is of course
*  Now this is tough because you're a humble guy, but
*  Objectively speaking. Can you say what your strengths are?
*  You're often listed as one of if not the greatest player of all time
*  So what what are the things that make you stand out?
*  So for me when I grew up I admired the big cash game players because that's what I was I loved tournaments
*  But I wanted to be well rounded like in my day
*  You couldn't make the poker hall of fame if you just played one game
*  You had to jump in to the high stakes games in bobby's room as they say right and I was able to do that when I was
*  In my early in my mid 20s. I was playing 4 000 8 000 limits
*  You know, you could win or lose a million dollars in a day
*  So I grinded it out like a lot of people think oh, you know, he's lucky. He's had sponsorship
*  Otherwise, he'd be broke. He's like I built
*  Multi-million dollar bankrolls before any of that stuff existed and I did it the good old-fashioned way by sitting my butt on the table
*  I think probably one of my biggest strengths
*  is self-awareness and
*  In that regard a level of humility that always allows me to say okay
*  Well, you know what in this case with these players they're better than me
*  So what am I going to learn from them?
*  Right rather than have this need to say I know the best because of history and I'm always looking to guys and go wow
*  He does this really well, whether it's the adamos or the ivies or whoever it may be
*  um, so my willingness to adapt I think and stay relevant by
*  Learning what the young guys are learning is something i've always done and I also pride myself on um
*  Again being well rounded like playing all the games like I don't feel intimidated
*  in any game
*  You know, whatever the format is so always being a scholar of the game
*  As as the game evolves as the different games of all the different players of all the culture evolves
*  always adjusting by being a scholar having the humility to be a scholar a healthy respect for
*  A healthy respect for the younger generation how they learn what they learn and what they can teach me rather than poo poo it
*  And say oh these kids today because that's a lot a lot of people like the mike matisos and the phil hellenius my generation
*  They just poo poo it because they don't understand it on a level of one to ten
*  Their level of understanding this is like a one maybe if i'm being generous by calling it a one
*  They really don't understand it. So they poo poo it
*  Right. It's easy to do that. Oh, that's not how I do it. So that's wrong or that's stupid or whatever
*  I don't take that approach. I go. Well, let me learn. Let me see what what what what there is to this
*  But that said the crankiness that matisos and phil hellenius have is great to watch especially when they're on a table with you
*  Oh, I love it. Yeah, it's a blast. It's a blast
*  You're masterful of being able to get under their skin
*  What about somebody from the new school like justin bonomo who's who's leading in terms of cash wins?
*  Is there somebody like that that stands out to you as a potential uh goat?
*  status person
*  Yeah, so there's two different ones but one is very
*  So they're both just no limit, right?
*  So I like again when I think of poker I think of you know a variety of games
*  But there's so many of the young guys that specialize michael adama was one that i've mentioned several times
*  and I love the way that he approached the game another one that's highly respected because of his online prowess and his
*  He's people have like looked and how close he is to game theory and they say he's about as perfect as you get
*  And it's a kid named linus
*  Linus uh line linus love online linus linger. So he just came second recently
*  I believe in uh in the triton huge triton, so he's primarily an online player
*  Yeah, he's an online cash player for the most part, but he plays him live and he's you know
*  He's again and I respect the peers that I play with who say yeah, he's he's tough as nails. There's another kid, too
*  um
*  Russian kid named timofey kuznetsov and he plays all the games and he's well respected
*  Um, you know in that regard the same with a guy like jungle man dan kates was a unique personality
*  I mean this guy showed up won the poker players championship back-to-back years in a randy macho man savage
*  Costume and he was doing macho man the entire times. Oh, yeah
*  I'm gonna take all the chips like I did last year
*  Bust them all and he was in character for the entirety of the turn. This is great. Just unique
*  But uh, yeah, I respect for a lot of those guys
*  Um, is it gonna take time to figure out who?
*  Um, you know stands the test of time. That's the thing, right?
*  So a lot of these kids like there was a guy who beat me heads up in the million dollar one drop
*  I got 8.7. He won 15 million dollars kid named dan colman. He was seen as like, you know, the next big thing in poker, right?
*  He made his money
*  Just wasn't for him. So he's moved on, you know to doing what he's doing skiing in the alps, whatever
*  He's you know, we have nobody seen from like five six years. So that can happen, right?
*  Because there is a lot of burnout, you know, I think like I think it was actually a
*  Gotham chess who mentioned something about how difficult it is to like I think it's true in poker when you get really really good at something
*  to get
*  This much better takes so much work
*  And a lot of people don't necessarily want to put in that kind of work in order to do that
*  That's just even staying at the same level takes a huge amount of work
*  Like so if you want to get better at chess, you're already like really really good and you're trying to get like one little bit
*  better you have to study like
*  In a ridiculous amount, you know
*  And again, that's once you've already had I think the toughest thing for anybody once you've tasted success and you've already achieved it
*  Staying hungry staying on the top reaching the top is much easier than it is to stay there. Yeah
*  over years
*  what's your training regimen in poker in terms of
*  How you uh keep improving
*  So you said you study games, but that's mostly leading up to a particular, um tournament
*  But is there kind of uh behind the scenes daily activity you tried to do that kind of over time
*  Keeps you sharp. So for me now that i'm 47 and I feel like
*  the predominant
*  Aspect of my poker game is going to be in terms of my success is going to be my mental state
*  Right. So I find it's really really important for me now at this age
*  To have balance
*  So when i'm not playing poker and i'm out of it
*  Poker is not even on my radar you're able to remove it from your mind doing my fantasy hockey play little chess
*  You know play some golf watch watch some hockey whatever the case may be
*  Outside of the game and then I start to get the itch like after the world series of poker
*  The poker door was closed. Yeah, you took some time off all of august
*  I didn't play any poker at all until just recently, you know, I started to get the itch again
*  Yeah
*  Because I that's what's important for me is if I don't have the itch and I don't want to play poker
*  Then i'm not going to be at my best
*  Once I start getting the itch that's when I start to so okay, let's start watching some of these streams
*  Let's see what my opponents are up to lately and um, you know, let's look at some solvers and different things like that
*  And uh, you're doing pretty good. You came back and doing pretty good
*  Yeah so far
*  Do you like being in front of the camera through the hell?
*  Of the world series of poker this year you filmed every single day you did a vlog
*  Does that energize you is that exhausting because it's really beneficial to a huge amount of people it energizes the the poker community
*  But do you see it as a service or do you purely just love it?
*  I've been comfortable on camera since I was a kid when I was a kid
*  I wanted to be an actor like really really young and uh, it was always comfortable in that environment. I think like
*  That gives me a little bit of advantage sometimes too with these filmed events
*  Because i'm comfortable with a mic on and on camera with the lights and I think a lot of people maybe aren't with
*  The knowledge that other people are going to see what they're doing every day
*  So it's been so comfortable and easy for me as far as the world series goes and the vlogs and all the shooting
*  It's kind of therapeutic for me. It is essentially the
*  Essentially my version of journaling, right?
*  So there's a lot of value I think in like at the end of a day doing a brain dump where you just write out
*  And journal but doing it on camera has this similar effect
*  and it also
*  You know when you when you make a mistake on your own
*  You're held accountable to you. But when I have to explain it
*  To what others like here's what I did
*  And this is the mistake I made or whatever the case may be it may be
*  um
*  It actually I think that helps me, you know, yeah, so you uh, you're held responsible by a larger audience
*  I think it's like so like I said, listen, i'm 47. I'm my life is good
*  I don't have to be in this tournament if i'm over it. I can just dump my chips off and go home
*  Yeah, right, but I can't when i'm
*  Doing the vlog. I have to actually
*  Answer to that, you know
*  And keeps me in line
*  How hard is it to win?
*  The main event of the world series of poker
*  So the main event of the world series of poker is the hardest event to win simply because of the sheer size of it
*  You know, you're talking seven eight thousand players
*  Right and a lot of land mines and and frankly
*  There are so many players that you've not played with before too
*  You play these high roller events like these super ones you get 30 40 people, you know everybody right so you have an idea
*  You said at the main event there's you don't know have any idea this guy wearing a philadelphia eagles jersey and
*  Sunglasses and you just raised you being I don't know this guy. I don't know what he's about. So there's a lot of like
*  It's grueling too in your seven eight days where you're you're in the blender as you as you might say
*  So so what's the structure says ten thousand dollar buy-in or something like that?
*  And there's a bunch of tables and you just keep playing
*  As and you like when is it over for a single table?
*  So the way that it works is this so there's let's say 8 000 players and the way the main event works
*  Unique to others is there's various day ones you can play right? So a day one you're going to play from noon to like midnight
*  Right if you if you're still in you bag up your chips and you'll come back for day two, okay?
*  There's four different day ones, right?
*  Now they'll all combine essentially to play on a day two and at the end of the night they redraw
*  The tables so you don't just win your table if players get knocked out
*  Tables break they continue to be replaced. So you start with 8 000 then you know after day one, you've got
*  6000 then you do the same you play, you know
*  Like a 12-hour day and you slowly whittle down day four day three day four
*  You're in the money and then you continue to progress and then what they do now with the final table is they they because they were
*  Trying to do this for tv. These final tables can take
*  You know 12 hours to play and what we were finding was
*  You know you start the thing at 5 pm and it goes till 8 am and like nobody's watching anymore
*  So they separate separate into three days now
*  And so you're talking now
*  It's like six seven days to get to the final table and another three days to play it
*  So you're under you know, you're you're you're grinding for
*  You know a week and a half, but most of the time
*  You're playing against people you've never played against before especially early on
*  Yeah, and then by the end like who knows, you know rarely do you see?
*  You see in the last hundred you usually see some notable names
*  Then in the last 27 you might see one maybe two final table. Maybe one but often it's going to be
*  You know some players you've you've never heard of before
*  Is there strategies that?
*  Maximize your likelihood of having a chance. Yes, absolutely
*  Like I think the world series of poker main event is a unique animal in that
*  You know
*  Like we talk about game theory and all that kind of stuff
*  If you're focused on that when you're playing you're really not playing well, right?
*  You need to just exploit because you're gonna have a lot of people who see this as a bucket list item
*  You know, they just want to play the main event of the world series and they might be scared
*  They might be nervous or whatever. You don't have to worry about being balanced, right?
*  Oh, you know, I have to make sure that i'm bad. No, you don't you might know you're playing with this guy now for three hours
*  You might never see him again. So just make the play that makes sense for you, right? So
*  So yeah, you're you're gonna I approach that event very differently than I would
*  Like playing against the high roller players that I play with does that mean more aggressive essentially less actually
*  so
*  When you play against really good players, you have to take
*  small plus ev
*  Scenarios where you push the envelope and you're playing really aggressive you're bluffing off your stack
*  You got to do this. You got to focus a little bit more on being balanced because otherwise, you know
*  You're not going to beat these guys
*  Whereas if you're playing with amateurs and you're playing with regular players for the most part
*  Risking all your chips on a bluff
*  Probably don't need to do that. You don't need to do that nearly as much you can probably
*  Slowly, but surely build your stack without taking you know, those high risk high variance situations because you'll find better situations
*  What mistakes do amateurs usually make?
*  Internments like that. Are they over bluffing? Well, I think amateurs generally the biggest mistake they make is they think that pros are bluffing more than they are
*  So like a pro will bet all his chips on the end and like
*  Maybe you know this is fill ivy. Maybe he's doing some crazy stuff. He's like probably not
*  Yeah, he's probably just got it, you know
*  And then they get lose all their money by calling or go going all in as well
*  And so the right thing is to be more patient for so amateur is too impatient
*  Well, or just bad reads so all the amateurs are built different
*  Some of the amateurs are just too weak and passive. They're just waiting for the nuts
*  You know, yeah, and then you know the pros everyone notices that and then when they make their big hand
*  They don't get paid anyway
*  So in order to win the main event, I mean you have to have some components of your game that are aggressive
*  It's very unlikely to expect to just get the cards
*  The whole way and just always have the best hand you're gonna have to find ways to win pots that
*  You know where you don't have the best hand. How do you win the?
*  final table the final table is unique now, especially because you're talking about
*  The way the poker works in tournaments is that if there's seven people left and you have just you know
*  You're very short on chips
*  But if one other player goes out you just make like three hundred thousand dollars for folding like just for sitting out
*  Right the term for that that you know
*  Chill kids uses ICM independent, you know chip model right where talks about the value of each chip where what happens?
*  What we see now is let's say one guy has a big chip lead
*  And there's another guy who's second in chips and there's a couple that are short these guys in the middle
*  They just play super tight and they wait for the little guys to go while the big stack is just
*  Pounding them because he can afford to right? He knows that people are handcuffed
*  So let's say I had 10 million in chips and you have 9 million in chips
*  These guys have little chips if I go in on you, are you gonna call me?
*  And risk like, you know guaranteed pay jumps of like moving up a few spots
*  So really the question comes down to like are you the type of guy who just wants to inch up?
*  Or are you gonna go for it and you're gonna go for the win?
*  I think ultimately there's some value in being the guy who says, you know, I don't care if I come seventh
*  I'm not worried about
*  Going from seventh to fifth. I'm here to win
*  And so you're saying like the the guys that win will often be the ones that call there
*  So like they're not just bullying the small stacks. They're
*  Well, they're the ones no, they're the ones that are willing to willing to risk it, right?
*  So there are some people who you know, if there's
*  five left
*  You know and they're third in chips and there's two guys very short and you you know, they'll have ace king and someone moves
*  They'll just fold they fold the hand because
*  They want to wait for those two other players to get broke and that way they let you know
*  They make actual money
*  So you I guess the thought process between winning first place and winning the most amount of money are different
*  They're conflicting right? Because in order to like
*  Win the if you're just if your focus is only on winning the tournament you will make mistakes financially where you had guaranteed income for
*  Just folding right? Let's say a guy has one chip left
*  You know one chip and me and you have good chips and I go all in with you and I lose
*  Now that guy, you know got the guaranteed, you know, he got the pay jump that I wouldn't have got
*  So there's some extremely stupid mistakes you can make from a financial perspective, but it's often at odds with
*  You know giving yourself the best chance to actually come first
*  And in a tournament, especially the main event, especially the final table it's all about
*  Coming in first. Well, I know because most of the people who make it so like
*  You know when you play these high rollers, these guys are accustomed to playing for hundred thousand two
*  They're they're accustomed to this kind of money
*  So they're going to play right for the most but you're talking about guys who bought into a ten thousand dollar tournament
*  Maybe never had a hundred k cash in their life and now they're sitting there
*  And it's like one million for fifth and two million for fourth
*  So like they don't want to be they're just gonna sit there and go
*  So they'll they'll be under more financial pressure because they're not like your typical high roller type player
*  Are you still able to uh find the guts to take big risks?
*  Yeah, see i'm trying to win like I think that gives me an advantage frankly
*  Where I might make decisions that are financially suboptimal
*  Because i'm trying to win but there's also an inherent advantage to that like that again something I watched and learned
*  From a guy like michael adama where he takes advantage of these people playing so passively in these spots
*  Where he's like I don't i'm not trying to come i'm gonna win i'm just gonna bully bulldoze you
*  Because i'm not worried about you know the small financial mistake of you know
*  a pay jump
*  What advice could you give to to uh beginning poker players?
*  Actually at every level how to get better how to improve how to improve their game
*  Obviously as you said it's easiest to get better in the beginning
*  But what advice would you give how to get better?
*  So one of the ways I mean I think way back to how I started right and there's so many resources and tools available
*  Right now to analyze hands, but when you play
*  right and you find yourself in a situation or a hand that you're not really sure about not because
*  You had aces and went all in and you lost like that's not interesting but an interesting situation where you're not sure what you did
*  Jot the jot the hand down write it out
*  and then either a you know use some of the tools whether it's the solvers if you're you know advanced enough or
*  Ask your group
*  You know like have a couple friends at your level and talk through the different decisions and start to learn that way
*  Right because those mistakes that you make or those tough tough hands
*  That's where the real learning comes from like so that so basically
*  If you're because you're going to be in similar scenarios in poker you're rarely going to have the identical situation
*  But you'll have situations that are similar
*  You know you raise with ace king someone three bet another guy goes all in okay
*  Well, what do I do in that spot?
*  You know, it's you're going to have similar situations in the future as well
*  So figuring that out the more you can do that you chop away at um, you know different
*  Strategical mistakes, you know you you used to make that you no longer make are there resources like your master class is really is great
*  Are there books?
*  So there was a guy named michael esavito. This is my again for a little bit more advanced players, but it's a book called
*  Modern poker theory, I think it's called
*  Um, which sort of explains game theory right to the novice, right?
*  So it's it's a little bit. I think if you're new to poker, it's probably above the rim for you
*  But once you start to get a little better and you want to understand how to do it
*  It's probably a good resource for as far as books and there's also like tons of people who stream poker
*  Professional players and then you can get in there and you get in on the chat and you start talking you ask them
*  You see people, you know explaining their thought process and things like that
*  There's so many free resources and of course my master class I think does a good job of sort of compartmentalizing like, you know
*  How to attack it on a deeper level and you know, we get it I try to get into
*  What's funny when I did the master class?
*  I asked them I was like well, you know, how high end do you want this in terms of poker?
*  And they're like we want really really high end and I was like, oh sure
*  Then I started to explain really really high and like okay. Well, maybe the one below that
*  Right, so I try to explain really complex
*  um
*  You know theory in a more palatable way in english if you will because some of these kids you hear them talk and you be like
*  Huh? But you also which is really nice give
*  example hands
*  That really illustrate the point which is really nice
*  Um, you also wrote a book I think 10 years ago power hold them strategy
*  It's interesting to think how much of the stuff in that book still applies how much doesn't listen
*  I still think the book holds up to a certain degree obviously like
*  You know, it isn't optimal because there's like more advanced strategies
*  And if you played that way people will figure out a way to exploit you
*  But if you're like an average player playing an average buy-ins like that's sort of what I coined like small ball approach
*  Absolutely will work, you know at the highest level you have to add much more a lot more bluffing
*  But overall, I think it's still you know, for the most part. There's a lot of really especially with tournaments
*  There's a lot of really good principles in the book
*  What's the difference in the dynamics if you could just comment on between uh heads up poker and when multiple people are in one hand
*  What are interesting aspects to everything we've been talking about from?
*  uh game theory to
*  Exploitative strategy all that kind of stuff. So the biggest difference when you play let's say nine handed, you know against eight other players
*  and you know heads up is
*  First of all, just the the type of hands and the number of hands you're gonna have to play
*  So the way that it works is that there's nine people
*  Two out of the nine hands you have to put in money and the other seven you could just fold for nothing
*  Okay, when your head's up, you're forced to put money in every single hand
*  Okay, and there's only one other hand in front of you, which means the ranges of hands that you play is way wider
*  Right. So if you're nine handed, right and you're in first position, you're like, all right
*  What do I need to play like a good pair?
*  You know two high cards suited a big ace, you know stuff like that. That's it, right?
*  That's what you're gonna play right?
*  And you're gonna fold all the rest when your head's up you look at a king and a two
*  And you're like, well, I gotta play this
*  You know, you're gonna you're gonna you're forced to play a lot more hands in a lot more complex situations when you're playing
*  Um heads up because you're going to be playing much far weaker hands queen five
*  Jack three all these types of hands and you're gonna see flops where you're not going to have the luxury of being like
*  I'm in there with a premium hand queens kings aces. Those are easier to play, right?
*  Very very strong holdings heads up. You're forced to dance and fight a lot more
*  You know, you can't sit in the weeds and wait. What do you enjoy more?
*  um
*  Heads up is very intense. I like heads up but
*  I think if you had to play heads up eight ten hours
*  It's so mentally draining because your face with so many constant decisions each and every spot
*  Like you play nine handed you look at a nine and a three you throw it away
*  You hang out for a bit relax you go you get a little break and you're playing heads up your leg
*  It's like boom boom. You're it's like you're in the ring, you know, you're in the octagon and you're facing like
*  haymakers non-stop
*  Since uh, we talked about online a bit is it possible to cheat in poker especially online?
*  We offline also talked about the the cheating controversy that's going on in the chess world. Um
*  Is it possible to use?
*  What is it? Uh remotely?
*  Connected anal beads to some hot shit. No, uh, is there is that a concern of uh cheating online?
*  So here's the thing
*  It's kind of like a romanticized from the old days
*  Like, you know in the western stuff like people trying to cheat and have you ever killed a man because he cheated
*  No, I have not but I when I started out as a teenager
*  I played in a game with a bunch of italians and I knew they cheated and I didn't care because they were so bad
*  That I could win anyway. I was like I knew they would cheat but I knew how they were cheating
*  So I was like, all right, you guys suck. But so here's the thing anytime you're talking about
*  Large sums of money there will be people looking to take advantage whether that's live or online, right?
*  and so it's like the job essentially of
*  The you know the online operators or the you know live event staff to police it the best they can and the players themselves
*  Being on the lookout for it
*  You know like a guy like dole brunson is a great resource because he's seen it all and he's seen all the tricks
*  You know and so live, you know, he probably could spot a few things but online there's
*  There's various ways people can try to cheat but there's also really good
*  Security measures in place to catch them, you know, and we've caught in like about two years ago
*  There was a huge undertaking of like 500 accounts that were banned
*  For doing different things and you know
*  There's and again you can't go in they can't go into detail in terms of how they're doing it because otherwise
*  You know then you're sort of giving the cheats the playbook in terms of how to take advantage
*  But it's always going to be a concern for poker wherever you play, right?
*  But it's not something i'm worried about
*  Personally, so at the highest in person and by the way online
*  There's really interesting algorithms that do some of the work in an automated way to detect to flag things that are weird
*  But in person, it's just not something at the highest level that you're super concerned about so it's not
*  It didn't quite infiltrate the poker world to a degree where it's a huge concern
*  Yeah, like so here's the thing I don't play in private games and whatever right, right but in private games theoretically
*  Yeah, you know you could be if you don't trust the people you're playing with like i've heard stories of people where
*  You know they have an earpiece in that you can't see right and they have uh, you know like
*  RFID on the cards or something like that and they have a phone reading it
*  So they have somebody in a truck telling them you're gonna win this hand
*  You're gonna lose this hand like that happened in a private game, you know
*  And the guy what's often funny about some of these people who cheat is they're so
*  Greedy and blatantly obvious that they get caught
*  Where if they use this tool in a more subtle way, they could probably continue to get away with it
*  But again, that's not something I worry about in a casino environment
*  Um, you know in these tournaments and things like that, but if I was playing in private games
*  Like if I came down to texas and some guy I got cheated in a game
*  By a guy named blacky blackburn and tex. That's a red flag right there. I was at the chimo hotel
*  I was a teenager and they saw me playing, you know, I was making good money as a teenager
*  I had like a thirteen thousand dollar bankroll, you know
*  And I went and played in this game with them in a private hotel room and found out later that the guy was a card mechanic
*  You know, he was dealing and he could you know deal you the hands and he knew what you had stuff like that
*  So yeah, I remember, you know, I lost a big number in that game
*  And it was a good learning lesson in terms of you know, being wary of who you trust
*  Yeah, so if the dealer is in on it that's one way you could cheat it's fascinating
*  That's part of the reason that they cut
*  So like you'll see like uh, there's a burn card
*  Because what would happen in you know, maybe the old days is like if you're sitting in the one seat
*  I could lift the card and you could see it the next card coming, right?
*  So what they do is they have a card on top of it that you burn that isn't the card
*  And then the next card is the one that comes face up
*  I just learned about the edge
*  sorting
*  uh thing that uh phil ivy maybe others were involved with
*  I just
*  Reading it at first was super interesting to me that you could exploit
*  the
*  Imperfections in the printing of cards. Yeah, that was almost cool to me that that was that's almost not cheating because it's like
*  That needs to be a movie. That's awesome. Yes. Yeah, what happened with phil ivy in that whole case is it's it's a catastrophe
*  Really? Yeah, it is such a horrible precedent because here's what he did phil ivy shows up at the casino says
*  I want to play this game. They say okay. All right, I want to play with those decks. They say, okay
*  They agree to everything that he says he never touches the cards. He doesn't do anything
*  Outside of the fact that your cards that you supplied have imperfections on them and he can see them
*  Yeah, okay, so that increases his chances of winning he could still lose theoretically, right?
*  Probably not but he can lose in theory. It just gives him a little bit of an edge and it's all stuff based on what you provided
*  Yeah, so the idea that you offered a game I accepted I beat you and now you want to free roll me. That's disgusting
*  So for people who don't know maybe you can elaborate and it's just fascinating to me
*  But you're exploiting the imperfections in the card patterns on the back and then they look different if you rotate it
*  and
*  The the fascinating thing too when you shuffle usually you don't rotate the cards
*  so that you can see
*  the
*  sort of
*  Detect which cards are the strong cards by marking them by through rotating them and the way
*  You know that rotated is because of the pattern imperfections
*  Yeah
*  So some of the cards like you said like, you know, they had those like the that that pattern on it
*  And some of them this was faulty cards on there were not cut properly
*  Yeah, so like the eights and nines had the card cut differently and those are important cards in this game
*  You know the eights and nines or whatever so you could essentially from looking at the back of the card discern
*  You know what? It's going to be you do nothing in terms of like cheating yourself
*  You're not rigging the game all you're doing is taking advantage of the fact that you're playing
*  You know, you've offered me cards that are faulty. Can I just say that?
*  Of course, it would be phil ivy who's who's the goat at the at the normal game?
*  It would be figure out this particular thing
*  I mean, that's what if you're into soccer this dia go maradona has that famous hand of god in the world cup
*  where he scores a goal with his hand and
*  So, of course the the referee didn't see it. They thought it was a header
*  So, I mean part of the part of the magic of the genius of the people at the top of the game is they're able to exploit
*  All the flaws that are there. That's a beautiful thing. See phil like phil had you know in his heyday he had
*  He exploited weaknesses and casinos
*  You know systems all over the country like in one night. I don't know if you know the story in one night
*  He would take a plane a private plane and fly to 30 different casinos all over the country
*  Because he would have these deals where they're like, all right
*  We've got this big rich sucker who's going to come here and play craps and he's going to lose all our money
*  So he'd have this deal with one of the casinos where they'd be like, all right
*  You get 20 back up to half a million, right? So if you lose half a million, we'll give you back 100k
*  Okay, so he'd go to one casino in tunica. He'd play half a million
*  Win win or lose
*  You know, he would leave they think they're going to get him to stay they get him a big room whatever
*  So let's say he goes to tunica. He loses half a million
*  Okay, now he goes he flies to atlantic city. He wins half a million
*  Okay, he lost half a million and won one half a million, but he got 100,000 back
*  So he's actually plus 100,000
*  Do that at 10 casinos a night
*  You're making a million dollars in free equity and they would give him promotional chips and all these kind of things and free flights and stuff
*  Like that, so he took advantage of the image
*  Yeah, you know that they're trying to exploit so this is why I don't have any empathy for these casinos because they're giving you free drinks
*  They're giving you why do you think they're doing that kind of the kindness of their heart?
*  They're trying to exploit you. So guess what you lost at your own game
*  Pay the piper and I think it was crazy because the judges in his case said
*  He did not cheat but yeah, well, it's probably not right
*  Hold on. Yeah, you just said he didn't cheat, you know that that should be the end of the case
*  And then the casinos do the funny thing. I mentioned to you. I was just at the ufc and uh,
*  Dana white is a huge gambler. He's a blackjack gambler and
*  Uh, there's that famous situation where you got kicked out of a casino and the casinos do that kind of thing when you went too much
*  so he he won some ridiculous amount of money he best like
*  I mean he plays like millions of dollars on hands of blackjack. It's insane
*  And so he won really big and he got kicked out
*  Was he counting? No, no, he wasn't counting
*  So counting in blackjack here in las vegas is like the only game where they actually can ask you not to play
*  So like basically if you're counting cards, right?
*  You could potentially have an edge in blackjack and there are some professionals who do that
*  But they get caught pretty quickly and then they say you can play craps you can play whatever you want
*  But you can't play blackjack here anymore. No, I think I don't think danah white is counting
*  I think he was winning a lot. I guess they can
*  Claim that they believe you're a con because how do you really know if you're well you easily they figure it out
*  So basically they have an eye in the sky and they can see so if you're varying your bet size, right?
*  So there's certain spots where based on the cards that are out. Let's say for example
*  The a lot of the twos threes and fours and fives have been coming out
*  So the riches the deck is rich in face cards. That's very good for the player, right? So imagine you were betting
*  500 bucks
*  And then all of a sudden you up your bet to 2 000 or 5 000 when the deck is rich
*  They know when the deck is rich in high cards because they keep a counter themselves
*  So if they notice a player increasing their bet sizes when the deck is good for them, it's a telltale sign
*  Interesting I don't think danah white would be counting it
*  So casinos don't kick you out if you don't often kick you out
*  Do they ever kick you out if you make too much money?
*  Because you're playing millions of dollars that they unless they they would never kick you out for making too much money unless they
*  Suspect cheating because why would they they have an advantage they want the money back
*  It's not like you go in there win 10 million like oh no, that's enough for us
*  What about if he was talking shit the whole time? I wonder I don't think that would matter
*  Yeah, because in the long run they'll get the money back
*  exactly
*  uh
*  You tweeted if you watch jersey shore family vacation, we would probably get along really well
*  What is it about? Uh, because I lived in jersey for a while. What is it about?
*  Jersey shore characters that you love. I just love that. They're sort. I love the debauchery
*  I think paulie d is a fun guy, you know, and just like it's just something like it's just
*  It's it's what what do you call it? It's trash tv. It's a guilty pleasure
*  But you can just watch snooki get drunk and falling all over herself or whatever
*  Is that part do you love that part of vegas as well?
*  And not really like I don't go out and stuff, but I kind of I just like the characters
*  I like that they have you know unique personalities and I think like we live in a world now where
*  people are more and more careful of what they say and afraid of backlash and all that stuff and it's kind of like
*  An old-school version of just like say what you feel. It's okay as long as your intent is good
*  and uh
*  You know like they haven't been
*  Cancelled if you will which is good, but I feel like their type of behavior
*  slowly, but surely like because they got a lot of flack originally for
*  misrepresenting like
*  italian americans or something like that like there was a lot of backlash about this isn't how italian americans really are and blah blah blah
*  so they sort of
*  Representing that group of people and you know, they received some backlash back in the day
*  I'm a huge supporter of diversity in all the beautiful forms that uh
*  The human species is able to generate and that's certainly well one dimension. What's the greatest vegas movie?
*  Would you say I don't know if that's a difficult question, but fear fear of loading las vegas leaving las vegas casino
*  I watch because anytime casinos on randomly. I always watch it such a great movie
*  Um, it could be one of the uh, sharon stone. Sure. Sure. Frankly. Sharon stone
*  Sheriff frankly sharon stone
*  Reminded me every time I would watch the movie reminded me of my wife amanda
*  Like totally I would see like the character and I was like i'm the robert caniero character in the film
*  It was I used to watch it through that lens. You know
*  from like uh
*  the depth of
*  Love that you have just kind of she was I remember that she was like
*  She was like she let she lit up every room. She does light up everyone she goes there everybody's
*  Attracted and drawn to her and she was kind of when she was younger
*  She was a little wild and crazy and whatnot
*  So she reminded me of uh the sharon stone character and then the robert caniero characters trying to like
*  Have a stable life, you know and be that now that was me who's the joe patchy in your life
*  Well, there was a guy there was a james woods for sure who was the the lester we called him
*  We actually called him lester a few of my friends call him lester
*  The you know the greasy guy I try to get back in and all that
*  But yeah, yeah, one of my favorite scenes is when they meet out in the desert
*  Uh, and it's like a 50 50 odds if you're gonna make it out alive in that I mean there
*  Yeah, that there's an epicness to that portrayal of vegas. I love I mean, it's just you know, totally
*  I mean, it's obviously more corporate now and it's different but uh, I love those movies
*  I love all those movies just seeing that life
*  And like I said if there was a period in time that I could go back to
*  And just experience it it would be that you know right around then there'll be that
*  We're playing with a mob and I think of like these crime shows today like they're so unrealistic now because
*  If they're in an era that is now like none of this stuff can happen because there's cameras everywhere
*  You can't like get away with these like killing somebody and jumping in a car and you're gonna get caught, you know
*  But in the 70s, yeah, you know that stuff across the line you die
*  Is yeah lake mead lake mead is recently like losing water and like every couple days
*  They're finding more and more bodies from that era. Oh, they really are
*  You're close with your mom. What did you learn about life from your mom?
*  My mother was very generous. My mother she was she experienced joy through giving people
*  Food for the most part my dad would get him drinks and that was how she felt fulfilled
*  Right. She felt good when she like would cook for you and like she'd be that person you'd come over
*  You'd be like, are you hungry? You said oh, no, no, i'm okay
*  She's gonna put 15 things in front of you and you'll eat, you know
*  You're gonna eat because everyone does that to be polite. No, no, i'm good
*  but you know, they will start to eat and just her hospitality in that regard and just being generous and like
*  being a good host to people and things like that like
*  um, how did that define like help define who you are as a person?
*  That generosity yeah to rub off on you. It made me think about in my life
*  when it comes to like
*  any sort of
*  Business deals or things like that. I don't want to get the best of it in such a way where I screw the other person
*  I genuinely don't i'd much rather you owe me than me. Oh you so if I hire people
*  They get paid more than they're supposed to and i'd rather than do that
*  And work towards it rather than feel underpaid because if they're underpaid they'll likely under deliver. Whereas if they feel overpaid
*  Then if I need them to do something special, they're not going to be like hey, I don't get paid for that
*  Like yeah, you do you really do so that's certainly like played out in my life where I set it up in such a way
*  Where I don't owe
*  You know i'm owed but that's okay. I'd because I can handle taking the worst of it in spots
*  I don't like being the person to uh
*  You know feel like i'm indebted to others
*  Yeah, and in some way the karma of that tends to
*  Pay dividends in the long term somehow. Yeah, somehow there's a
*  There's a somebody
*  Up up there that's keeping track in some kind of way
*  Uh, what advice would you give to young people today in high school and college? How to um
*  Have a career they can be proud of or maybe how to have a life in general they can be proud of
*  I would say like
*  Your 20s is a good opportunity to set yourself up for the rest of your life
*  Right. So while the 20s are a period where you want to have fun and you want to experience youth
*  It's also a good opportunity to start thinking about what do you want to what do you want to like?
*  What do you want your life to look like in your 30s and your 40s?
*  right, so I feel like it's the best time to really put yourself out there and take risks and
*  Try to hit it, you know, whatever, you know, like to work really really hard to set yourself up because
*  And I said this at an event. I was speaking at when you're like with poker when your bankroll is very very small
*  It's replenishable, right?
*  You don't need to protect it as much as you do once you've got something
*  As you do once you've got something right once you have a brand or you have money you have something like that
*  That's that's when you want to start protecting you but in your 20s is an opportunity to just really sort of
*  Get a cut, you know to work really really hard to set yourself up
*  You know for the future. I am concerned a little bit like every time I talk to kids today
*  I'm like, what do you want to be?
*  They all want to be youtubers or instagram stars rappers, right?
*  Okay, it's like that's cool. But like there's only so many of those, you know that there can be
*  So it might be worthwhile having a little bit of a backup plan
*  I think it's easier to be successful on instagram and social media if you do something else
*  And uh, I would say this too. One other thing I would say is
*  Don't choose a profession or an idea
*  Because you think it'll make you rich. Yeah, right
*  Pursue something that you actually love
*  Because if you love it, you're you're way more likely to become rich if you don't you do something that you don't actually enjoy
*  Now you're spending a lot of your life unhappy doing something you don't want and you're far and if you're not passionate about it
*  You're probably not the chances of you being successful are are much lower and also becoming rich
*  And i've talked to a lot of rich people hang out with a lot of rich people is not
*  Going to be as fulfilling as you imagine
*  If you arrive there by not doing the thing that you love doing, that's true. Ultimately the thing that you love doing is
*  Like that's what makes life worth there's another quote. I can't remember who it was otherwise I would quote them
*  but it says something to the effect of like
*  um
*  If we believe in the lie that more is always better then we can never truly arrive
*  Because wherever we are
*  More is better, right? I've never understood and i've been around rich people like, you know, you said, you know the bill
*  I never got I can't I don't get it
*  Like if you have a billion dollars, why do you give a shit about money at all?
*  Like and they're still like oh we made this deal and i'm like, you know
*  We picked up 300 who cares like your life is set like there is that bell curve, right?
*  Where obviously being in poverty, you know, there's obviously a high rate of unhappiness, but there's a certain amount of money where you reach
*  You know where you reach a level of happiness and then too much you find the people
*  That are searching for money to fulfill these holes. It starts to go back down again
*  well it
*  The getting more money could become a game like a sport that's fun to play as long as you
*  Directly or indirectly acknowledge that what you love is the game of it
*  Versus the actual attainment and I think that's what it is
*  Right for me. I've never cared about money that much. I just never did otherwise. I would have a lot more of it
*  but it's always like it's always been strange to me how
*  people that have that kind of money like
*  Are cheap in any way?
*  You know like they wouldn't donate five thousand to a worthwhile charity because it's like buddy this like when it changes your life
*  Not even like like small things like taxes like okay
*  You have 20 billion dollars and you're worried about paying 33 percent 30 percent 31. I get it
*  I get the I get the the point of it all but like it literally has no effect on your life whatsoever
*  Your life is unchanged whether it's 31 or 33
*  Yeah, that's that's the negative of a lot of money is if it corrupts the way you see the world you start to be
*  Protective and so on I mean part of the challenge of when you get a lot of money is people start to treat you differently
*  And so navigating that correctly is is very challenging. So don't change
*  Remain the same person you always were because if you change
*  You start to I mean, that's why power corrupts is you get a lot of power you get a lot of fame
*  You get a lot of money
*  You start to distrust people
*  You start to push away people that are actually really close to you
*  What's trusting you you develop some biases where you think like you're just this, you know
*  You think like it was all you and you're a genius and you're so great and all these other people who don't have it's just
*  Because they don't have what you have and like you just then you start to like view that group of people whether they're impoverished
*  Or whatever is like less than and that you're some like great guru where you could have just got lucky and bought bitcoins
*  That you know could have done anything and then you became like super wealthy and then you have this like dunning kruger effect
*  Where you think you know everything about everything and a lot of poker people have that and I listen i'm probably guilty in some ways
*  Too, you know thinking because you can figure out poker and be you know great at that that you could figure out anything
*  So there's like it's true, right?
*  I mean we sort of we genuinely feel like people that reach the highest levels of poker feel like they are intelligent
*  So they will look at problem solving and think that they have answers
*  Well, you have to remind yourself that you're not
*  Is best to see the world as you did just get lucky or at least from my perspective that you're not better than anybody
*  I don't think there's anything wrong with like acknowledging that you worked hard to get where you were like there isn't but at the same time like
*  It's not available to everybody in the same way, you know, right time right place like for me
*  My poker career could have gone very differently
*  You know if things didn't work out, you know if I had some bad luck in the wrong times like who knows where i'd be
*  So you said your brain crawl is pretty small in your 20s
*  I'm sure you've been around a lot of people you care a lot about who've lost everything in poker. What's that like?
*  What's those low points of losing everything
*  I think because
*  I've been there
*  I have
*  More empathy than I probably should for those people that really feel for them because I remember being in vegas and being totally broke
*  And like a guy loaning me four hundred dollars and me like turning that four hundred into twenty thousand four hundred bucks and it was like
*  eternally grateful of that
*  So when I have friends who go through that like I always try to consult them obviously
*  What they really need is money for the most part
*  But I remember saying no to one friend because he didn't have a plan
*  So I like to try to help them in that regard like my buddy's like can you stake me in this game?
*  And I was like, all right. Well, how much do you then I was like, let's break down the math, bro
*  You want me to stake you so you get 50 of the profit, right?
*  So I said how much do you think you can make in this game? How much is the biggest biggest winners make?
*  It's like well, I can probably you know, I'd probably do like 20,000 a month in this game. It's okay
*  So you get half of that because I get 10 right? What is your monthly nut? How much are you spending?
*  Well, I'm renting this thing for eight thousand. You're spending seventeen thousand a month
*  so like no matter what you're
*  Set up to fail like this isn't going to work
*  So I actually didn't give him the money and I was like what you need to do to earn more money is lower your monthly nut
*  Because it's too high. It just you know, it just doesn't mathematically add up. So trying to set them right in that regard
*  is something that like
*  I feel obliged to do especially if they're friends
*  But what about the mental aspect of the struggle they're going through the struggle you were going through just uh,
*  I mean, it's it's really rough to have no money. It's not for everybody
*  This really isn't like a lot of people might you know, listen to this and think like oh I want to play poker
*  It's like most people fail
*  Most people who want to play in the nfl they you know
*  They they spend their college years like they're most of them are not going to make it
*  Most of you who try to play poker professionally are going to fail and you're going to experience despair. Okay?
*  There are those like in anything that have the passion have the know-how have the luck and all that sort of stuff and it all
*  Pans out but you know, they're the minority
*  And so for the low points if you remember what does it take to sort of overcome that overcome the um
*  The mental struggle. I mean you're making it sound like certain people are just genetically able to insert
*  I do think some people are more apt to being able to deal with like
*  Adversity and having resilience and some people just can't hack it
*  But like I generally what I would advise with, you know people that are let's say a guy's playing, you know
*  Really high stakes or whatever doing badly is
*  Step number one is take take a little bit of a break here. Let's recalibrate and let's start small again
*  Let's you know, let's restart and let's play smaller stakes and let's get our confidence back because in poker
*  Without confidence you cannot be successful. It is incredibly important to have almost an inflated
*  level of confidence in yourself
*  Because you're you're up against it right as I said the majority people fail so why are you special?
*  Why are you different? You have to be pretty confident about your you know yourself to think that you are one of the chosen ones
*  And then uh, don't resist the despair and take a nap
*  Definitely take a nap and listen. It's okay to experience it. Like I said, yeah, you're gonna experience the spirit
*  What else would you what should you be feeling? You know if things are going poorly and you just lost all your money excited
*  Maybe like okay have your moment of grief
*  Allow yourself to experience it so that you can you know
*  Reassemble there's a fundamental way in which you haven't really lived life. You haven't if you haven't experienced periods of despair
*  You have a jaded view of the world
*  Right weird thing about the human condition that both the highs and the lows are important. Yeah
*  uh
*  What role does love play in the human condition daniel negrano?
*  That's a good one
*  World has love played in your life. It's yeah, that's you know, you sort of talked about the ups and downs of uh
*  Of you know the human condition and love has been that for me, right?
*  Like i'm in a good place now
*  But you know even with uh my now wife
*  years ago, you know
*  She was young. She was you know new to poker and she wasn't ready to settle down
*  I was like when I met her, I think I was 31. She was 21
*  And I was ready to like lock her up if you will, you know, let's do this
*  And I bought a ring way back when she was like not about that. She was living the the hollywood life
*  She was living a party in la doing that kind of stuff. It wasn't ready and we split
*  And that one hit me hard
*  So I didn't realize how much of a hit
*  that had on my
*  Confidence in my in everything really in poker with other women it had me a little jaded about women too, you know resentful
*  You know, um, and it took a lot of like self-retro
*  I did like a lot of personal growth work and workshops and things like that
*  And then didn't see her for years and she came back to town. I was a much different person
*  It was you know, four years ago or something like that and she was too
*  Went to dinner a few months later. We were married
*  It worked out so different because we both had to grow, you know and become different people
*  Huh? And that love was still there somehow. Yeah, like she went through her relationships. I went through mine
*  You know, we experienced life and I was married once before too, you know called my starter marriage if you will
*  um, which yeah
*  You know, we just you don't know
*  I think like until you do it until you get married and you know experience like the sacrifice not necessarily sacrifices
*  But your value systems if they don't align identically, which they're not going to
*  someone like me one of probably one of my
*  One of my strengths in poker, but my weaknesses in relationship is judgment
*  Right when I play poker I need to judge you
*  That's essentially what i'm doing
*  I'm gauging who you are and what you're good at and what you're bad at and that can have repercussions because it leads
*  That's that's how I you know view that's the lens. I look at everyone with based on how you live your life
*  I'm judging you this guy's this this guy's that this guy's that and that's not healthy
*  So you have to shut that off you have to learn to like relationship and the thing I finally realized what love is frankly for me
*  With her is no judgment, right?
*  She's so like yeah, so I have my way of being right if she wants to have cereal for dinner
*  Babe, that's the best decision for her. I was living in a framework of better and worse
*  Yeah, the way that I do things is better and yours is worse do things more like I do
*  That's that's a recipe for disaster true acceptance and true love is accepting someone like exactly as they are
*  You know if she wants to do something different i'm going to support her
*  Whatever it is even if I disagree with it personally and like the way that I would do things
*  Learning to just realize that she's had a different journey and a different walk towards where she's at than I have so
*  That's I can't pass my judgments on other people like I believe it is ethically wrong and probably illegal to eat cereal for dinner
*  Listen if she wants it she wants it acceptance like when she goes to bed like all these little things about my regimented life
*  She's not like our motto at our wedding was like
*  You keep me wild i'll keep you safe you keep me wild I keep her safe
*  She keeps me wild. She's like not organized and anal and all those kind of things. I am
*  she helps me like
*  Let loose, you know, you know, i'm oh no i'm eating this this she's like have some popcorn. All right, let's do it
*  You know, she keeps me uh freed and accepting that embracing that the uh, the difference is the chaos of it
*  Yeah, that's what like I literally do think about with her
*  How important it is and how much I try to like
*  Just come from neutral and like compassion and never judge because she's got other things that she deals with right that I don't
*  She's bipolar, right? So with that i've studied and i've learned a lot about
*  you know sort of mental health and what that means and um
*  ways in which
*  A lot of characteristics about somebody is completely out of their control when they're bipolar, right?
*  And there's swings like there's no
*  There's no cocktail for for bipolar that solves the issue, right?
*  So there's medications that work to you know, level you out for periods of time
*  But then they start to fade and they don't work as well. So they constantly need readjustment. It's an unsolved mystery to a certain degree
*  so
*  in some sense
*  You know her diagnosis made our relationship easier
*  Because I don't take anything personal, right? I realized that sometimes she's going to be in a mood
*  And say, you know, I mean she's so good about communicating it though
*  She tells me some morning she'll be like bad mood trying to get out of it, babe. Like okay
*  Did I leave her alone? Well, that's great
*  That's I mean
*  She's grown to be able to communicate to understand to self-reflect to understand what she is
*  I have people in my life who I love who are bipolar. It's a beautiful ride. It is right. Yeah
*  It's yeah, the highs and the lows are like are there so but yeah like because I like I feel like protector and for me
*  I just want to be a rock right and that's part of the whole cereal thing if she wants to eat cereal
*  Don't make a wrong for anything. She wants to do
*  What have you learned from life from the song the gambler by kenny rogers?
*  You gotta know when to hold them know when to fold them
*  No one to walk away. No one to run
*  You never count your money when you're sitting at the table
*  There'll be plenty of time for counting when the dealings done is that do you live by those words?
*  The first part of it for sure
*  What did they even mean because you got no win?
*  No, so basically it's like all right, you know in life like, you know
*  Let's say let's let's use a whatever the market for example
*  You bought a stock right or you bought bitcoin and you're like, it's gonna go to the moon, right? It's like, okay. Well
*  Maybe things have changed new scenario new circumstances new situation. Are you going down with the ship?
*  Right, or are you gonna play the hand down? Are you gonna fold it whether it's a relationship?
*  You know, you're you're you're with this woman. You're like, all right, I think it's time to fold this one
*  I think you know
*  I don't think that we're going to be able to make this this hand work right now when to fold them and when to run
*  Yeah, so maybe
*  Every gambler knows that the secret to surviving is knowing what to throw away knowing what to keep
*  Because every hand's a winner and every hand's a loser
*  That's like a stoic philosophy and the best thing you can hope for is to die in your sleep
*  Every hand's a winner and every hand's a loser. What does that mean? I like that one
*  I like for me that's like the difference between victim and responsible like the way that I think about it, right?
*  You can be a victim to circumstance or you can be responsible for everything in your life, right? So an event happens
*  The event itself is neither good or bad until you assign it value
*  right, so like an event happens and
*  Can be traumatic. It can be, you know painful
*  It can be you know painful
*  But you know how you respond to it is ultimately going to be up to you
*  Like you actually do have a choice and that's the thing you can control
*  The fact that you daniel negron took my commentary about the gambler seriously shows once more that you're a beautiful human being
*  Thank thank you
*  Thank you so much for being who you are for inspiring millions of people about poker about how to live life
*  And thank you for giving me your valuable time today. This is amazing. Thanks for talking man. It's great to have the conversation
*  Thank you for listening to this conversation with daniel negrano to support this podcast
*  Please check out our sponsors in the description and now let me leave you with some words from duel bronzen
*  Poker is war
*  People pretend it is a game
*  Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time
