---
Date Generated: April 10, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 9112s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence', 'artificial intelligence podcast', 'jordan', 'karjakin', 'kasparov', 'lebron', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex podcast', 'magnus carlsen', 'messi', 'mit ai', 'world chess championship']
Video Views: 2198534
Video Rating: None
---

# Magnus Carlsen: Greatest Chess Player of All Time | Lex Fridman Podcast #315
**Lex Fridman:** [August 27, 2022](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0ZO28NtkwwQ)
*  The following is a conversation with Magnus Carlsen, the number one ranked chess player in the world
*  and widely considered to be one of, if not the greatest chess player of all time.
*  The camera on Magnus died 20 minutes into the conversation. Most folks still just listen to
*  the audio through a podcast player anyway, but if you're watching this on YouTube or Spotify,
*  we did our best to still make it interesting by adding relevant image overlays.
*  I mess things up sometimes, like in this case, but I'm always working hard to improve. I hope
*  you understand. Thank you for your patience and support along the way. I love you all.
*  This is the Lex Friedman Podcast. To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description.
*  And now, dear friends, here's Magnus Carlsen.
*  You're considered by many to be one of the greatest, if not the greatest,
*  chess players of all time, but you're also one of the best fantasy football, aka soccer,
*  competitors in the world, plus recently picking up poker and competing at a world-class level.
*  So before chess, let's talk football and greatness. You're a Real Madrid fan,
*  so let me ask you the ridiculous big question. Who do you think is the greatest football,
*  aka soccer player of all time? Can you make the case for Messi? Can you make the case for
*  Cristiano Ronaldo, Pele, Maradona? Does anybody jump to mind?
*  I think it's pretty hard to make a case for anybody else than Messi for his all-around game.
*  Frankly, my Real Madrid fandom predates the Ronaldo era, the second Ronaldo, not the first one. I
*  always liked Ronaldo, but I always kind of thought that Messi was better. I went to quite a number of
*  Madrid games, and they've always been super helpful to me down there. The only thing is that
*  they asked me, they were going to do an interview, and they were going to ask me who my favorite
*  player was. I said somebody else, I think I said Isco at that point, and I was like, okay,
*  take two, now you say Ronaldo. So for them, it was very important, but it wasn't that huge to me.
*  So Messi over Maradona?
*  Yeah, but I think just like with chess, it's hard to compare eras. Obviously, the improvements in
*  football have been like in technique and such have been even greater than they have been in chess,
*  but it's always a weird discussion to have.
*  But just as a fan, what do you think is beautiful about the game? What defines greatness?
*  With Messi, one, he's really good at finishing, two, very good at assist, three, there's just
*  magic. It's just beautiful to see the play. So it's not just about the finishing. It's like
*  Maradona's hand of God. There's some creativity on the pitch. Is that important or is it very
*  important to get the World Cups and the big championships and that kind of stuff?
*  I think the World Cup is pretty overrated seeing as it's such a small sample size. So
*  it sort of annoys me always when titles are always appreciated so much, even though that
*  particular title can be a lot of luck or at least some luck. So I do appreciate
*  statistics a bit and all the statistics say that Messi is the best finisher of all time, which
*  I think helps a lot. And then there's the intangibles as well.
*  The flip side of that is the small sample size is what really creates the magic.
*  It's just like the Olympics. You basically train your whole life for this. You live your whole
*  life for this and it's a rare moment. One mistake and it's all over. That's, for some reason,
*  a lot of people either break under that pressure or rise up under that pressure.
*  You don't admire the magic of that?
*  No, I do. I just think that rising under pressure and breaking under the pressure is often a really
*  oversimplified take on what's happening. Yeah, we do romanticize the game.
*  Let me ask you another ridiculous question. You're also a fan of basketball.
*  Yes. Let me ask the goat question. I'm biased because I went to high school in Chicago
*  and Chicago Bulls during the Michael Jordan era. Let me ask the Jordan versus LeBron James question.
*  Let's continue on this thread of greatness. Which one do you pick or somebody else?
*  So I'll give you a completely different answer. Depending on my mood and depending on whom I talk
*  to, I pick one of the two and then I try to argue for that.
*  It's the quantum mechanical thing. Again, what would, if you were to argue for either one,
*  statistically, I think LeBron James is going to surpass Jordan.
*  Yeah, no doubt.
*  Again, there's a debate between... Unquantifiable greatness. That's the whole debate.
*  Yes. So it's quantifiable versus unquantifiable. What's more important? And you're depending on
*  mood all over the place. But what do you lean in general with these folks, with soccer,
*  with anything in life towards the unquantifiable more?
*  No, definitely towards the quantifiable.
*  So when you're unsure, lean towards the numbers. But see, it's later generations.
*  There's something, that's what people say about Maradona, is he took an arguably somewhat mediocre
*  team to a World Cup. So there's that also uplifting nature of the player to be able to rise up. It is
*  a team sport.
*  So are you going to punish Messi for taking a mediocre Argentine squad to the final in 2014
*  and punish him because they lost to a great team very narrowly after they missed?
*  He set up a great chance for Igwein in the first half, which he fluffed. And then, yeah,
*  eventually they lost the game.
*  Yeah, they do criticize Cristiano Ronaldo, Messi for being on really strong squads in terms of the
*  club teams and saying, yeah, okay, it's easy when you have like Ronaldinho or whoever on your team.
*  It would be very interesting just if the league could make a decision.
*  Yeah, just random, random allocation.
*  And just every single game, just keep reallocating, or maybe once a season,
*  or every season you get random.
*  Let's say every player, if let's say they sign a five-year contract for a team,
*  like one of them you're going to get randomly allocated to, let's say, a bottom half team.
*  I bet you there's going to be so much corruption around that.
*  Obviously it wouldn't ever happen or work, but I think it's interesting to think about.
*  So on chess, let's zoom out.
*  If you break down your approach to chess, when you're at your best, what do you think
*  contributes to that approach?
*  Is it memory recall, specific lines and positions?
*  Is it intuition?
*  How much of it is intuition?
*  How much of it is pure calculation?
*  How much of it is messing with the strategy of the opponent, so the game theory aspect,
*  in terms of what contributes to the highest level of play that you do?
*  I think the answer differs a little bit now from what it did eight years ago.
*  For instance, I feel like I've had two peaks in my career in 2013, 2014, and also in 2019.
*  In those years, I was very different in terms of my strengths.
*  Specifically in 2019, I benefited a lot from opening preparation.
*  While in 2013, 2014, I mostly tried to avoid my opponent's preparation rather than that being a
*  strength.
*  So I'm mentioning that also because it's something I didn't mention.
*  I think my intuitive understanding of chess has, over those years, always been a little bit
*  better than the others, even though it has evolved as well.
*  Well, certainly there are things that I understand now that I didn't understand
*  back then, but that's not only for me, that's for others as well.
*  I was younger back then, so I played with more energy, which meant that I could play better in
*  long drawn out games, which was also a necessity for me because I couldn't beat people in the
*  openings.
*  But in terms of calculation, that's always been a weird issue for me.
*  I've always been really, really bad at solving exercises in chess.
*  That's been a blind spot for me.
*  First of all, I found it hard to concentrate on them and to look deep enough.
*  So this is like a puzzle, a position, mate in X.
*  I mean, one thing is mate, but find the best move.
*  That's generally the exercise.
*  Find the best move, find the best line.
*  You just don't connect with it.
*  Usually you have to look deep.
*  And then when I get these lines during the game, I very often find the right solution,
*  even though it's not still the best part of my game to calculate very, very deeply.
*  But it doesn't feel like calculation you're saying in terms of-
*  No, it does sometimes, but for me, it's more like I'm at the board trying to find the solution.
*  And I understand the training at home is trying a little bit to replicate that.
*  You give somebody half an hour in a position, in this instance, you might have thought for
*  half an hour if you play the game.
*  I just cannot do it.
*  One thing I know that I am good at though is calculating short lines,
*  because I calculate them well.
*  I'm good at seeing little details and I'm also much better than most at evaluating,
*  which I think is something that sets me apart from others.
*  So evaluating specific position, if I make this move and the position changes in this way,
*  is this a step in the right direction in a big picture way?
*  Yeah, you calculate a few moves ahead and then you evaluate.
*  Because a lot of the times, the branch just becomes so big that you cannot calculate everything.
*  Like a fog.
*  Yeah, so you have to make evaluations based mostly on knowledge and intuition.
*  And somehow I seem to do that pretty well.
*  When you say you're good at short lines, what's short?
*  That's usually lines of two to four moves each.
*  Okay, so that's directly applicable to even faster games like Blitz, chess, and so on?
*  Yeah, Blitz is a lot about calculating forest lines.
*  So you can see pretty clearly that the players who struggle at Blitz who are great at classical
*  are those who rely on deep calculating ability.
*  Because you simply don't have time for that in Blitz.
*  You have to calculate quickly and rely a lot on intuition.
*  I know it's really difficult.
*  Can you try to talk through what's actually being visualized in your head?
*  Is there a visual component?
*  Yeah, no, I just visualized the board.
*  I mean, the board is in my head.
*  Two-dimensional?
*  My interpretation is that it is two-dimensional.
*  Like what colors?
*  Is it brown tinted?
*  Is it black?
*  Is it...
*  Like what's the theme?
*  Is it a big board, small board?
*  Are the...
*  What do the pawns look like?
*  Or is it more in the space of concepts?
*  Yeah, there aren't a lot of colors.
*  It's mostly...
*  What is it?
*  Queen's Gambit on the ceiling?
*  I'm trying right now to imagine it.
*  What about when you do the branching, when you have multiple boards and so on?
*  How does that look?
*  It's only one at a time.
*  One position at a time.
*  One position at a time, so then I go back.
*  And that's what when people play, or at least that's what I do.
*  When I play blindfold chess against several people,
*  then it's just always one board at a time and the rest are stored away somewhere.
*  But how do you store them away?
*  So like you went down one branch, you're like, all right, I got that.
*  I understand that there's some good there, there's some bad there.
*  Now let me go down another branch.
*  How do you store away the information?
*  You just put it on a shelf kind of?
*  I try and store it away.
*  Sometimes I have to sort of repeat it because I forget.
*  And it does happen frequently in games that you're thinking for...
*  Especially if you're thinking for long, let's say half an hour,
*  or even more than that, that you play a move and then your opponent plays a move.
*  Then you play a move and they play a move again and you realize,
*  oh, I actually calculated that.
*  I just forgot about it.
*  So that's obviously what happens when you store the information and you cannot retrieve it.
*  When you think about a move for 20, 30 minutes,
*  how do you break that down?
*  Can you describe what's the algorithm here that takes 30 minutes to run?
*  30 minutes is...
*  At least for me, it's usually a waste.
*  30 minutes usually means that I don't know what to do.
*  You're just running into the wall over and over.
*  I'm trying to find something that isn't there.
*  I think 10 to 15 minutes things in complicated positions can be really, really helpful.
*  Then you can spend your time pretty efficiently.
*  It just means that the branches are getting wide.
*  There's a lot to run through, both in terms of calculation and lots you have to evaluate as well.
*  Then based on that 10 to 15 minutes, I think you have a pretty good idea what to do.
*  It's very rare that I would think for half an hour and I would have a eureka moment
*  during the game.
*  If I haven't seen it in 10 minutes, I'm probably not going to see it at all.
*  You're going through different branches and after 15 minutes, it's like...
*  Mainly to the middle game because when you get to the end game,
*  it's usually brute force calculation that makes you spend so much time.
*  Middle game is normally a complicated mix of brute force calculation and
*  creativity and evaluation.
*  End game, it's easier in that sense.
*  You're good at every aspect of chess, but also your end game is legendary.
*  It baffles experts.
*  Can you linger on that then?
*  Try to explain what the heck is going on there.
*  If you look at game six of the previous world championship,
*  the longest game ever played in chess, it was, I think, his queen versus your rook,
*  knight in two pawns.
*  There's so many options there.
*  It's such an interesting little dance and it's not obvious that it wouldn't be a draw.
*  How do you escape it not being a draw and you win that match?
*  No, I knew that for most of the time, it was a theoretical draw since
*  chess with seven or less pieces on the board is solved.
*  People watching online, they can just check it.
*  They can check a so-called table base and it's just going to spit out win for white,
*  win for black or a draw.
*  And also, I knew that.
*  I knew that, didn't know that position specifically, but I knew that it had to be a draw.
*  So for me, it was about staying alert, first of all, trying to look for the best way to put my pieces.
*  But yeah, those end games are a bit unusual.
*  They don't happen too often.
*  So what I'm usually good at is I'm using my strengths that I also use in middle games is
*  that I evaluate well and I calculate short variations.
*  Even for the end game, short variations matter?
*  Yes, it does matter in some simpler end games.
*  But also, there are these theoretical end games with very few pieces like rook,
*  knight and two pawns versus queens.
*  But a lot of end games are simply defined by the queens being exchanged.
*  And there are a lot of other pieces left.
*  And then it's usually not brute force.
*  It's usually more of understanding and evaluation.
*  And then I can use my strengths very well.
*  Why are you so damn good at the end game?
*  Isn't there a lot of moves from when the end game starts to when the end game finishes?
*  You have a few pieces and you have to figure out it's like a sequence of little games
*  that happens, right?
*  Like little pattern.
*  How does it being able to evaluate a single position lead you to evaluate a long sequence
*  of positions that eventually lead to a checkmate?
*  Well, I think if you evaluate well at the start, you know what plans to go for.
*  And then usually the play from there is often pretty simple.
*  Let's say you understand how to arrange your pieces and often also how to arrange your pawns
*  early in the end game.
*  Then that makes all the difference.
*  And after that is like what we call technique very often.
*  That technique basically just means that the moves are simple and these are moves that
*  a lot of players could make.
*  Not only the very strongest ones.
*  These are moves that are kind of understood and known.
*  So with the evaluation, you're just constantly improving a little bit and that just leads
*  to suffocating the position and then eventually to the win.
*  As long as you're doing the evaluation well, one step at a time.
*  To some extent.
*  Also, yeah, as I said, if you evaluate it better and thus accumulated some small advantages,
*  then you can often make your life pretty easy towards the end of the end game.
*  So you said in 2019, the second phase of why you're so damn good, you did a lot of opening
*  preparation.
*  What's the goal for you of the opening game of chess?
*  Is it to throw the opponent off from any prepared lines?
*  Is there something you could put into words about why you're so damn good at the openings?
*  Again, these things have changed a lot over time.
*  Back in Kasparov's days, for instance, he very often got huge advantages from the opening as
*  white.
*  Can you explain why?
*  There were several reasons for that.
*  First of all, he worked harder.
*  He was more creative in finding ideas.
*  He was able to look places others didn't.
*  Also, he had a very strong team of people who had specific strengths in openings that
*  he could use.
*  So they will come up with ideas and he would integrate those ideas into...
*  Yeah, and he would also very often come up with them himself.
*  Also, at the start, he had some of the first computer engines to work for him to find his
*  ideas, to look deeper, to verify his ideas.
*  He was better at using them than a lot of others.
*  Now, I feel like the playing field is a lot more level.
*  There are both computer engines, neural networks, and hybrid engines available to
*  practically anybody.
*  So it's much harder to find ideas now that actually give you an advantage with the white
*  pieces.
*  People don't expect to find those ideas anymore.
*  Now, it's all about finding ideas that are missed by the engines.
*  Either they're missed entirely or they're missed at low depth and using them to gain
*  some advantage in the sense that you have more knowledge.
*  It's also good to know that usually these are not complete bluffs.
*  These are semi-bluffs so that you know that even if your opponent makes all the right
*  moves, you can still make a draw.
*  Also, at the start of 2019, neural networks had just started to be a thing in chess.
*  I'm not entirely sure, but there were at least some players, even in the top events, who you
*  could see did not use them or did not use them in the right way.
*  Then you could gain a huge advantage because a lot of positions were being evaluated differently
*  by the neural networks than traditional chess engines because they simply think about chess
*  in a very, very different way.
*  Short answer is these days it's all about surprising your opponent and taking it into
*  positions where you have more knowledge.
*  Is there some sense in which it's okay to make suboptimal, quote-unquote, moves?
*  No, but you have to.
*  The best moves have been analyzed to death mostly.
*  When you say semi-bluff, that's a kind of sacrifice.
*  You're sacrificing the optimal move, the optimal position so that you can take the opponent.
*  That's a game theoretic sense.
*  You take the opponent to something they didn't prepare well.
*  You could also look at it another way.
*  If you turn on whatever engine you turn on, if you try to analyze either from the starting
*  position or the starting position of some popular opening, if you analyze long enough,
*  it's always going to end up in a draw.
*  In that sense, you may not be going for the objective, the tries that are objectively the
*  most difficult to draw against, but you are trying to look at least at the less obvious paths.
*  How much do you use engines?
*  Do you use Leela, Stockfish in your preparations?
*  My team does.
*  Personally, I try not to use them too much on my own because I know that when I play,
*  you obviously cannot have help from engines.
*  Often, I feel like having knowledge about a position or some engine knowledge can be a lot worse than
*  having no knowledge.
*  I try to look at engines as little as possible.
*  Your team uses them for research, for a generation of ideas, but you are
*  relying primarily on your human resources.
*  Yeah, for sure.
*  You can evaluate well, you don't lean.
*  Yeah, I can evaluate as a human.
*  I can know what they find unpleasant and so on.
*  It's very often the case, for me to some extent, but a lot for others that you arrive in a position
*  and your opponent plays a move that you didn't expect.
*  If you didn't expect it, you know that it's probably not a great move
*  since it hasn't been expected by the engine.
*  But if it's not obvious why it's not a good move, it's usually very, very hard to figure it out.
*  So then looking at the engines doesn't necessarily help because at that point,
*  you're facing a human.
*  You have to think as a human.
*  I was chatting with the Demis Asaba, CEO of DeepMind, a couple of days ago, and he
*  asked me to ask you about what you first felt when you saw the play of AlphaZero.
*  Like interesting ideas, any creativity.
*  Did you feel fear that the machine is taking over?
*  Were you inspired?
*  What was going on in your mind and heart?
*  Funny thing about Demis is he doesn't play chess at all like an AI.
*  He plays in a very, very human way.
*  No, I was hugely inspired when I saw the games at first.
*  In terms of man versus machine, that battle was kind of lost for humans even before I
*  entered top level chess.
*  That's never been an issue for me.
*  I never liked playing against computers much anyway.
*  That's completely fine.
*  But it was amazing to see how they quote unquote thought about chess in such a different way
*  and in a way that you could mistake for creativity.
*  Mistake for creativity.
*  Strong words.
*  Is it wild to you how many sacrifices it's willing to make that sacrifice pieces
*  and then wait for prolonged periods of time before doing anything with that?
*  Is that weird to you that that's part of chess?
*  No, it's one of the things that's hardest to replicate as a human as well.
*  Or at least for my playing style.
*  Usually when I sacrifice, I don't do it unless I feel like I'm getting something tangible
*  in return.
*  Like a few moves down the line.
*  A few moves down the line, you can see that you can either retrieve the material or you can put
*  your opponent's king under pressure or have some very concrete positional advantage that
*  compensates for it.
*  For instance, in chess, bishops and knights are fairly equivalent.
*  We both give them three points, but bishops are a little bit better.
*  Especially a bishop pair is a lot better than a bishop and a knight.
*  Especially two knights.
*  Depends on the position, but on average they are.
*  Sacrificing a pawn in order to get a bishop pair, that's one of the most common sacrifices.
*  Oh, you're okay making that sacrifice?
*  Yeah.
*  It depends on the situation, but generally that's fine.
*  There are a lot of openings that are based on that.
*  You sacrifice a pawn for the bishop pair and then eventually it's some sort of positional equality.
*  That's fine.
*  The way AlphaZero would sacrifice a knight or sometimes two pawns, three pawns,
*  and you could see that it's looking for some sort of positional domination, but it's
*  hard to understand.
*  It was really fascinating to see.
*  In 2019, I was sacrificing a lot of pawns especially, and it was a great joy.
*  Unfortunately, it's not so easy to continue to do that.
*  People have found more solid opening lines since that don't allow me to do that as often.
*  I'm still trying both to get those positions and still trying to learn the art of sacrificing pieces.
*  Demis also made a comment that was interesting to my new chess brain,
*  which is one of the reasons that chess is fun is because of the quote,
*  creative tension between the bishop and the knight.
*  You were talking about this interesting difference between the two pieces.
*  How would you convert that?
*  That's like a poetic statement about chess.
*  I think he said that why has chess been played for such a long time?
*  Why is it so fun to play at every level?
*  If you can reduce it to one thing, is it the bishop and the knight,
*  some kind of weird dynamics that they create in chess?
*  Is there any truth to that?
*  It sounds very good.
*  I haven't tried a lot of other games, but I tried to play a little bit of Shogi.
*  And for my new Shogi brain, comparing it to chess,
*  what annoyed me about that game is how much the pieces suck.
*  Basically, you have one rook and you have one bishop that move like in chess,
*  and the rest of the pieces are really not very powerful.
*  So I think that's one of the attractions of chess, like how powerful especially the queen is.
*  Interesting.
*  I kind of think it makes it a lot of fun.
*  You think power is more fun than variety?
*  No, there is variety in chess as well, though.
*  But not much more so than like go or something?
*  No, no, no.
*  That's for...
*  So like knight, I mean, they all move in different ways.
*  They're all weird.
*  There's just all these weird patterns and positions that can emerge.
*  The difference in the pieces create all kinds of interesting dynamics,
*  I guess is what I'm trying to say.
*  Yeah.
*  And I guess it is quite fascinating that all those years ago they created
*  the knight and the bishop without probably realizing that they would be
*  almost equally strong with such different qualities.
*  That's crazy that when you design computer games,
*  it's like an art form.
*  It's science and an art to balance it.
*  You talk about StarCraft and all those games.
*  Like so that you can have competitive play at the highest level
*  with all those different units.
*  In the case of chess, it's different pieces.
*  And they somehow designed a game that was super competitive.
*  But there's probably some kind of natural selection that the chess
*  just wouldn't last if it was designed poorly.
*  Yeah.
*  And I think the rules have changed over time a little bit.
*  But I would be...
*  I mean, speaking of games and all that,
*  I'm also interested to play other games like Chess 960 or Fisher Random,
*  as they call it, like that you have 960 maps instead of one.
*  Yeah.
*  So for people who don't know, Fisher Random Chess 960s.
*  Yeah.
*  That basically just means that the pawns are in the same way
*  and the major pieces are distributed randomly on the last rank.
*  Only that there have to be obviously bishops of opposite color
*  and the king has to be in between the rooks
*  so that you can castle both ways.
*  Oh, you can still castle in Chess 960.
*  You can still castle, but it makes it interesting.
*  So you still have...
*  It still castles in the same way.
*  So let's say the king is like...
*  Yeah.
*  What happens in that case?
*  Yeah.
*  Let's say the king is in the corner.
*  So to castle this side, you have to clear a whole lot of pieces.
*  What would castling look like though?
*  No, the king would go here and the rook would go there.
*  Oh, okay.
*  And that's happened in my games as well.
*  Like I forgot about castling and I've been attacking a king over here
*  and then all of a sudden it escapes to the other side.
*  I think Fisher Chess is good that it's...
*  The maps will generally be worse than regular chess.
*  Like I think the starting position is as close to ideal
*  for creating a competitive game as possible,
*  but they will still be interesting and diverse enough
*  that you can play very interesting games.
*  So when you say maps, there's 960 different options
*  and what fraction of that creates interesting games at the highest level?
*  This is something that a lot of people are curious about
*  because when you challenge a great chess player like yourself
*  to look at a random starting position,
*  that feels like it pushes you to play pure chess versus memorizing lines.
*  Yeah, for sure.
*  Or for sure, but that's the whole idea.
*  That's what you want and...
*  How hard is it to play?
*  I mean, can you talk about what it feels like to you to play
*  with a random starting position?
*  Is there some intuition you've been building up?
*  It's very, very different.
*  And I mean, understandably, engines have an even greater advantage
*  in 960 than they have in classical chess.
*  No, it's super interesting.
*  And that's why also I really wish that we played more classical chess,
*  like long games, four to seven hours.
*  And in fish random chess, just 960,
*  because then you really need that time, even on the first moves.
*  What usually happens is that you get 15 minutes before the game,
*  you're getting told the position 15 minutes before the game,
*  and then you can think about it a little bit, even, you know,
*  check the computer, but that's all the time you have.
*  But then you really need to figure it out.
*  Like some of the positions obviously are a lot more interesting than the others.
*  In some of them, it appears that like, if you don't play symmetrically
*  at the start, then you're probably going to be in a pretty bad position.
*  What do you mean with the pawns?
*  With the pawns, yeah.
*  Why? How does that make sense?
*  That's the thing about chess, though.
*  So let's say white opens with e4, which has always been the most played move.
*  There are many ways to meet that, but the most solid ways of playing
*  has always been the symmetrical response with e5, and then there's the
*  the Rillopus, there's the Petroff opening and so on.
*  And if you just ban symmetry on the first move in chess,
*  you would get more interesting games.
*  Or you'd get more decisive games.
*  So that's the good thing about chess is that we've played it so long that
*  we've actually devised non-symmetrical openings that are also fairly equal.
*  But symmetry is a good default.
*  But yeah, symmetry is a good default.
*  And it's a problem that by playing symmetrical, armed with good preparation
*  in regular chess, it's just a little bit too dry.
*  And I guess if you analyze a lot in chess 960, then a lot of the positions would end up being
*  pretty dry as well.
*  Because the random starting point is so shitty, you're forced to...
*  You're actually forced to play symmetrically.
*  You cannot actually try and play in a more interesting manner.
*  Is there any other kind of variations that are interesting to you?
*  Oh, yeah, there are several.
*  So no castling chess has been promoted by former world champion Vladimir Kramnik.
*  There have been a few tournaments with that, not any that I've participated in though.
*  I kind of like it.
*  Also, my coach uses non-castling engines quite a bit to analyze regular positions
*  just to get a different perspective.
*  So castling is like a defensive thing.
*  So if you remove castling, it forces you to be more offensive.
*  Is that why?
*  Yeah, for sure.
*  It seems like a tiny little difference.
*  No castling probably forces you to be a little bit more defensive at the start,
*  or I would guess so, because you cannot suddenly escape with the kings.
*  It's going to make the game a bit slower at the start, but I feel like eventually it's going to
*  make the games less dry for sure.
*  Then you have some weird variants like where the pawns can move both diagonally and forward.
*  And also you have self-capture chess, which is quite interesting.
*  So the pawns can commit suicide?
*  Yeah, people can.
*  Why would that be a good move?
*  No, sometimes one of your pieces occupies a square.
*  Let me just set up a position.
*  Let's put it like this.
*  For instance, there are a lot of ways to checkmate for white.
*  This, for instance, or there are several ways.
*  But this would be a chance.
*  Oh, cool.
*  For people who are just listening, basically you're bringing in a knight close to the whole
*  the king and the queen and so on, and you replace the knight with a queen.
*  Yeah, that's interesting.
*  So you can have like a front of pieces and then you just replace them with the second.
*  Yeah, I mean, that could be interesting.
*  I think also maybe sometimes it's just clearance, basically.
*  It adds an extra element of clearance.
*  So I think there are many different variants.
*  I don't think any of them are better than the one that has been played for
*  at least a thousand years, but it's certainly interesting to see.
*  So one of your goals is to reach the FIDEA ELO chess rating of 2900.
*  Maybe you can comment on how is this rating calculated and what does it take to get there?
*  Is it possible for a human being to get there?
*  Basically, you play with a factor of 10, which means that if I were to play against
*  an opponent who's rated the same as me, I would be expected to score 50%, obviously.
*  And that means that I would win five points with a win, lose five points with a draw,
*  and then equal if I draw.
*  If your opponent is 200 points lower rated, you're expected to score 75% and so on.
*  And you establish that rating by playing a lot of people and then it slowly converges
*  towards an estimate of how likely you are to win or lose against different people.
*  My rating is obviously carried through thousands of games.
*  Right now, my rating is 2861, which is decent.
*  I think that pretty much corresponds to the level I have at the moment,
*  which means in order to reach 2900, I would have to either get better at chess, which I think is
*  fairly hard to do, at least considerably better.
*  So what I would need to do is try and optimize even more in terms of
*  the matchups, the preparations, everything, but not necessarily selecting tournaments and so on,
*  but just optimizing in terms of preparation, making sure I never have any bad days.
*  So you basically can't lose.
*  Yeah, I basically can't fuck up ever if I want to reach that goal.
*  And so I think reaching 2900 is pretty unlikely.
*  The reason I've set the goal is to have something to play for, to have
*  a motivation to actually try and be at my best when I play, because otherwise I'm
*  playing to some extent mostly for fun these days in that I love to play, I love to try and
*  win, but I don't have a lot to prove or anything.
*  But that gives me at least the motivation to try and be at my best all the time,
*  which I think is something to aim for.
*  So at the moment, I'm quite enjoying that process of trying to optimize.
*  What would you say motivates you in this now and in the years leading up to now?
*  The love of winning or the fear of losing?
*  So for the World Championship, it's been the fear of losing for sure.
*  Other tournaments, love of winning is a great, great factor.
*  And that's why I also get more joy from winning most tournaments than I do for
*  winning the World Championship, because then it's mostly been a relief.
*  I also think I enjoy winning more now than I did before, because I feel like I'm
*  a little bit more relaxed now.
*  I also know that it's not going to last forever.
*  So every little win, I appreciate a lot more now.
*  And in terms of fear for losing, that's a huge reason why I'm not going to play the
*  World Championship, because it really didn't give me a lot of joy.
*  It really was all about avoiding losing.
*  Why is it that the World Championship really makes you feel this way?
*  The anxiety.
*  When you say losing, do you mean not just the match, but every single position?
*  Like the fear of a blunder?
*  No, the blunder is okay.
*  When I sit down at the board, then it's mostly been fine, because then I'm focused on the
*  game.
*  And then I know that I can play the game.
*  It's a time in between knowing that I feel like losing is not an option, because it's
*  the World Championship.
*  And because in a World Championship, there are two players.
*  There's a winner and a loser.
*  If I don't win a random tournament that I play, then I'm usually...
*  It depends on the tournament.
*  I might be disappointed for sure.
*  Might even be pretty pissed.
*  But ultimately, you go on to the next one.
*  With the World Championship, you don't go on to the next one.
*  It's years.
*  And it's been a core part of my identity for a while now that I am World Champion.
*  And so there's not an option of losing that.
*  You're going to have to, at least for a couple of years, carry the weight of having lost.
*  You're the former World Champion now, if you lose, versus the current World Champion.
*  There are certain sports that create that anxiety and others that don't.
*  For example, I think UFC makes martial arts a little better with losing.
*  It's understood.
*  Everybody loses.
*  Not everybody, though.
*  Not everybody.
*  Not everybody.
*  Not everybody.
*  Could be bent to the chat.
*  But in boxing, there is that extra pressure of maintaining the championship.
*  Maybe you could say the same thing about the UFC as well.
*  So for you personally, for a person who loves chess,
*  the first time you won the World Championship, that was the thing that was fun.
*  And then everything after is stressful.
*  Essentially.
*  There was certainly stress involved the first time as well.
*  But it was nothing compared to the others.
*  So the only World Championship after that that I really enjoyed was the one in 2018
*  against the American Fabiano Caruana.
*  And what made that different is that I'd been kind of slumping for a bit,
*  and he'd been on the rise.
*  So our ratings were very, very similar.
*  They were so close that if at any point during the match I'd lost the game,
*  he would have been ranked as number one in the world.
*  Our ratings were so close that for each draw they didn't move.
*  And the game itself was close.
*  Yeah, the games themselves were very close.
*  I had a winning position in the first game,
*  then I couldn't really get anywhere for a lot of games.
*  Then he had a couple of games where he could potentially have won.
*  Then in the last game I was a little bit better.
*  And eventually they were all drawn.
*  But I felt all the way that this is an interesting match
*  against an opponent who is at this position at this point equal to me.
*  And so losing that would not have been a disaster.
*  Because in all the other matches I would know that I would have lost against somebody
*  who I know I'm much better than.
*  And that would be a lot harder for me to take.
*  Well, that's fascinating and beautiful that the stress isn't from losing.
*  Because you have fun.
*  You enjoy playing against somebody who's as good as you, maybe better than you.
*  That's exciting to you.
*  It's losing at this high stakes thing that only happens rarely
*  to a person who's not as good as you.
*  And that's why it's also been incredibly frustrating in other matches.
*  When we play draw after draw, I know that I'm better.
*  I can sense during the game that I understand it better than them.
*  But I cannot get over the hump.
*  So you are the best chess player in the world.
*  And you not playing the World Championship really
*  makes the World Championship not seem important.
*  There's an argument to be made for that.
*  Is there anything you would like to see if you had changed about the World Championship
*  that would make it more fun for you?
*  And better for the game of chess period for everybody involved?
*  So I think 12 games or now 14 games that there is for the World Championship
*  is a fairly low sample size.
*  If you want to determine who the best player is
*  or at least the best player in that particular matchup, you need more games.
*  And I think to some extent, if you're going to have a World Champion
*  and call them the best players, you got to make sure that the format
*  increases the chance of finding the best players.
*  So I think having more games and if you're going to have a lot more games,
*  then you need to decrease the time control a bit, which in turn I think is also a good thing
*  because in very long time controls with deep preparation,
*  you can sort of mask a lot of your deficiencies as a chess player
*  because you have a lot of time to think and to defend and also you have deep preparation.
*  So I think those would be for me to play.
*  Those would be the main things, more games and less time.
*  So you want to see more games and rules that emphasize pure chess?
*  Yeah, but already less time emphasizes pure chess because
*  defensive techniques are much harder to execute with a little time.
*  What do you think? Is there a sweet spot in terms of, are we talking about blitz?
*  I think blitz is a bit too fast. To their credit, this was suggested by Fita as well.
*  For a start to have two games per day and let's say you have 45 minutes a game plus
*  15 or 30 seconds per move, that means that each session will probably be about
*  or a little less than two hours. That would be a start.
*  Also, what we're playing in the tournament that I'm playing here in Miami, which is
*  four games a day with 15 minutes plus 10 seconds per move, those would be
*  more interesting than the one there is now. I understand that there are a lot of traditions.
*  People don't want to change the world championship. That's all fine. I just think that
*  the world championship should do a better job of trying to reflect who's the best overall chess player.
*  So would you say if it's faster games, you'd probably be able to get a sample size of
*  over 20 games, 20, 30, 40. Do you think there's a number that's good over a long period of time?
*  Well, I would prefer as many as possible.
*  So like 100?
*  Yeah, but let's say you play 12 days, two games a day, that's 24. I feel like that's already
*  quite a bit better. You play like one black game, one white game each day.
*  Endurance wise, that's okay?
*  Yeah, I think that's fine. You will have three days as well. So I don't think that will be a problem.
*  And also you have to prepare two sets of openings for each day, which makes it more difficult for
*  the teams preparing, which I think is also good.
*  Let me ask you a fun question. If Hikaru Nakamura was one of the two people, I apologize.
*  Yeah, he could have finished second. So he lost the last round of the candidates.
*  Yeah, and you maybe can explain to me, internet speed copium is something you tweeted.
*  Yeah.
*  But if he got second, would you just despite him still play the world championship? That's
*  internet question. And when the internet asks, I must abide the due divides.
*  Yeah, sure. Thank you, internet.
*  So after the last match, I did an interview right after where I talked about the fact that I was
*  unlikely to play the next one. I'd spoken privately to both family, friends, and of course,
*  also my chess team that this was likely going to be the last match. What happened was that
*  right before the world championship match, there was this young player, Alireza Firouza.
*  He had a dramatic rise. He rose to second in the world rankings. He was 18 then, he's 19 now.
*  He qualified for the candidates. And it felt like there was at least a half realistic possibility
*  that he could be the challenger for the next world championship. And that sort of lit a fire under me.
*  Do you like that idea?
*  I like that a lot. I love the idea of playing him in the next world championship. And originally,
*  I was sure that I wanted to announce right after the match that this was it, I'm done.
*  I'm not playing the next one. But this lit a fire under me. So that made me think,
*  this actually motivates me. And I just wanted to get it out there for several reasons,
*  to create more hype about the candidates, to motivate myself a little bit, maybe motivate him.
*  Also, obviously, I wanted to give people a heads up for the candidates that you might be playing
*  for more than first place. Normally, the candidates is first place or best. It's
*  like the world championship. And then, so Nakamura was one of many people who just didn't believe me.
*  Which is fair, because I've talked before about not necessarily wanting to defend again.
*  But I never talked as concretely or was as serious as this time. So he simply didn't believe me.
*  And he was very vocal about that. And he said, nobody believed me, no other players, which may
*  or may not have been true. And then, yeah, he lost the last game and he didn't qualify.
*  But to answer the question, no, I'd already at that point decided that I wouldn't play.
*  I would have liked it less if he had not lost the last round.
*  But the decision was made.
*  But the decision was already made.
*  Does it break your heart a little bit that you're walking away from it? In all the ways that you
*  mentioned that it's just not fun. There's a bunch of ways that it doesn't seem to bring out the
*  best kind of chess. It doesn't bring out the best out of you and the particular opponents involved.
*  Does it just break your heart a little bit? Like you're walking away from something,
*  or maybe the entire chess community is walking away from a kind of a historic event
*  that was so important in the 20th century, at least.
*  So I won the championship in 2013. I said no to the candidates in 2011. I didn't particularly
*  like the format. I was just not in the mood. I didn't want the pressure
*  that was connected with the world championship. And I was perfectly content at the time to play
*  the tournaments that I did play. Also to be ranked number one in the world, I was comfortable with
*  the fact that I knew that I was the best and I didn't need a title to show others.
*  And what happened later is I suddenly decided to play. In 2013, they changed the format. I liked
*  it better. I just decided, you know, it could be interesting. Let's try and get this. There really
*  wasn't more than that to it. It wasn't like fulfilling life-long dream or anything. I just
*  thought, you know, let's play. So it's just a cool tournament? Yeah, it's a cool
*  tournament. It's a good challenge. You know, why not? It's something that could be a motivation.
*  It motivated me to get in the best shape of my life that had been until then. So it was a good
*  thing. And 2013 match brought me a lot of joy as well. So I'm very, very happy that I did that.
*  But I never had any thoughts that I'm going to keep the title for a long time. Immediately after
*  the match in 2013, I mean, also before the match, I'd spoken against the fact that the champion is
*  seeded into the final, which I thought was unfair. After the match, I made a proposal that we have a
*  different system where the champion doesn't have these privileges. And people's reaction, both
*  players and chess community was generally like, okay, we're good. We don't want that.
*  You keep your privileges. I was like, okay, whatever. So you want to fight for it every time?
*  Yeah, I want that. I have to ask, just in case you have an opinion, if you can maybe from a fantasy
*  chess perspective, analyze Ding versus Nepo, who wins? The current, the two people that would play
*  if you're not playing. Generally, I would consider that Ding has a slightly better overall
*  chess strength. What are the strengths and weaknesses of each, if you can kind of summarize it?
*  So Nepo, he's even better at calculating short lines than I am. But he can sometimes like a
*  little bit of depth. In short lines, he's an absolute calculation monster. He's extremely quick,
*  but he can sometimes like a bit of depth. Also recently, he's improved his openings quite a bit.
*  So now he has a lot of good ideas and he's very, very solid. Ding is not quite as well prepared,
*  but he has an excellent understanding of dynamics and imbalances in chess, I would say.
*  What do you mean by imbalances?
*  Imbalances like bishops against knights, material imbalances.
*  He can take advantage of those.
*  Yes, I would say he's very, very good at that and understanding the dynamic factors,
*  as we call them, like material versus time, especially.
*  I think Nepo got the better of him and the candidates. So what's your sense why Ding
*  has an edge in the championship? I feel like individual past results
*  hasn't necessarily been a great indicator of world championship results. I feel like
*  overall chess strength is more important. I mean, to be fair, I only think like Ding has a very
*  small edge. Like difference is not big at all. But our individual head-to-head record was
*  probably the main reason that a lot of people thought Nepo had a good chance against me
*  as well. It was like four to one in his favor before the match. But that was just another
*  example of why that may not necessarily mean anything. Also in our case, it was a very,
*  very low sample size. I think about the size of the match in total 14 games and that generally
*  doesn't mean much. How close were those games, would you say, in your mind for the previous
*  championship? So that game six where it was a turning point where you won, was there any
*  doubt in your mind that, you know, like if you do a much larger sample size, that you'll get the
*  better of Nepo? No, no, larger sample size is always good for me. So world championship,
*  it's a great parallel to football because it's a low scoring game. And if the better
*  player or the better team scores, they win most of the time.
*  Oh, that's generally for championships or in general?
*  Yeah, for championships. Like they generally win because the other slightly weaker team,
*  they're good enough to defend to make it very, very difficult for the others. But when they
*  actually have to create the chances, then they have no chance. And then it very often ends with
*  a blowout as it did in our match. If I hadn't won game six, it probably would have been very,
*  very close. He might have edged it. There's obviously a bigger chance that I would have
*  edged it. But this is just what happens a lot in chess, but also in football that matches are
*  close and then they- Somebody scores.
*  Somebody scores and then things change. And this gives people the illusion that the matchup was
*  very close. While actually it just means that the nature of the game makes the matches close
*  very often, but it's always much more likely that one of the teams is going to or one of the players
*  is going to break away than the others. And in other matches as well, even though a lot of people
*  before the match in 2016 against Karyakin, there were people who thought before the match that I
*  was massively overrated as a favorite and that essentially the match was pretty close, like
*  whatever, 60-40 or some people even said like 55-45. And what I felt was that the match went very,
*  very wrong for me and I still won. And some people saw that as an indication that the
*  pre-match probabilities were probably a bit closer than people thought. Well, I would look at it in
*  the way that everything went wrong and I still won, which probably means that I was a pretty
*  big favorite to begin with. I do have a question too about that match, but first,
*  so Sergei Karyakin was originally a qualifier for the candidate tournament, but was disqualified
*  for breaching the FIDE code of ethics after publicly expressing approval for the 2022
*  Russian invasion in Ukraine. When you look at the Cold War and some of the US versus Russian
*  games of the past, does politics, some of this geopolitics, politics ever creep its way into the
*  game? Do you feel the pressure, the immensity of that, as it does sometimes with the Olympics,
*  these big nations playing each other, competing against each other, almost like fighting out
*  in a friendly way, the battles, the tensions that they have in the space of geopolitics?
*  Yeah, I think it still does. So the president of the World Chest Federation who was just re-elected
*  is a Russian. I like him personally, for sure, but he is quite connected to the Kremlin. And it's
*  quite clear that the Kremlin considers it at least a semi-important goal to bring the chest
*  crown home to Russia. So it's still definitely a factor. And I mean, I can answer for in the
*  Karyakin case, I don't have a strong opinion on whether he should have been banned or not.
*  Obviously, I don't agree with anything that he says. But in principle, I think that you should
*  ban either no Russians or all Russians. I'm generally not particularly against either. But
*  I don't love banning wrong opinions, even if they are as reprehensible as his have been.
*  Yeah, there's something about the World Chest Championships or the Olympics, where it feels
*  like banning is counterproductive to alleviating some of the conflicts.
*  We don't know. This is the thing, though. We really don't know about the long-term
*  conflicts. And a lot of people try to do the right thing in this sense, which I don't really blame
*  at all. It's just that we don't know. And I guess sometimes there are other ways you want to try and
*  help as well. See, within the competition, within some of those battles of US versus Russia,
*  and so on, there's also between the individuals, maybe you'll disagree with this, but from a
*  spectator perspective, there's still a camaraderie. At the end of the day, there's a thing that unites
*  you, which is this appreciation of the fight over the chessboard. Even if you hate each other.
*  Yeah, for sure. I think for every match that's been, you would briefly discuss the game
*  with your opponent after the game, no matter how much you hate each other. And I think that's
*  lovely. And Kasparov, he was quoted, somebody in his team asked him, why are you talking to
*  Karpov after the game? You hate that guy. Yeah, sure. But he's the only one who understands.
*  Yeah, the only one who understands.
*  I think that's really lovely. And I would love to see that in other areas as well, that you can
*  regardless of what happens, you can have a good chat about the game. You can just talk about
*  the ideas with people who understand what you understand.
*  So if you're not playing the world championships, there's a lot of people who are saying that
*  perhaps the world championships don't matter anymore. Do you think there's some truth to that?
*  I said that back a long time ago as well, that for me, I don't know if it never happened. So I
*  don't know what would have happened. But I was thinking like the moment that I realized that I'm
*  not the best player in the world, like I felt like morally I have to renounce the world championship
*  title, you know, because it doesn't mean anything. As long as you're not the best player.
*  So the ratings really tell a bigger, a clearer story.
*  I think so, at least over time. Like I'm a lot more proud of my streak of being rated number
*  one in the world, which is now since I think the summer of 2011. I'm a lot more proud of that than
*  than the world championships. How much anxiety or even fear do you have before making a difficult
*  decision on the chessboard? So when it's a high stakes game, how nervous do you get? How much
*  anxiety do you have? And all that calculations, you're sitting there for 10, 15 minutes because
*  you're in a fog. There's always a possibility of a blunder of a mistake. Are you anxious about it?
*  Are you afraid of it? Really depends. I have been, I have been at times. I think the most nervous I
*  ever been was game 10 of the world championships in 2018. I know that was just a thrilling game.
*  I was black. I basically abandoned the Queen side at some point to attack him on the King side. And
*  I knew that my attack, if it doesn't work, I'm going to lose. But I had so much adrenaline. So
*  that was fine. I thought I was going to win. Then at some point I realized that it's not so clear.
*  And then my time was ticking and I was just getting so nervous. I still remember
*  what happened. We played this time trouble phase where he had very little time, but I had even less.
*  And I just remember, I kind of remember much of it, just that when it was over, I was just so
*  relieved because then it was clear that the position was probably going to be rather than
*  in a draw. Otherwise, I'm often nervous before games, but when I get there, it's all business.
*  And especially when I'm playing well, I'm never afraid of losing when I play because I trust,
*  yeah, I trust my instincts. I trust my skills. How much psychological intimidation is there
*  from you to the other person, from the other person to you?
*  I think people would play a lot better if they played against an anonymous me. I would love to...
*  Are people scared of you?
*  I would love to have a tournament online where, let's say, you play 10 of the best players in the
*  world. And for each round, you don't know who you're playing.
*  That's an interesting question. There's these videos where people eat McDonald's,
*  Burger King, or Diet Coke versus Diet Pepsi. Would people be able to tell they're playing you
*  from the style of play, do you think, or from the strength of play?
*  If there was a decent sample size, sure.
*  And what about you? Would you be able to tell others?
*  In just one game? Very unlikely.
*  What sample size would you need to tell accurately? I feel like it's the science.
*  Yeah, I think 20 games would help a lot.
*  Per person?
*  Yeah. But I know that they've already developed AI bots that are pretty good at recognizing
*  somebody's style, which is quite fascinating.
*  And it'd be fascinating if those bots were able to summarize the style somehow. Maybe great
*  attacking chess, like some of the same characteristics you've been describing, like great at short
*  line calculations, all that kind of stuff. Or just talk shit.
*  I mean, really, all the best chess players, there are basically just two camps. People who
*  are good at longer lines or shorter lines, it's the hare and the tortoise, basically.
*  And sometimes, I feel like I'm the closest you can get to a hybrid of those.
*  Because you're good in every position in the middle game and the end game.
*  Yeah. And also, I can think to some extent both rapidly and deeply, which a lot of people,
*  they can't do both. But to answer your question from before, I think, yeah, I sometimes can get
*  a little bit intimidated by my opponent, but it's mostly if there's something unknown. It's
*  mostly if it's something that I don't understand fully. And I do think, especially when I'm playing,
*  well, people, they just play more timidly against me than they do against each other, sometimes
*  without even realizing it. And I certainly use that to my advantage. If I sense that my opponent is
*  apprehensive, if I sense that they are not going to necessarily take all their chances,
*  it just means that I can take more risk. And I always try and find that balance.
*  To shake them up a little bit. What's been the toughest loss of your career that you remember?
*  Would that be the World Championship match? Oh, yeah, for sure. Game eight in 2016.
*  And who was it against? Against Karyakin in New York.
*  Can you take it through the story of that game? Where were you before that game in terms of
*  game one through seven? Yeah, so game one and two, not much happened. Game three and four,
*  I was winning in both of them. And normally, I should definitely have converted both.
*  I couldn't, partly due to good defense on his part, but mostly because I just messed up.
*  And then after that, games five, six and seven, not much happened. I was getting impatient
*  at that point. So for game eight, I was probably ready to take a little bit more risks than I had
*  before, which I guess was insane because I knew that he couldn't beat me unless I beat myself.
*  He wasn't strong enough to outplay me. And that was leading to impatience somehow and impatience.
*  No, because I knew that I was better. I knew that I was better. I knew that I just needed
*  to win one game and then the match is over. That's what happened in 2021 as well. When I
*  won the first game against Nebo, I knew that the match was over. Unless I like fuck up royally,
*  then he's not going to be able to beat me. So what happened was that I played a kind of innocuous
*  opening as whites, just trying to get a game, trying to get my out of book as soon as possible.
*  Then, can you elaborate innocuous, get him out of the book? No, basically I set up pretty
*  defensively as white. I wasn't really crossing into his half at the start at all. I played more
*  like a system more than like a concrete opening. It was like, I'm going to set up my pieces this
*  way. You can set them up however you want. And then later where sort of the armies are going to
*  meet. I'm not going to try and bother you at the start. And that means you can have with as many
*  pieces as possible kind of pure chess in the middle game without any of the lines, the standard lines
*  in the opening. Exactly. And so there was at some point a couple of exchanges, then some maneuvering,
*  flip a little bit better. Then he was sort of equalizing and then I started to take too many
*  risks. And I was still sort of fine. But then at some point I realized that I'd gone a bit too far
*  and I had to be really careful. Then I just froze. I just completely froze. Mentally? Yeah, mentally.
*  What happened, Dukie? I realized that, I mean, all the thoughts of I might lose this, what have I done?
*  Why did I take so many risks? I knew that I could have drawn at any moment.
*  Just be patient. Don't give him these opportunities. What triggered that phase transition in your mind?
*  No, it was just a position on the board. There was one particular move he played that I missed.
*  Then I realized that this could potentially not go my way. So then I made another couple of mistakes
*  and to his credit, once he realized he had the chance, he knew that this was his one chance.
*  He had to take it. And so he did. And yeah, that's the worst I've ever felt after a chess game.
*  I realized that I'm probably going to lose my title against somebody who's not even close to my level.
*  And I've done it because of my own stupidity, most of all. And that was really, really,
*  at the time, I was all in my own head. That was hard to deal with. And I felt like I didn't really
*  recover too much for the next game. So what I did, there was a free day after the eighth game.
*  So I did something that I never did at any other World Championship. After game eight, I got drunk
*  with my team. That's not a standard procedure? No, that's the only time that's happened in the
*  World Championship during the match. So yeah, I just tried to forget. But still before game nine,
*  I was a little bit more relaxed, but I was still a bit nervous. Then game nine, I was almost lost
*  as well. And then only game 10. Game 10, I wasn't in a great mood. I was really, really tense.
*  The opening was good. I had some advantage. I was getting optimistic. Then I made one mistake.
*  He could have forced a draw. And then the old negativity came back. I was like,
*  how am I going to play for a win with Black in the next game? What am I doing? And then eventually,
*  it ended well. I didn't find the right line. I ground him down. Actually, I played at some point
*  pretty well in the end game. And after that game, there was such a weight. I lifted. No,
*  I after that, there was no thought of losing the match whatsoever. I knew that, okay, I'd
*  basically gotten away with not with murder, but gotten away with something.
*  What can you say about the after game eight? Where are the places you've gone in your mind?
*  Do you go to some dark places? We're talking about like depression. Do you think about quitting
*  at that point? No, I mean, I think about quitting every time I lose the class. Or at least I used
*  to. Especially if it's in a stupid way. I'm thinking like, okay, if I'm going to play like this,
*  if I'm going to do things that I know are wrong, then I might as well quit. No, that's happened
*  a bunch of times. I've definitely gotten a bit more carefree about losing these days, which
*  it's not necessarily a good thing. My hatred of losing led to me not losing a lot. And it also
*  lit the fire under me that I think my performance after losses in classical chess over the last 10
*  years is like over 2900. I really play well after a loss, even though it's really unpleasant.
*  So apparently, like, I don't think the way that I dealt with them is particularly healthy,
*  but it's worked. It's worked so far. But then you've discovered now love for winning to where
*  ultimately, longevity wise, creates more fun. Yeah, for sure. Yeah. What's the perfect day in the life
*  of Magnus Carlsen on a day of a big chess match? It doesn't have to be world championship. But
*  if it's a chess match, you care about what what time you wake up? What do you eat?
*  It depends on when the game is. But let's say the game is at three. I'll probably
*  wake up pretty late at about 11. Then I'll
*  go for a walk, might listen to some podcasts. Maybe I'll spend a little bit of time
*  looking at some you know, some NBA game from last night or whatever.
*  To not chess related stuff? No, no, no, no. Then I'll get back, I'll have big lunch, like usually
*  like a big omelet with a bunch of salad and stuff. Then go to the game. When like a very nice clean
*  game. This perfect day. Just go back after relax. Like the things that make me the happiest that
*  tournaments is just having a good routine and feeling well. I don't like it when too much is
*  happening around me. So the tournament that I came from now was the Chess Olympiad, which is the team
*  at the end. So we were a team Norway. We did horribly. I did okay, but the team in general
*  did horribly. Who won that? Italy? No, Italy beat us, but Uzbekistan won the end. They were
*  this amazing team of young players. It was really impressive. But the thing is like we had a good
*  camaraderie in the team. We had our meals together. We played a bit of football, went swimming.
*  And I couldn't understand why things went wrong. And I still don't understand. But the thing is,
*  for me, it was all very nice. But now I'm so happy to be on my own at a tournament, just to have my
*  own routines, not see too many people. Otherwise just have like a very small team of people that I
*  see. You are a kind of celebrity now. So, you know, people within the chess tournament and outside
*  recognize you want to socialize, want to tell you about how much you mean to them, how much you
*  inspire them, all that kind of stuff. Does that get in the way for you when you're like trying to
*  really focus on the match? Are you able to block that? Like, are you able to enjoy those
*  little interactions and still keep your focus? Yeah, most of the time that's fine as long as
*  it's not too much. But I have to admit, when I'm at home in Norway, I rarely go out without
*  big headphones and something. Oh, like a disguise? No, not a disguise, just to block out the world.
*  Otherwise... Don't make eye contact. Yeah. So the thing is, people in general are nice. I mean,
*  people, they wish me well, and they don't bother me. Also, when I have the headphones on, I don't
*  notice as much people turning around and all of that. So I can be more in my own world.
*  So I like that. Yeah. What about in this perfect day after the game? Do you try to analyze what
*  happened? Do you try to think through systematically or do you just kind of loosely think about like...
*  No, I just loosely think about it. I've never been very structured in that sense. I know that
*  it was always recommended that you analyze your own games, but I generally felt that I mostly had
*  a good idea about that. Like nowadays, I will loosely see what the engine says at a certain
*  point if I'm curious about that. Otherwise, I usually move on to the next. What about diet?
*  You said omelet and salad and so on. I heard in your conversation with the other Magnus,
*  Magnus number two, about you had this bet about meat. One of you are going to go vegan if you
*  lose... I forget which... Vegetarian though. Oh, vegetarians. And you both have an admiration for
*  meat. Is there some aspect about optimal performance that you look for in food? Like maybe eating only
*  like once or twice a day or a particular kind of food like meat, heavy diet, is there anything like
*  that or you just try to have fun with the food? I think whenever I'm at tournaments, it's very
*  natural to eat, at least for me to eat only twice a day. So usually I do that when I'm at home as
*  well. So you do eat before the tournament though. You don't play fasted. No, no, no. But I try not
*  to eat too heavy before the game or in general to avoid sugary stuff to have a pretty stable
*  blood sugar level. Because that's the easiest way to make mistakes that your energy levels
*  just suddenly drop and they don't necessarily need to be too high as long as they're pretty stable.
*  Have you ever tried playing fasted? Like intermittent fasting, so playing without having
*  eaten. I mean, the reason I ask, especially when you do a low carb diet, when I have done a person
*  a low carb diet, I'm able to fast for a long time, like eat once a day, maybe twice a day. But I just,
*  the mind is most focused on like really difficult thinking tasks when it's fasted. It's an interesting
*  and a lot of people kind of talk about that. You're able to kind of like zoom in and if you're
*  doing a low carb diet, you don't have the energy stable. No, that is true. Maybe that would be
*  interesting to try. So what's happened for me is I've played a few tournaments where I've had food
*  poisoning and then that generally means that you're both sleep deprived and you have no energy. And
*  what I've found is that it makes me very calm, of course, because I don't have the energy and
*  it makes me super creative. Like being sleep deprived, I think in general makes you creative.
*  Just the first thing that goes away is the ability to do the simple things.
*  That's what it affects you the most. Like you cannot be precise. So that's the only thing I'm
*  worried about. Like if I'm fasted, that I won't be precise when I play.
*  But you might be more creative. It's an interesting trade off.
*  Fasted? Yeah, potentially.
*  What about you have been known to on a rare occasion play drunk? Is there a mathematical
*  formula for sort of on the x-axis how many drinks you had and on the y-axis your performance slash
*  creativity? Is there like an optimal for like one of the would you suggest for the FIDE world
*  championship that people would be required to drink? Would that change things in interesting ways?
*  Yeah, not at all. Maybe for rapid, but for blitz, think if you're playing blitz, you're mostly
*  playing on short calculation and intuition. And I think those are probably enhanced if you've had
*  a little bit of a little bit to drink. Can you explain the physiology of why
*  it's enhanced? You're just thinking less. You're more confident.
*  Oh yeah. I think it's just confidence. I think also like a lot of people feel like they're better at
*  speaking languages, for instance, if they've drunk a little bit.
*  It's just like removing these barriers. I think that it's a little bit of the same in chess.
*  In 2012, I played the world blitz championship and then I was doing horribly for a long time.
*  I also had food poisoning there. I couldn't play at all for three days. So before the last break,
*  I was in the middle of the pack in the 20th place or something. And so I decided as the last
*  gasp, I'm going to go to the mini bar and just have a few drinks. And what happened is that I
*  came back and I was suddenly relaxed and I was playing fast and I was playing confident. And I
*  thought I was playing so well. I wasn't playing nearly as well as I thought, but it still helped
*  me. I won my remaining eight games and if there had been one more round, I probably would have
*  won the whole thing. But finally I was second. So generally I wouldn't recommend that, but maybe as
*  the last research sometimes, if you feel that you have the ability, obviously none of this
*  is remotely relevant if you don't feel like you have the ability to begin with. But if you feel
*  like you have the ability, there are just factors that make it impossible for you to
*  show it. Like numbing your mind a bit can probably be a good thing.
*  Yeah. Well, it's interesting, especially during training, you have all kinds of sports that have
*  interacted with a lot of athletes and grappling sports. It's different when you train under
*  extreme exhaustion. For example, you start becoming, you start to discover interesting things.
*  You start being more creative. A lot of people, at least in Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu, they'll smoke weed.
*  It creates this kind of anxiety and relaxation that kind of enables that creative aspect. It's
*  interesting for training. Of course you can't rely on any one of those things too much, but it's cool
*  to throw in a few drinks every once in a while to, yeah, one, first of all, to relax and have fun.
*  And two, to kind of try things differently, to unlock a different part of your brain.
*  Yeah, for sure. What about supplements? Are you a coffee guy?
*  Oh, no. I quite like the taste of coffee. But the thing is I've never had a job.
*  So I've never needed to wake up early. So my thought is basically that if I'm tired,
*  I'm tired. That's fine. Then I'll work it out. So I don't want to ever
*  make my brain get used to coffee. If you see me drinking coffee, that
*  probably means that I'm massively, massively hungover and I just want to try anything to
*  make my brain work. Yeah, that's interesting. But for a lot of people, like you said, taste the coffee.
*  For a lot of people, coffee is part of a certain kind of ritual. Yeah, for sure. You can have
*  rituals without that. I know that I would enjoy it a lot. Yeah. You don't want to rely on that.
*  I also like the taste, so there's no problem there. What about exercise?
*  A lot of people talk about the extreme
*  stress that chess puts in your body, physically and mentally. How do you prepare for that?
*  To be physically and mentally? Is it just through playing chess or do you do cardio and that kind of
*  stuff? This is going to be up and down. As I said, in 2013, I was in great shape. How do you
*  prepare for that? I was in great shape. I mean, generally, I was exercising, doing sports every
*  day, either playing football or tennis or even other sports. Otherwise, if I couldn't do that,
*  I would try and take my bike for a ride. I had a few training camps and I played tennis against one
*  of my seconds. He's not a super fit guy, but he's always been very good at tennis. I never
*  played in any organized way. That was the perfect exercise because I was running around enough to
*  make the games pretty competitive. It meant that he had to run a bit less as well. He said he was
*  shocked that if we played for two hours, I wouldn't flinch at all. Interesting. So a combination of fun
*  and the differential between skill results in good cardio? Yeah. In those days, I was pretty fit
*  in that sense. I've always liked doing sports, but at times, I think in winter especially,
*  I never had a schedule. So at times, I let myself go a little bit. I've always done it more for
*  fun than for a concrete benefit. But now, at least after the pandemic, I was not in great shape. So
*  now I'm trying to get back, get better habits and so on. I feel like I've always been
*  the poster boy for making being fit a big thing in chess. I always felt that it was
*  not really deserved because I never liked doing weights much at all. I run a bit at times, but I
*  never liked it too much. You just love playing sports. I just love playing sports. So I think
*  people confuse that because I'm not massively athletic, but I am decent at sports. That's
*  how I built that perception, even though others who are top-level chess players,
*  they're more fit. Like Karana, for instance, his body is really, really strong. It's just that he
*  goes to the gym and... Yeah, it doesn't play sports. That's the difference.
*  And the thing about sports is also just, it's an escape. It helps you forget for a brief moment
*  about the obsessions, the pursuits of the main thing, which is chess.
*  Yeah, for sure. And I think it also helps your main pursuit to feel that you're
*  even if not mastering, but doing well in something else. I found that if I just juggle a ball,
*  that makes me feel better before a game.
*  So a skilled activity.
*  Juggle with football.
*  Yeah, skilled activity that you can improve on over time. It flexes the same kind of muscle,
*  but on the thing that you're much worse at, it focuses you, relaxes you. That's really interesting.
*  What's the perfect day in the life of Magnus Carlsen when he's training?
*  So what's a good training regimen in terms of daily training that you have to put in across many
*  days, months, and years to just keep yourself sharp in terms of chess?
*  I would say when I'm at home, I do very little deliberate practice. I've never been that guy
*  at all. I could never force myself to just sit down and work.
*  So deliberate practice just so maybe you can educate me. For some grandmasters,
*  what would that look like? Just doing puzzles kind of thing?
*  Yeah, doing puzzles and opening analysis. That would be the main things.
*  Studying games?
*  Just studying games. Yeah, a little bit. But I feel like that's something that I do.
*  But it's not deliberate. It's like reading our article or reading a book.
*  Got it. I love chess books. I'll read just anything and I'll find something interesting.
*  So chess books that are like on openings and stuff like that or chess books that go over
*  different games? Yeah, books. So there are three main categories. There are books on openings and
*  there are books on strategy and there are books on chess history and I find all of them very, very
*  very interesting. What fraction of the day would you say you have a chess board floating somewhere
*  in your head? Meaning you're thinking about it. Probably be a better question to ask how many hours
*  a day I don't have a chess board floating in my head. I mean it could be just floating there and
*  nothing is happening. I often do it parallel to some other activity though. What does that look
*  like? Are you daydreaming? Is it actual positions you're just fucking around with?
*  Fumbling with different pieces in your head? Often I've looked at a random game on my phone
*  for instance or in a book and then my brain just keeps going at the same position analyzing it and
*  often it goes all the way to the end game. And those are actual games or you conjure up fake games?
*  No, they're often based on real games and then I'm thinking like oh but it wouldn't be more
*  interesting if the pieces were a little bit different and then often I play it out from there.
*  So you don't sit behind a computer or a chess board and you lay out the pieces?
*  No, I'm not at all opposed to board for deliberate practice. I could never work that way. My first
*  coach gave me some exercises at home sometimes but he realized at some point that wasn't going to
*  work because I wouldn't do it really or enjoy it. So what he would do instead is that at the school
*  where I had the trainings with him there was this massive chess library so he was just like yeah,
*  pick out books. You can have anything you want, just pick out books you like and then you give
*  back the next time. So that's what I did instead. Yeah, I just absolutely rated it. Then my next
*  tournament I will try out one of the openings from that book if it was an opening book and so on.
*  Does it feel like a struggle, like challenging? Like to be thinking those positions or is it fun
*  and relaxing? No, it's completely fine. Like if it's a difficult position to figure out?
*  Then I go on to something else. Like if I can't figure it out then I go on.
*  Change it so that it's easier to figure out. There is a point in your life where Kasparov
*  was interested in being your coach or at least training with you. Why did you choose not to go
*  with him? That's a pretty bold move. Was there a good reason for this? No, the first
*  homework exercise he gave me was to analyze. He picked out I think three or four of my worst
*  losses and he wanted me to analyze them and give him my thoughts. And it wasn't that there were
*  painful losses or anything. That was a problem. I just didn't really enjoy that. Also, I felt that
*  this whole structured approach and everything. I just felt like from the start it was a hassle.
*  I loved the idea of being able to pick his brain but everything else I just couldn't see myself
*  enjoying. At the end of the day, I did then and always have played
*  for fun. That's always been the main reason. It's great that you had the confidence to
*  basically turn down the approach of one of the greatest chess players of all time. At that time,
*  probably the greatest chess player of all time. I don't think I thought of it that way. I just
*  thought this is not for me. I wouldn't try another way. I don't think I was particularly
*  thinking that this is my one opportunity or anything. It was just, yeah, I don't enjoy this.
*  Let's try something else. When you were 13, you faced Kasparov and he wasn't able to beat you.
*  Can you go through that match? What did that feel like? How important was that? How epic was that?
*  We played three games. I lost two and I drew one. Right, but one draw. No, the one draw
*  and but didn't you say that you kind of had a better position in that?
*  Yeah, I remember that day very well. There was a blitz game. This was a rapid tournament and there
*  was a blitz tournament the day before which determined the pairings for the rapid.
*  For people who don't know, super short games are called bullet, kind of short games are called blitz,
*  semi short games are called rapid and classic chess, I guess, is very super long.
*  Yeah, basically bullet is never played over the board. So in terms of over the board chess,
*  blitz is the shortest. Rapid is like a hybrid between classical and blitz. You need to have
*  the skills of both and then classical is like the blitz tournament, which didn't go so well.
*  I got a couple of wins, but I was beaten badly in a lot of games, including by Gary.
*  There was the pairing that I had to play him, which is pretty exciting. I remember I was so
*  tired after the blitz tournament. I slept for 12 hours or something. Then I woke up like,
*  okay, I'll turn on my computer. I'll search chess space for Kasparov and we'll go from there.
*  So before that, I hadn't spent a lot of time specifically studying his games. It was super
*  intimidating because a lot of these openings I knew, I was like, oh, he was the first one to play
*  that. Oh, that was his idea. I actually didn't know that. So I was a bit intimidated before
*  we played. Then of course the first game, he arrived a bit late because they changed the time
*  from the first day to the other, which is a bit strange. But everybody else had noticed it but him.
*  Then he tried to surprise me in the opening. I think psychologically the situation was not
*  so easy for him. Clearly it would be embarrassing for him if he didn't win both games against me.
*  Then I was spending way too much time on my moves because I was playing Kasparov. I was double
*  checking everything too much. Normally I would be playing pretty fast in those days.
*  And then at some point I calculated better than him. He missed a crucial detail and I had a much
*  better position. I couldn't convert it though. I knew what line I had to go for in order to have
*  a chance to win, but I thought I'll play a bit more carefully. Maybe I can win still. I couldn't.
*  Then I lost the second game pretty badly, which it wasn't majorly upsetting, but
*  I felt that I had two black games against Kasparov, both in the Blitz and the Rapid,
*  and I lost both of them without any fight whatsoever. I wasn't happy about that at all.
*  That was less than I thought I could be able to do. So to me, yeah, I was proud of that,
*  but it was a gimmick. I was a very strong IAM but had GM strength. I was like,
*  it can happen that a player of that strength makes a draw against Gary once in a while.
*  I understand that I'm 13, but still I felt a bit more gimmicky than anything. I guess it's a good
*  thing that made me notice, but apart from that, it wasn't.
*  And for people who don't know, I am his international master and GM is grandmaster.
*  I was the second youngest ever. I think I'm the seventh youngest now. I mean, these kids these days.
*  Kids these days.
*  But I was the youngest grandmaster at the time in the world.
*  You say it's gimmicky, but there's a romantic notion, especially as things have turned out.
*  Right.
*  No, for sure.
*  And have you talked to Gary since then about that?
*  No, not really. I think he's embarrassed.
*  He's still bitter, you think?
*  No, I don't think he's bitter, but I think the game in itself was a bit embarrassing for him.
*  Even he can't see past...
*  I think he's completely fine with that. I think in retrospect, it's a good story. He appreciates
*  it. I don't think that's the problem, but it never made sense for me to broach the subject with him.
*  It's funny just having interacted with Gary, now having talked to you.
*  There is a little thing you still hate losing, no matter how beautiful that moment is.
*  In a way, it's a passing of the baton from one great champion to another.
*  But you still just don't like the fact that you didn't play a good game from Gary's perspective.
*  He's still just annoyed probably that he could have played better.
*  We did work together in 2009 quite a lot. That corporation ended early 2010, but we did play a
*  lot of training games in 2009, which was interesting because he was still very, very strong.
*  At that time, it was fairly equal. He was playing me quite a bit, but I was fighting well. It was
*  pretty even then. I appreciate those games a lot more than some random game from when I was 13.
*  Maybe I just don't know what I'm talking about, but I always found it, at least based on that game,
*  you couldn't tell that I was going to take his spot. I made a horrible blunder and lost to
*  an Uzbek kid in the World Rapid Championship in 2018. Granted, he was part of the team that now
*  won gold in the Chess Olympia, but he wasn't the crucial part. He barely played any games.
*  I would think that he would become world champion because he beat me.
*  I'm always skeptical of those who said that they knew that I was going to be world champion
*  after that game or at all at that time. It was easy to see that I would become a very, very
*  strong player. Everybody could see that, but to be the best in the world or one of the best ever.
*  It is hard to say, but I do remember seeing Messi when he was 16 and 17.
*  But hasn't that happened with other players though?
*  Yeah, but I just had a personal experience. He did look different. There's magic there.
*  Maybe you can't tell he would be one of the greatest ever, but there's still magic. But
*  you're right. Most of the time we try to project, we see a young kid being an older person and you
*  start to think, okay, this could be the next great person. Then we forget when they don't become that.
*  Yeah, exactly. That's I think what happens.
*  When it does become...
*  Or maybe some people are just so good at seeing these patterns that they can actually see.
*  Aren't you supposed to do that kind of thing with fantasy football? See the long shot
*  and bet on them and then they turn out to be good?
*  No, you make a lot of long shot bets and then some of them come good.
*  Then people call you a genius for making the bet.
*  Let me ask you the GOAT question again from fantasy perspective. Can you make the case
*  for the greatest chess player of all time? For each yourself, Magnus Carlsen, for Garry Kasparov,
*  I don't know who else, Bobby Fischer, Mikhail Tull, anyone else? For Hikaru Nakamura? Just kidding.
*  Yeah, I think I can make a case for myself, for Garry and for Fischer. I'll start with
*  Fischer. For him, it's very, very simple. He was ahead of his time, but that's like intangible.
*  You can say that about a lot of people. But he had a peak from 1970 to 72 when he was so much better
*  than the others. He won 20 games in a row. Also, the way that he played was so powerful and with
*  so few mistakes that he just had no position there. He had just a peak that's been
*  better than anybody. The gap between him and others was greater than it's ever been in history
*  any other time. That would be the argument for him. For Garry, he's played in a very competitive
*  era and he's beaten several generations. He was the best, well, he was the consensus best player,
*  I would say, for almost 20 years, which nobody else has done at least in recent time.
*  The longevity.
*  The longevity, for sure. Also, at his peak, he was not quite the level of
*  Fischer in terms of the gap, but it was similar to or I think even a little bit better than mine.
*  As for me, I'm, of course, unbeaten as a world champion in five tries. I've been world number
*  one for 11 years straight in an even more competitive era than Garry. I have the highest
*  chess rating of all time. I have the longest streak ever without losing a game. I think for me,
*  the main argument would be about the era where the engines have leveled the playing field so much
*  that it's harder to dominate. Still, I haven't always been a clear number one, but I've been
*  number one for 11 years and for a lot of the time, the gap has been pretty big. I think there are
*  decent arguments for all of them. I've said before and I haven't changed my mind that Garry
*  generally edges it because of the longevity in the competitive era, but there are arguments.
*  But people also talk about you in terms of the style of play. It's not just about dominance or
*  the height. It's just the creative genius of it. Yeah, but I'm not interested in that.
*  In terms of greatest of all time, I'm not interested in questions of style.
*  For Messi, you don't give credit for the style, for the stylistic.
*  I like watching it. But you're not going to give points for the... So,
*  Messi gets best ever because of the finishing. No, it's not because of the finishing. It's because
*  of his overall impact on the game. It's higher than anybody else's. He contributes. He just
*  contributes more to winning than anybody else does. You're somebody who is advocated for and
*  has done quite a bit of study of classic games. What would you say is maybe the number one or
*  maybe top three games of chess ever played? It doesn't interest me at all. You don't think of
*  them? No, I don't think of it. I find the games interesting. I try to learn from them, but trying
*  to rank them has never interested me. What games pop out to you as super interesting then?
*  Is there things like old school games where there's interesting ideas that
*  you go back... Or you find surprising and pretty cool that those ideas were developed back then?
*  Is there something that jumps to mind? Yeah, there are several games of
*  young Kasparov, before he became world champion. If you're going to ask for my favorite
*  player or favorite style, that's probably... Young Kasparov. Young Kasparov. Can you describe
*  stylistically or in any other way what young Kasparov was like that you like?
*  It was just an overflow energy in his play. So aggressive attacking chess. Yeah, extremely
*  aggressive dynamic chess. It probably appeals to me a lot because these are the things that I cannot
*  do as well. That it just feels very special to me. But yeah, in terms of games, I never thought
*  about that too much. Is there memories, big or small, weird, surprising, just any kind of beautiful
*  anecdote from your chess career? Like stuff that pops out that people might not know about?
*  Just stuff when you look back, it just makes you smile. No, so I'll tell you about the most
*  satisfying tournament victory of my career. So that was the Norwegian Championship under 11 in 2000.
*  Before that tournament, I was super anxious because I started kind of late at chess.
*  I played my first tournament when I was eight and a half and a lot of my competitors had already
*  played for a couple of years or even three, four years at that point. And the first time,
*  so I played the under 11 championship in 99. I was like a little over the middle of the pack.
*  I'd never played against any of them before, so I didn't know what to expect at all. And then over
*  the next year, I was like edging a little bit closer. In each tournament, I felt like I was
*  getting a little bit better. And when we had the championship, I knew that I was ready, that I was
*  now at the same level of the best players. I was so anxious to show it. I remember I was just,
*  the feeling of excitement and nervousness before the tournament was incredible.
*  The tournament was weird because I started out, I gave away a draw to a weaker player
*  whom I shouldn't have drawn to. And then I drew against the other guy
*  who was clearly the best or second best. And at that point, I thought it was over
*  because I thought he wouldn't give away points to others. And then the very next day, he lost to
*  somebody. So the rest of the tournament, it was just like, I was always playing my game and watching
*  his. And we both won the rest of our games, but it meant that I was half a point ahead.
*  Like the feeling when I realized that I was going to win, that was just so amazing. It was like the
*  first time that I was the best at my age. And at that point, you're hooked. Yeah, at that point,
*  I realized I could actually be very good at this. So you kind of saw, where did you think your
*  ceiling would be? Did you see that one day you could be the number one? No, I didn't think that
*  was possible at all. But I thought I could be the best in Norway at that point. Because I started
*  at that point. Because I started relatively late. And also, I knew that I studied a lot more than
*  the others. I knew that I had a passion that they didn't have. They saw chess as something like,
*  it was a hobby. It was like an activity. It was like going to football practice or
*  any other sports. You practice once or twice a week, and then you play a tournament at the weekend.
*  That's what you did. For me, it wasn't like that. I would go with my books and my board every day
*  after school. And I would just constantly be trying to learn new things. I had two hours of
*  internet time on the computer each week. And I would always spend them on chess.
*  I think before I was 13 or 14, I'd never opened a browser for any other reason than to play chess.
*  Would you describe that as love or as obsession or something in between? It's everything?
*  Yeah, everything. It wasn't hard for me to tell at that point that I had something that the other
*  kids didn't. Because I was never the one to grasp something very, very quickly. But once I started,
*  I always got hooked, and then I never stopped learning.
*  What would you say, you've talked about the middle game as a place where you can play pure chess.
*  What do you think is beautiful to you about chess?
*  The thing when you were 11... What is beautiful to me is when your opponent can predict every
*  single one of your moves and they still lose. How does that happen?
*  No, it means that at some point early, your planning, your evaluation has been better.
*  So that you play just very simply, very clearly. It looks like you did nothing special and your
*  opponent lost without a chance. How do you think about that, by the way?
*  Are you basically narrowing down this gigantic tree of options to where your opponent has less
*  and less and less options to win, to escape, and then they're trapped? That's it.
*  Essentially. Is there some aspect to the patterns themselves, to the positions, to the elegance of
*  the dynamics of the game that you just find beautiful? That doesn't... Where you forget about
*  the opponent. In general, I try and create harmony on the board. What I would usually find
*  harmonious is that the pieces work together, that they protect each other, and that there are no
*  pieces that are suboptimally placed. Or if they are suboptimally placed, they can be improved pretty
*  easily. I hate when I have one piece that I know is badly placed and I cannot improve it.
*  Yeah, when you're thinking about the harmony of the pieces, when you're looking at the position,
*  you're evaluating it. Are you looking at the whole board? Or is it a bunch of groupings of pieces
*  overlapping and dancing together kind of thing? I would say it's more of the latter. That would
*  be more precise. I look mostly closer to the middle, but then I would focus on one. There are
*  usually one grouping of pieces on one side and then some closer to the other side. I would
*  think of it a little bit that way. Everything is kind of gravitating to the middle.
*  If it's going well, then yes. And in harmony.
*  Yeah, in harmony. If you can control the middle, you can more easily attack on both sides.
*  That applies to pretty much any game. It's as simple as that. Attacking on one side
*  without control of the middle would feel very non-harmonious for me. I talked about the 10th game
*  in the World Championship. That's the time I was the most nervous.
*  And it was because it was the kind of attack that I hate where you just have to,
*  you're abandoned one side and the attack has to work. There was one side and part of the middle
*  as well, which I didn't control at all. That's like the opposite of harmony for me.
*  What advice would you give to chess players of different levels how to improve in chess?
*  Very beginner, complete beginner. I mean, at every level. Is there something you can say?
*  It's very hard for me to say because the easiest way is love chess, be obsessed.
*  Well, that's a really important statement.
*  But that doesn't work for everybody.
*  It can feel like a grind. So you're saying the less it can feel like a grind, the better.
*  Yeah, for sure.
*  At least for you.
*  That's for sure. But I'm also very, very skeptical about giving advice because I think,
*  again, my way only works if you have some combination of talent and obsession. So I'm
*  not sure that I'd generally recommend it. Like what I've done doesn't go with what most coaches
*  suggest for their kids. I've been lucky that I've had coaches from early on that have been very,
*  very hands off and just allowed me to do my thing basically.
*  Well, there's a lot to be said about cultivating the obsession. Like really, really letting that
*  flourish to where you spend a lot of hours like with the chessboard in your head and it doesn't
*  feel like a struggle.
*  No. So like just letting me do my thing. Like if you give me a bunch of work, it will probably
*  feel like a sure. And if you don't give me, I will spend all of that time on my own without
*  thinking that it's work or without thought that I'm doing this to improve my chess.
*  Well, in terms of learning stuff like books, there's one thing that's relatively novel
*  from your perspective. People are starting now as there's YouTube. There's a lot of good YouTubers
*  you're part-time YouTuber. You have stuff on YouTube, I guess.
*  If you've seen my YouTube, it's mostly. It's very, it's not. It's carefree.
*  Not higher for content.
*  Yeah. But do you like any particular YouTubers? I could just recommend like stuff I've seen. So
*  I've got matter, Gotham Chess, Potez Live. I really like St. Louis Chess Club,
*  Daniel Narodzki and John Bartholomew. Those are good channels, but is there something you can
*  recommend?
*  No, all of them are good. You know, the best recommendation I could give is I got matter
*  purely.
*  How much did he pay you to say that?
*  No. So the thing about that is that I haven't really, I have, so I can tell you, I've never
*  watched any of his videos from start to finish. I'm not like, I'm not the target audience,
*  obviously. But I think the only chess YouTube video that my dad has ever watched from start to
*  finish is I got matter. And he said, like, I watched one of his videos. I wanted to know what
*  it was all about because I think I got matter is like the same strength as my father, or maybe
*  just a little bit weaker, like 1900 or something. My father is probably about 2000. And my father
*  has played chess his whole life. He loves, he absolutely loves the game. It was like, that's
*  the only time he's actually sat through one of those videos. And he said, like, yeah, I get it.
*  I enjoy it. So that's the best recommendation I could give. That's the only channel that my
*  father actually enjoys.
*  This is hilarious. I talked to him before this, asked him if he has any questions for you.
*  And he said, no, just just do your thing. You know, he's so careful. He wouldn't do that.
*  He did mention jokingly about Evans Gambit. I think. Is that a thing? Evans Gambit is some
*  weird thing he made up. It might be an inside joke. I don't know. But he asked me to. Well,
*  anyway, I didn't even get. It's something he made up. I didn't even realize that he placed the Evans
*  Gambit. Like he plays a lot of gambit star. Wait, Evans Gambit is a thing. Yeah. Yeah.
*  That's the thing. Like that's an old opening from the 1800s. Captain Evans apparently invented it.
*  Why would he mention that particular one? Yeah. Something hilarious about that one.
*  I don't know. I don't think I've ever faced the Evans Gambit in a game. I feel like both of you
*  are trolling me right now. I mean, he's played a lot of other gambits. Maybe this is the one he
*  wanted to mention. So maybe this is called the Evans Gambit as well. But I just know it as the
*  2G4 Gambit. Maybe this is the one. Like this one he has played a bunch. And he's been telling me
*  a lot about his games in this line. He's like, oh, it's not so bad. And I'm like, yeah, but you're
*  upon down. But I can sort of see it. I can sort of understand it. And he's like, he's proud of
*  the fact that nobody told him to play this line or anything. He came up with it himself. And there's
*  this, I'll tell you another story about my father. So there's this line that I call the Henry Carlson
*  line. So at some point, he never knew a lot of openings in chess, but I taught him
*  a couple of openings as black. It's the Sveshnikov Sicilian that I played a lot myself also
*  during the World Championship in 2018. I won a bunch of games in 2019 as well. So that's one
*  opening and also taught him as black to play the Rogozin defense. And then so the Rogozin defense
*  goes like this. It's characterized by this bishop move. And so he would play those openings pretty
*  exclusively as black in the tournaments that he did play. And also the Sveshnikov Sicilian,
*  two of my sisters have played a bunch of chess tournaments as well. And that's the only opening
*  they know as well. So my family's portrait is very narrow. So this is the system. Black goes here
*  and then we have white takes the pawn and black takes the pawn. So at some point I was watching
*  one of my father's online blitz game. And as white, he played this. So this is called the
*  Karkhan defense. He took the pawn, was taken back and then he went with the knight. His opponent
*  went here and then he played the bishop here. So I'd never seen this opening before and I was like,
*  wow, how on earth did he come up with that? And he said, no, I just played the Rogozin with the
*  different colors because if the knight was here, it would be the same position. I was like, I never,
*  I was like, how am I like one of the best players in the world? And I've never thought about that.
*  So I actually started playing this line as white with pretty decent results and it actually became
*  kind of popular. And everybody who asked about the line, it's like, I would always tell them,
*  yeah, that's the Henry Carlson. I wouldn't necessarily explain why it was called that. I
*  would just always call it that. So I really hope that at some point, this line will find its
*  rightful name. Yeah, it finds its way into the history books. What did you learn about life from
*  your dad? What role has your dad played in your life? He's taught me a lot of things, but most of all,
*  as long as you win a chess, then everything else is fine.
*  I think my, especially my father, but my parents in general, they always wanted me to
*  get a good education and find a job and so on. Even though my father loves chess and he wanted
*  me to play chess, I don't think he had any plans for me to be professional. I think things changed
*  at some point. I was less and less interested in school and for a long time, we were kind of
*  going back and forth fighting about that, especially my father, but also my mother a little
*  bit. It was at times a little bit difficult. They wanted you to go to school. Yeah, they
*  sort of wanted me to do more school, to have more options. And then I think at some point,
*  they just gave up. But I think that coincided when I was actually starting to make real money of
*  tournaments. And after that, everything's been easy. In terms of the family, they've never
*  put any pressure on me or they've never put any demands on me. Yeah, my house has to focus on
*  chess. That's it. I think they taught me in general to be curious about the world and to get
*  a decent general education, not necessarily from school, but just knowing
*  about the world around you and knowing history and just being interested in society. I think
*  they've done well. And he's been with you throughout your chess career. There's something to be said
*  about just family support and love that you have. This world is a lonely place. It's good to have
*  people around you that got your back. Yeah, I think it's a good thing. I think it's a good thing.
*  I think all the people around you that got your back.
*  It's a cliche, but I think to some extent, all the people you surround yourself with,
*  they can help you a lot. It's only family that only has their own interests at heart. And so
*  for that reason, my father is the only one that's been constantly in the team.
*  He's always been around and it's for that reason that I know he has my back no matter what.
*  Now, there's a cliche question here. Let's try to actually get to some deep truth, perhaps.
*  But people who don't know much about chess seem to like to use chess as a metaphor for everything
*  in life. But there is some aspect to the decision making, to the kind of reasoning involved in chess
*  that's transferable to other things. Can you speak to that in your own life and in general?
*  The kind of reasoning involved with chess, how much does that transfer to life out there?
*  It just helps you make decisions. Of all kinds.
*  Yeah, that would be my main takeaway, that you learn to make informed guesses in a limited
*  amount of time. Does it frustrate you when you have geopolitical thinkers and leaders,
*  Henry Kissinger will often talk about geopolitics as a game of chess or 3D chess? Is that too
*  oversimplified of a projection? Or do you think that the kind of deliberations you have on the
*  world stage is similar to the kind of decision making you have on the chessboard? Well, I'm
*  never trying to get re-elected when I play a game of chess. There's no special interest,
*  you have to get happy. Yeah, that kind of helps. No, I can understand
*  that. Obviously, for every action, there's a reaction and you have to calculate. Far ahead,
*  it probably would be a good thing if more big players on the international scene thought
*  a little bit more like a chess player in that sense, like trying to make good decisions based
*  on limited amounts of data rather than thinking about other factors. But it's so tough. But it
*  does annoy me when people make moves that they know are wrong for different reasons.
*  If they did some calculation, they should know they're wrong.
*  Exactly, they should know that they're wrong. So much politics is like, you're often asked to do
*  something when it would be much better to do nothing. That happens in chess all the time.
*  You have a choice. I often tell people that in certain situations, you should not try and win,
*  you should just let your opponent lose. And that happens in politics all the time.
*  But yeah, just let your opponents continue whatever they're doing and then you'll win.
*  Don't try to do something just to do something. Often, they say in chess that having a bad plan
*  is better than having no plan. It's absolute nonsense. I forget what General said, but
*  it was like, don't interrupt your enemy when they're making a mistake.
*  Also, Petrosian, the former world champion said, when your opponent wants to play the
*  Dutch defense, don't stop them. I mean, chess players will know that it's the same thing.
*  Actually, this reminds me. Is there something you found really impressive about Queen's Gambit,
*  the TV show? That's one of the things that really captivated the public imagination about chess.
*  People who don't play chess became very curious about the game, about the beauty of the game,
*  the drama of the game, all that kind of stuff. Is there in terms of accuracy, in terms of the
*  actual games played that you found impressive? First of all, they did the chess well, they did
*  it accurately. And also, they found actual games and positions that I've never seen before.
*  It really captivated me. I would not follow the story at times. I was just trying to,
*  wow, where the hell did I find that game? I was trying to solve the positions.
*  So Beth Harmon, the main character, were you impressed by the play she was doing?
*  Was there a particular style that they developed consistently?
*  At the end, she was just totally universal. At the start, she was probably a bit too aggressive,
*  but no, she was absolutely universal. Wait, what adjective are you using?
*  Universal in the sense that she could play in any style.
*  Oh, interesting. And was dominant in that way. Wow, so there was a development in style too
*  throughout the show. Yeah, for sure.
*  It's really interesting they did that. Yeah. And it actually happened with me a bit as well.
*  I started out really aggressive. Then I became probably too technical at some point,
*  taking a little bit too few risks and not playing dynamic enough. And then I started to get a little
*  bit better at dynamics so that now I'm, I would say definitely the most universal player in terms of
*  in terms of style. Are there any skills in chess that are transferable to poker?
*  So as you're playing around poker a little bit now, how fundamentally different of a game is it?
*  What I find the most transferable probably is not like letting past decisions
*  dictate a future thinking. Yeah. But in terms of the patterns in the betting strategies and all
*  that kind of stuff. What about bluffing? I bluff way too much.
*  It does seem you enjoy bluffing and Daniel Negrano was saying you're quite good at it.
*  But yeah, it has very little material to go by. Sample size is small.
*  Yeah. No, I mean, I enjoy bluffing for the more of the gambling aspects, the thrill of.
*  So not the technical aspect of the bluffing like you would on the chessboard.
*  Not bluffing in the same sense, but there is some element. But I do enjoy it on the chessboard.
*  Like if I know that like, oh, I successfully scared away my opponent from making the best move.
*  That's of course satisfying. In that same way it might be satisfying
*  in poker, right? That you represent something, you scare away your opponent.
*  Yeah. The same kind of way. And also like you tell a story.
*  You try and tell a story and then they believe it.
*  Yeah. Tell a story with your betting, with your all the different other cues.
*  Yeah. Do you like the money aspect, the betting strategies?
*  So it's like it's like it's almost like another layer on top of it, right? Like
*  it's it's the uncertainty in the cards, but the betting there's so much freedom to the betting.
*  I'm not very good at that. So I cannot say that I understand it completely. You know,
*  when it comes to different sizing and all that, I just haven't studied it enough.
*  How much of luck is part of poker, would you say from what you've seen versus skill?
*  I mean, it's so different in the sense that you can be one of the best players in the world and
*  lose two, three years in a row without that being like a massive outlier.
*  Okay. The thing that more than one person told me that you're very good at is trash talking.
*  I don't think I am. A lot of people who
*  make those observations about me, I think they just expect very, very little. So they expect
*  from the best chess player in the world, that just anything that's non-robotic is interesting.
*  Also, when it comes to trash talking, like I have the biggest advantage in the world that I'm the
*  best at what I'm doing. So trash talking becomes very, very easy because I can back it up.
*  Yeah. Yeah. But a lot of people that are extremely good at stuff don't trash talk and they're not
*  good at it. I don't think I'm very good at it. It's just that I can back it up, which makes it
*  seem that I'm better. And also- You're even doing it now.
*  All of my, also being non-robotic or not completely robotic helps.
*  Yeah. Yeah. You're not trash talking. You're just stating facts. That's right. Have you ever
*  considered that there will be trash talking over the chessboard and some of the big tournaments,
*  like adding that kind of component or even talking, you know? Would that completely distract
*  from the game of chess? No, I think it's just the way it is.
*  No, I think it could be funny. When people play off-fant games, when they play blitz games,
*  people trash talk all the time. It's a normal part of the game.
*  So you emphasize fun a lot. Do you think we're living inside of a simulation
*  that is trying to maximize fun?
*  Fun. But that's only happened for the last, you know, 100 years or so. No, that's like the-
*  Fun has always been increasing, I think. Yeah. Okay. It's always been increasing,
*  but I feel like it's been increasing exponentially.
*  Yeah. I mean, or at least the importance of fun. But I guess it depends on the society as well.
*  In the West, we've had such Christian influence. I mean, Christianity hasn't exactly embraced the
*  concept of fun over time. Well, actually, to push back, I think forbidding certain things
*  kind of makes them more fun. So sometimes I think you need to say, you're not allowed to do this.
*  And then a lot of people start doing it and then they have fun doing that because it's like
*  a- it's doing a thing in the face of the resistance of the thing. So whenever there's
*  resistance, that does somehow make it more fun. Oppressive regimes has always been kind of good
*  for comedy, no? Yes. Supposedly, like in the Soviet Union, I don't know about fun, but
*  supposedly comedy, like at least underground, it thrived. Yeah. There's a- Well, no, it permeates
*  the entire culture. There's a dark humor that sort of the cruelty, the absurdity of life really
*  brings out the humor amongst the populace, plus vodka on top of that. But this idea that,
*  for example, Elon Musk has that the most entertaining outcome is the most likely,
*  that it seems like the most absurd, silly, funny thing seems to be the thing. So it happens more
*  often than it should. And it somehow becomes viral in our modern connected world. And so
*  the fun stuff, the memes spread, and then we start to optimize for the fun meme that seems to be a
*  fundamental property of the reality we live in. And so emerges the fun maximizer in all walks of life,
*  like in chess, in poker and everything. I think-
*  You're skeptical. No, I'm not skeptical. I'm just taking it all in. But I find it interesting and
*  not at all impossible. Do you ever get lonely? Oh yeah, for sure. Like a chess player's life is,
*  by definition, pretty lonely. Because you have nobody else to blame but yourself when you lose,
*  or you don't achieve the results that you want to achieve.
*  It's difficult for you to find comfort elsewhere. It's in your own mind. It's you versus yourself,
*  really. Yeah, really. But it's part of the profession. But I think any sport or activity
*  where it's just you and your own mind is just, by definition, lonely.
*  Are you worried that it destroys you? Oh, not at all. As long as I'm aware of it,
*  then it's fine. And I don't think the inherent loneliness of my profession really
*  affects the rest of my life in a major way. What role does love play in the human condition
*  in your lonely life of calculation?
*  You know, I'm like everybody else. Trying to find love.
*  No, not necessarily like trying to find love. Sometimes I am, sometimes I'm not. I'm just
*  trying to find my way. And my love for the game, obviously it comes and goes a little bit,
*  but there's always at least some level of love. So that doesn't go away. But I think in other
*  parts of life, I think it's just about doing things that make you happy, that give you joy,
*  that also makes you more receptive to love in general. So that has been my approach to
*  love now for quite a while. I'm just trying to live my best life and then the love will
*  come when it comes. And in terms of romantic love, it has come and gone in my life. It's
*  not there now, but I'm not worried about that. I'm more worried about, you know, not worried,
*  but more like trying to just be a good version of myself. I cannot always be the best version
*  of myself, but at least try to be good. Yeah. And keep your heart open. What is this Daniel
*  Joleston song? True Love Will Find You in the End. It may or may not. But it will only find you
*  if you're looking. So you have to be open to it. Yeah. It may or may not. Yeah. And no matter what,
*  you're going to lose it in the end because it all ends. The whole thing ends. Yeah. So I don't think
*  stressing over that, obviously it's so human that you can't help it to some degree.
*  But I feel like stressing over love, that's the blueprint for whether you're looking or
*  you're not looking or you're in a relationship or marriage or anything. Like stressing over it is
*  like the blueprint for being unhappy. Just to clarify confusion, I have just a quick question.
*  How does the knight move? So the knight moves in an L and unlike in shogi, it can move both forwards
*  and backwards. It is quite a nimble piece. It can jump over everything, but it's less happy in open
*  position where it has to move from side to side quickly. I am generally more of a bishop's guy
*  myself for the old debate. I just prefer quality over the intangibles. But I can appreciate a good
*  knight once in a while. Last simple question. What's the meaning of life, Magnus Carlsen?
*  There is obviously no meaning to life. Is that obvious?
*  I think we're here by accident. There's no meaning. It ends at some point, but it's still a great
*  thing. You can still have fun even if there's no meaning. You can still have fun. You can try and
*  pursue your goals, whatever they may be. But I'm pretty sure there's no special meaning and
*  trying to find it also doesn't make a whole lot of sense to me. For me, life is both meaningless and
*  meaningful for just being here, trying to make not necessarily the most of it, but the things that
*  make you happy both short term and also long term. Yeah, it seems to be full of cool stuff to enjoy.
*  It certainly does. And one of those is having a conversation with you,
*  Magnus. It's a huge honor to talk to you. Thank you so much for spending this time with me.
*  I can't wait to see what you do in this world. And thank you for creating so much elegance and
*  beauty on the chessboard and beyond. So thanks for talking today, brother.
*  Thank you so much. Thanks for having me. And
*  I wanted to say this at the start, but I never really got the chance. I was always a bit
*  apprehensive about doing this podcast because you are a very smart guy and your audience is
*  very smart. And I always had a bit of imposter syndrome. So I'll tell you this now after
*  the podcast. So please do judge me, but I hope you've enjoyed it.
*  I loved it. You're a brilliant man. And I love the fact they have imposter syndrome because
*  a lot of us do. And so that's beautiful to see even at the very top, but you still feel like an
*  imposter. Thank you, brother. Thanks for talking to them.
*  Thanks for listening to this conversation with Magnus Carlsen. To support this podcast,
*  please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from
*  Bobby Fisher. Chess is a war over the board. The object is to crush the opponent's mind.
*  Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
*  Bye.
