---
Date Generated: October 31, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 7183s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'anxiety', 'artificial intelligence', 'artificial intelligence podcast', 'bittersweet', 'depression', 'extroverts', 'introverts', 'leonard cohen', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex podcast', 'loneliness', 'loss', 'love', 'mit ai', 'quiet', 'susan cain']
Video Views: 565736
Video Rating: None
Video Description: Susan Cain is the author of Quiet: The Power of Introverts in a World That Can't Stop Talking, and Bittersweet: How Sorrow and Longing Make Us Whole. Please support this podcast by checking out our sponsors:
- Brave: https://brave.com/lex
- Skiff: https://skiff.org/lex to get early access
- Mizzen+Main: https://mizzenandmain.com and use code LEX to get $35 off
- Athletic Greens: https://athleticgreens.com/lex and use code LEX to get 1 month of fish oil
- InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/lex to get 20% off

EPISODE LINKS:
Susan's Twitter: https://twitter.com/susancain
Susan's Instagram: https://instagram.com/susancainauthor
Susan's Website: https://susancain.net
Bittersweet (book): https://amzn.to/3xE0LWt
Quiet (book): https://amzn.to/3QvpOmb

PODCAST INFO:
Podcast website: https://lexfridman.com/podcast
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/2lwqZIr
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/2nEwCF8
RSS: https://lexfridman.com/feed/podcast/
Full episodes playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLrAXtmErZgOdP_8GztsuKi9nrraNbKKp4
Clips playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLrAXtmErZgOeciFP3CBCIEElOJeitOr41

OUTLINE:
0:00 - Introduction
0:51 - Introverts
18:51 - Small talk
23:45 - Artistic expression
36:12 - Sad music
43:50 - Leonard Cohen
54:43 - Public speaking
1:01:59 - Podcasts
1:09:34 - Famous Blue Raincoat by Leonard Cohen
1:24:55 - Creativity and sadness
1:33:12 - Dark moments
1:41:14 - Parenting
1:50:08 - Advice for young people
1:53:18 - Meaning of life

SOCIAL:
- Twitter: https://twitter.com/lexfridman
- LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/lexfridman
- Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/lexfridman
- Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/lexfridman
- Medium: https://medium.com/@lexfridman
- Reddit: https://reddit.com/r/lexfridman
- Support on Patreon: https://www.patreon.com/lexfridman
---

# Susan Cain The Power of Introverts and Loneliness  Lex Fridman Podcast #298
**Lex Fridman:** [June 28, 2022](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j4PEu4sVD40)
*  People whose favorite songs are their happy songs play it on their playlist about 175 times.
*  The people who love sad music play them about 800 times.
*  And they say that they feel connected to the sublime when they're listening to that music.
*  The longing for what you lack is the very thing that gives you what you're longing for.
*  So the longing is the cure.
*  The following is a conversation with Susan Cain, author of Quiet,
*  The Power of Introverts in the World That Can't Stop Talking,
*  and her most recent book, Bittersweet, How Sorrow and Longing Make Us Whole.
*  This is the Lux Readman Podcast. To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description.
*  And now, dear friends, here's Susan Cain.
*  You've written on your website that, quote, I prefer listening to talking,
*  reading to socializing, and cozy chats to group settings.
*  So I think this conversation on the podcast is going to be fun.
*  What's a good definition of an introvert? Is something like those three things a good start?
*  It is a good start in terms of how introverts experience day-to-day life.
*  I think a good definition is one that some of your listeners will have heard many times before.
*  You know, the idea of where do you get your energy?
*  And for some people, they get their energy more from quieter settings,
*  and for other people, they get it more from being out there.
*  So a good rule of thumb is to ask, to imagine that you're at a party that you're really enjoying,
*  and you've been there for about two hours or so, and it's with people you really like,
*  and it's in your favorite place. So it's all good.
*  An extrovert in a setting like that is going to feel charged up,
*  and they're going to be looking for the after party.
*  And an introvert, no matter how good a time they're having and how socially skilled they are,
*  there's this moment where you just wish that you could teleport and be back at home.
*  Yeah. And that the time before the start of the party to the time when that moment happens
*  is different for different people. So the shorter that is, the more of an introvert you are?
*  Is that that kind of thing?
*  The shorter the moment until you get to the end of the party.
*  Until you get to the place where you've got to teleport home.
*  I've got to teleport home.
*  Yeah. And then for extroverts, it's the opposite. Maybe they're working on,
*  I don't know, focused on producing a memo that's really intensely interesting to them.
*  But if they're in that state of solitary mode of really focusing, they might get stir crazy
*  a lot faster than an introvert would. And so it doesn't have so much to do with what you're
*  good at as how you get your energy.
*  And so for an introvert, the source of energy is what? Silence, solitude. And for an extrovert,
*  it's interaction with other people.
*  What I'd really say is that, and this is neurobiological as well, is that it has to
*  do with how your nervous system reacts to stimulation. So for an introvert, you're
*  feeling in a great state of equilibrium when there are fewer inputs coming at you.
*  So they could be social inputs, but that's why an introvert in general would rather
*  hang out with one close friend at a time as opposed to a big party full of strangers,
*  because that's just too many inputs for the nervous system. And for an extrovert,
*  the nervous system needs more stimulants. So if they're not getting enough,
*  they get that listless and sluggish feeling.
*  So if you're just walking through the world, like people listening to this,
*  but in general, how do you know if you're an introvert?
*  How do you empirically start to determine if you are in large part an introvert?
*  Well, I would start by just asking that question of what happens to you
*  at around the cue of a remark where you're having a good time.
*  Just go to parties every day.
*  But I also find, I'm curious if you have a different experience from this, but from all
*  the years that I've been out there talking about this topic, I found that most people
*  really seem to know once they're being honest with themselves.
*  And maybe that's the question to ask is like, if you imagine that you have a Saturday or a whole
*  weekend where you can spend your time exactly the way you want to, with no professional
*  obligations and no social obligations, who would you spend it with? How many people?
*  What would you be doing? And what does that picture that you're painting start to look like?
*  Yeah, so there's nuance to this though, because I'm sure for extroverts to get energized by
*  stimulation, whether that's stimulation with other people, it depends what that stimulation is.
*  Maybe you're not surrounded by the kind of people that you enjoy being around.
*  So maybe that has to do less with whether some characteristics of your personality,
*  more has to do with the fact what your environment is like.
*  That's always kind of the question. Do you want to be alone because everybody around you is an
*  asshole or do you want to be alone because you get energized from being?
*  Well, I would hold the variables constant, I guess.
*  Keep the assholes constant and see. And then there's the other thing you kind of observed,
*  that there's a lot of people that will say they get energized from being alone.
*  Like people are exhausting to them or something like that. But at the same time,
*  when you see them at a party, they seem like the life of the party.
*  I know. And I hear from those people all the time. There are so many people like that.
*  What would you classify them as exactly? Is it ultimately as the source of energy?
*  Is the most important thing? Or like, how the heck are they the life of the party?
*  It's a bunch of different things. So first of all, just to say like a big
*  caveat to all of this is humans are just amazingly complex. So you can't explain every individual
*  human through these parameters, even though I think the parameters are really valuable.
*  But that person at the party, it could be that they're more of an ambivert. So they kind of
*  are more in the middle of the spectrum. It basically means someone who's not extremely
*  introverted or extremely extroverted. They're kind of in the middle. So maybe at a party,
*  their more extroverted side comes out. Or it could be an introvert who's gotten really good at the
*  skills of acting more like a pseudo extrovert. And they pull that up at the moments that they need
*  it. So they've learned how to fake it. Yeah. Oh, there's a lot of people like that. And I know
*  this because like I think out of all the people on this planet you could be talking to, I've heard
*  from the most number of those people. Like they all come and tell me about their experience out
*  in the world presenting a face that's different from what they feel. So one of the things you
*  talk about is, at least in the West, we've constructed a picture of success. And that picture
*  is usually one of an extrovert. Like when you imagine somebody who's a leader, who's a successful
*  person, that person has some of the qualities you would associate with an extrovert. And so
*  there's a lot of incentive for faking it. Yeah, exactly. If you want to be successful,
*  you got to be able to fake it, to sort of hang with the rest of the team. You have to be able to
*  be outgoing and all those kinds of things and not be drained by the interaction. Yeah. But I mean,
*  there are also a lot of introverts who figure out ways to draw on their own strengths. And they're
*  incredibly connecting and successful. And they're great leaders. And they're not actually faking it.
*  They're more just figuring out ways to do it their own way. You see a lot of people like that.
*  Is there advice, is there lessons you can draw from that, from just observing
*  how you can be an introvert and be in a leadership position?
*  Yeah, it's kind of like a mantra of figuring out what your own strengths are and how to draw on them.
*  I think of a guy I know, Doug Conant, who had been the CEO of Campbell's Soup for many years.
*  He's very introverted. He's quite shy also by his own description. And he really cares
*  about people. And so when he started at Campbell, the employee engagement ratings of the company
*  were all the way at the bottom of the Fortune 500. And by the time he stepped down 10 years later,
*  they were all the way at the top. And it wasn't that he was going out there and schmoozing people,
*  but he really did care. So he would find out who were the people who had really been contributing.
*  And he would write to them personal letters of thanks. And these letters meant so much to people.
*  They would carry them around with them. And during his time, the 10 years there, he wrote 30,000
*  of those letters. So that was his way of doing it. That was his way of drawing on his own strengths.
*  And he did that together with, of course, you sometimes have to go outside your comfort zone,
*  no matter who you are. So he was doing plenty of that too. It's kind of combination.
*  Yeah, that the writing process and focusing on the one-on-one interaction,
*  I can definitely relate. There's something deeply draining, which concerns me about Zoom meetings,
*  because it's some weird brain manipulation.
*  Say more.
*  Well, because you're not really engaged, but it wears on you the same way that it does a party.
*  It feels like you're emptying that bucket for the introverts, even though they're not participating
*  at all in the meeting. I mean, I suppose that's true for physical meetings too. But with Zoom
*  meetings, remote meetings, it's so much easier to invite a larger number of people into the meeting.
*  So you're draining more and more of the introvert energy. And I'm probably extrovert too,
*  but the introvert definitely there's, I mean, it's interesting. I would love to understand that more
*  because there's more and more push towards remote work without, I think, a deep understanding of why
*  these meetings are so draining on people. I just anecdotally have heard from that. But maybe that's
*  because the managers, the people who arrange the meetings are just not sufficiently yet aware of
*  the draining nature of them so that they pull in too many people, they schedule them too regularly,
*  so they need to adjust that kind of thing probably.
*  I think people are starting to realize, but I would say one reason that Zoom is so draining is because
*  you can see your own self-presentation the whole time if you choose to. And when you go into
*  in-person, you can't, so you're kind of freed of thinking about that. So it's like an extra
*  cognitive load that you're bearing the whole time. And like you might want to turn off the camera so
*  you can't see yourself, but then you feel like, well, I have the ability to, so I probably should
*  be doing it. And then that alone is a decision that you're making.
*  Yeah, there's probably studies on this now happening, either have happened or are happening,
*  the effect of seeing your own face on camera, because it's reminding you that you're supposed
*  to be acting a certain way. And that is especially a stressful thing.
*  Yeah, you can't be in the moment as much. But I mean, for you, you make the decision to do
*  all your podcast interviews in person, right? And so—
*  And that's even when it's very costly. If there's any kind of chemistry that contributes at all
*  to the conversation, which I think most conversations have chemistry, even the boring
*  work meetings, there's something there. Because yes, you're trying to solve a particular problem
*  at this particular time, but underneath it, there's a team building that's happening.
*  And honestly, people also have told me about this, why they enjoy the Zoom meetings during
*  the pandemic, is like they're lonely. It's annoying to have to sit and listen to
*  folks talk about nothing and so on. But they tune in anyway, because it's kind of lonely to sit
*  there by yourself. And that, I mean, there's a deep connection there with other people.
*  And that is especially true when they're there in person, which is a huge concern for me for
*  more and more offices from a capitalist perspective, realizing, hey, why do we have
*  these large office spaces? Why do we have to get people together? But I think in some deep sense,
*  we do. But then you also talk about that once we do, we want to protect the introverts.
*  Like you don't want the open space, office space, which was a big fad for a while. I don't know where
*  people stand on that at this point. Yeah, I think people are figuring it out in a post-pandemic
*  context. But I mean, I knew what you mean. So before I became a writer, I was a corporate
*  lawyer for like seven years. And literally the only thing I miss from those years is hanging out
*  with people at the office. Like, I don't know, just some of the funniest moments I've had in my life
*  came from being at the office until midnight with the other people I was working with. So I know
*  exactly what you're talking about. Though I will say the office is there at that firm. And at most
*  firms in those days, everybody had their own office. So it was like a dorm room, you know,
*  where it was like a long hallway with everybody in their own little dorm room. So you had tons
*  of privacy, but you would also come out and hang out with people. You could just kind of roam
*  whenever you want. Yeah, yeah. And whenever you roam, that means you're kind of open.
*  You're looking for trouble. Yeah. You're open for interaction. And the extent to which you would
*  keep your door open, you know, was it wide open or was it half a jar or just a little bit? Those
*  were all signals. So is there, because you said reenergize, is there, do you like to think, and
*  again, the human mind is complicated, but do you like to think of it as like a bucket that gets
*  refilled for introverts in terms of energy, of social interaction that they're able to handle?
*  Do you think of it like that as a bucket that gets emptied and needs to be refilled?
*  I think of it, yeah, more or less, because I use the metaphor of a battery that gets recharged or
*  not. It's basically the same thing, different metaphor. But yeah, but just to add on that,
*  there is a layer of complexity to that because you could be somebody who doesn't want the kind
*  of social life, let's say, where you have to be like on and presenting and interacting with
*  tons of people all the time, but you'd get really lonely if you were just by yourself.
*  So what you want is to maybe be in the company of a couple people you know really well.
*  Like for me, the pandemic was not actually that hard for me personally. I mean, I lost family,
*  but I mean, from the point of view of what we're talking about, it wasn't that hard because I live
*  with my husband and my kids. So I knew it was hard on the kids and I felt badly for them. But for me,
*  I was like, you know what, I have a lot of social life right here in the house.
*  Mm hmm. That's saying, you know, you love your husband.
*  And I can focus and do my work. Yeah.
*  That's the cool thing about the pandemic. I think it helped people figure out how much
*  they love their family. I think that's true.
*  And the while you give you a chance to really reconnect with kids, with your kids,
*  like really spend time with them, it's just fascinating to watch. Like people actually,
*  it did strengthen the family unit in an often beautiful way, which just sucks to have to leave
*  behind at this point. Yeah. And I think that's part of what people are not going to want to go
*  back to that we need to solve for to the extent that work becomes non-remote again. Yeah. I think
*  people have just realized how precious those aspects of their lives are. And, you know,
*  for somebody who's in a sort of conventional office job where you're going home and seeing
*  your kids for an hour before bedtime, and that's your interaction with them, that's,
*  that's kind of a ridiculous way to set things up. Yeah. It's cool that you can get, I think a lot
*  of places give you the option now, which is interesting. You get to optimize that element
*  of your life. Do you take the commute and the office work and then the social interaction there?
*  Do you focus on the work at home? It's also lonely at home, but then you get to see your kids. If
*  you have kids, that's part of the optimization is like, I have some options now and I'm going to try
*  to optimize solitude, loneliness, happiness, productivity, seeing family, seeing coworkers,
*  the chemistry with the team building with the coworkers versus just the raw
*  exchange of information with the coworkers. It's fascinating to see how that kind of evolves.
*  Yeah. And then there's the big, the third space idea of, you know, the spaces where you're
*  in a coworking space or a cafe or something like that. So you've got other people around you, but
*  you're not exactly interacting with them, but they're very much there. And that's huge too.
*  I don't think we think about that enough. Yeah. That energy is there.
*  Yeah. Yeah. I lived in Manhattan for 17 years before we had kids and I absolutely loved it.
*  I loved it. The feeling of all that energy all around you, but you could be anonymous within it.
*  To me it was perfect. Yeah. It's beautiful. I worked this morning for a few hours,
*  programmed for a few hours at a Starbucks. And first of all, wearing suits,
*  like Manhattan is the one place you can kind of fit into that because everyone's wearing suits.
*  Do you wear suits every day? Well, these days, unfortunately,
*  because I get recognized, I wear usually not suits when I just on my own life, but yeah,
*  I love it. I love the way it feels. I don't know. And the way I think about the world when I wear a
*  suit, I take it seriously as if my life is going to end today. Like this is what I would want to wear,
*  not for physical appearance, but just for some reason it makes me feel like
*  focused. I don't know. So even if you're not going to see anyone,
*  you would still put the suit on when you're doing your work? Especially then. Really?
*  Especially then. Yeah. Yeah. I really love doing that. So it tells you seriousness of purpose,
*  something like that. Yeah. Yeah. Like everything is elevated now.
*  I don't know what it is. I don't know what I imagine exactly, but it's some kind of
*  platonic form of like a mixture of James Bond and like, I don't know who else. Richard Feynman.
*  Can I think about when I think about a suit? You know, I think of Leonard Cohen, but
*  he was always wearing suits too, but you know. Leonard Cohen is definitely one of my,
*  is a tragic human, is a beautiful human being. Yeah. Through his words, through his own private
*  life. Yes, I definitely would think about Leonard Cohen. So small talk. That's another thing.
*  Is that part of the equation of introvert versus extrovert?
*  How much people enjoy small talk? I kind of went into this whole thing thinking that it was, but
*  from what I've seen, most people have studies that most people don't like small talk.
*  I think that's why people like your podcasts. Cause you're like, forget the small talk. I'm
*  going deep into it from the very beginning. Yeah. So it's actually the picture you're painting is
*  like the way you started, like with your, with the book Quiet and the way you are today is you
*  realize the picture may be more complicated. Yeah. Everything's more complicated.
*  I will say with the small talk thing that I'm curious if you have this experience,
*  but I find it fantastic to have a career where I'm known for anti-small talk kinds of topics,
*  because it means that anywhere I go, like if I show up at a conference or something like that,
*  no one does small talk with me. They're like telling me about the deep truth of their lives
*  from the first hello. And I love that. And in normal life, you have to like wade through
*  a lot before you know, if people are ready to go there.
*  Yeah. Do you have that experience too? No, definitely. Definitely with people that know
*  me for sure. But you forget how many people feel like they know you because of your podcasts.
*  Oh, that's what, no, that counts. Cause I'm a huge fan of podcasts and I feel it like before I ever
*  became friends with Joe Rogan, I felt like I was friends with him because I was a fan of his
*  podcast. And so like it was, I don't, I feel like it's a friendship. I know it's a one way
*  friendship with all the people I listened to in podcasts and even people who are no longer with
*  us, like writers, I feel like I have a relationship with them. Maybe I'm insane. No, I totally feel
*  that way. That's the whole reason I became a writer. Like I'm friends with Leonard Cohen.
*  Yeah. And he's not aware of it. No, I, but I think that's the whole reason for writing or making
*  music or whatever people do. It's to be able to have those kinds of connections that don't require
*  having to be in a room together. Cause there's only so many people you can be in a room with
*  in your lifetime. The hard thing is, is unfortunately because I value human connections so much,
*  and I only have just like you mentioned, sort of a small circle of people I'm really close with
*  by design. It always hurts me a lot to say goodbye to people. Like you meet people and you can tell
*  they're beautiful people. They're amazing. There's something so fascinating about them. They're,
*  they've had a complicated life. Like you could see in their eyes and the way they tell their story
*  in just a few sentences, they've gone through some shit, but they also found some elements of
*  beauty. And then you get to realize, okay, well there's a fascinating human here. And all you
*  get to say is a few words here and there, like a funny little joke, maybe a dark joke here and there.
*  And then you just say goodbye, maybe hug it out and you go on your way. So like that's a hello and
*  a goodbye and your past will never cross again. And that makes me like a sad walk, walk away.
*  But I guess I wouldn't have it any other way, I suppose, is the reality is in your book,
*  you talk about that sorrow, that sadness not being such a bad thing.
*  Yeah. And when you just said that, I just thought of this one moment in my life that I haven't
*  thought of for 20, 30 years or something, but it was when I was in law school and
*  a classmate of mine had his friend come to visit for the weekend and the three of us hung out a
*  lot and we just had an amazing time. And then this other guy who wasn't going to be coming back
*  anytime soon, if at all, sent a postcard to me. And the only thing written on the postcard was
*  this quote from Oscar Wilde. And I don't remember the exact words, but it basically said that there's
*  no pain as intense as the sorrow of parting from someone to whom you've just been introduced.
*  Yeah. And there was something so intense about that and so true.
*  I think partly also because when you've just been introduced to somebody, you don't yet know
*  their difficulties. So you're seeing the most sparkling version of them. You're seeing
*  like a platonic version of love and friendship. And your imagination fills in the rest in some
*  beautiful way that matches perfectly the kind of thing you're interested in. That's how I feel
*  about one scoop, like one spoonful of ice cream. And that's why you always finish the whole tub.
*  You regret all of it. You do cite, where did you write this? I think this is on your website,
*  that one of the best things in the world is that sublime moment when a writer, artist, or musician
*  manages to express something you've always felt, but never articulated, or at least never quite so
*  beautifully. So that's the Oscar Wilde line is one line like that, but just a line from a song
*  or maybe a piece of art that just grabs you. Is there something that jumps out into memory?
*  Like that for you? I don't know if I have an exact line though. I mean, that feeling that you
*  just quoted happens to me all the time. I'm just bad at recalling exact instances, but
*  on the spot, but the writer Allen de Bottone regularly makes me feel that way. He's just this
*  beautiful essayist and like observer of human nature. And he's just constantly expressing
*  things in this gorgeous way that you've experienced yourself. And you feel like,
*  I don't know, it's just this grand act of generosity. You feel less lonely, you feel like
*  this deep sense of communion. It's such an elevating experience. Even when it's like a
*  melancholy line. Maybe especially when it is. Yeah, what is that? There's, so Jack Kerouac
*  on the road definitely makes me feel that way, like every other line in there,
*  a forlorn rags of growing old. You know, I never read that book. So what was it about that book
*  that made you feel that way? Well, okay. Well, since you asked, I'm going to linger on this.
*  So this is stories, he's kind of the book, the kind of defining book of the beats,
*  the beat generation. And it's basically a story of a writer who takes a road trip
*  across the United States a couple of times and experiences a few close friends and a few
*  strangers along the way. And there's a lot of just those melancholy goodbyes along the way.
*  You meet all these people with interesting lives. Some of them are defined by struggle. Some of them
*  are defined by drugs, drinking women, all that kind of stuff. And still he just kind of dances
*  around all of that and is defined by the goodbyes and the passing of time. So a lot of the really
*  powerful lines are basically like, there's one on there, again, I don't remember exactly, but he
*  meets a beautiful girl at a rest stop. And the girl is getting or a woman is getting on a different
*  bus than he's getting on. And so it's that like feeling of falling in love for like a second
*  and realizing that fate is just ripping that out, which is similar to this idea of,
*  it sucks to say goodbye just when you met, but it's especially true when you fall in love just a
*  little bit with that stranger with all the possibilities that could lay there. So there's
*  a few lines I've written down. I went down this whole rabbit hole of thinking, one of the lines
*  that grabbed me, a couple of lines from On the Road. So one is,
*  what is that feeling when you're driving away from people and they recede on the plane until
*  you see their specs dispersing? It's the two huge worlds vaulting us and it's goodbye,
*  but we lean forward to the next crazy venture beneath the skies. So this is him talking about
*  leaving a particular city. The spoiler alert towards the end of the book, rather the end of
*  the book. Lying never turned too often. It's more poetry, but it's the feeling that captures the
*  book, I would say. The evening star must be drooping and shedding her sparkler dims on the
*  prairie, which is just before the coming of complete night that blesses the earth, darkens
*  all the rivers, cups the peaks and folds the final shore in. And nobody, nobody knows what's going to
*  happen to anybody besides the forlorn rags of growing old. And it just captures this kind of,
*  in the moment, appreciation of the beauty of the world and a sadness over the fact that time passes
*  and you leave the people you love behind, you leave the places you love behind,
*  or at least the way they were at the time that you really enjoyed them. And you just leave that,
*  all that, just the sadness you feel when you, something about it, like look at her picture,
*  look at your kids grow up, look at your old friends getting old. Something makes you realize
*  that time passes and somewhere deep in there is probably a realization of your mortality. And then
*  it just makes you somehow first sad that everything comes to an end. And then that's immediately
*  followed by sort of an appreciation of the moment, like a gratitude that you get to experience this
*  moment. Yeah, I know it exactly. I mean, that's the whole reason that I wrote Bitter Sweet. It's
*  all about that. So I know intensely what you're talking about. And by the way, my husband loves
*  the book, A Movable Feast by Ernest Hemingway, which I also haven't read, but it talks about that
*  same thing, you know, groups of people traveling around together and the group coalesces into some
*  magical formation. And then one person leaves the group and it's never going to be the same again.
*  And they move on to the next one. Yeah, I mean, I think that's the deepest essence of human nature.
*  The feeling of longing for some kind of state of perfect completeness, completion, perfect love,
*  the Garden of Eden, all of it. And the feeling that you're never going to quite attain it,
*  but you get glimpses of it here and there. And that those glimpses are some of the best
*  things that ever happened to us. And they're suffused with sadness because they're not the
*  real thing or they're not the full thing. They're just a glimpse. It's a glimpse of what we long for.
*  So the sadness that we might feel is always connected to the ways in which we fall short
*  from the perfect thing. There's always a thing you're longing for. And the sadness has to do with
*  the getting a glimpse of it, but not quite getting a hold of it. Yeah. Yeah. So it's always losing.
*  It's always losing, but it's also always that, but it's not, that sounds really depressing,
*  but it's, it's not, you know, it's not pressing because you experience this all the time. It's
*  also, those are the most beautiful moments I think life offers. I mean, it's intense, intense beauty
*  in those moments because it's getting closer to the real thing that we long for.
*  So what about Mike loss, losing love? Is that also a beautiful thing?
*  Well, the moments you're talking about, I think it's easier to appreciate the beauty of it all in
*  the moment because you're experiencing, you're kind of experiencing the loss and the love all
*  at the same time. Whereas if you're talking about straight up loss, like a betrayal or a
*  bereavement or whatever it is, that's, it's different. It's quite overwhelming. So losing
*  loved one kind of thing, losing a loved one. I mean, I will say that the, the truth that I think
*  that we can come to after a lot of time on this earth is the idea that love exists not only in
*  its particular forms. So not only in the form of the one person, you know, that one person we love
*  or that other person we love, but love itself is a state that we have access to. And so over time,
*  the loss of person A can heal and you can tap into a kind of bigger river of love.
*  Yeah. I mean, I had this, this comes from Louie, Louie CK,
*  at a show. Damn, I love that line. I mean, there's a, he's talked to an older gentleman
*  and Louie is all like sad about losing a loved one or like getting rejected, essentially like a
*  breakup. And then the older gentleman gives him advice saying like, basically criticizes Louie
*  for saying, why are you moping around? Cause this is the most, this is the best part.
*  Like losing love is the best part. Cause it that's the real loss is when you forget,
*  like feeling shitty about having gone through a breakup is when you most intensely appreciate
*  what that person meant to you. Like you most intensely feel love in some strange way by
*  realizing that you've lost it by missing it, wishing at this moment, I wish I had that
*  like that feeling that that's when you feel that love the most, the absence of it. And so the,
*  the older gentleman gives advice that that that's the best part. And it can, if you're good with it,
*  it can last for the longest. It could be the most sort of prolonged experience of deep
*  appreciation and emotion and so on. So that's kind of a, that's a nice way to look at loss,
*  which is a reminder of how much somebody meant to us.
*  LW Yeah. I mean, I think there's a lot of truth in that because yeah, you wouldn't care so much
*  if it weren't something that mattered to you. So it's always a signpost to the direction you
*  really want to go to. That's always what it is. Yeah. And it's interesting to see the way
*  that the mystical versions of many of the great religions all point in this direction,
*  you know, whether you're looking at Sufism or, or the Kabbalah or in Christian mysticism,
*  you see this idea that the longing for what you lack is the very thing that gives you what
*  you're longing for. So the longing is the cure. I mean, that's, that's the way the Sufi poet Rumi
*  puts it. The longing is the cure. You know, and he says, be thirsty, like be as thirsty as you
*  possibly can. That's what you want to be. LW The good stuff is the wanting, not the having.
*  Yep. Yep. Of course, tell it to a person that just broke up and they'll be like, shut up,
*  asshole. Advice sucks. I wish I had her him back. LW Yeah, no, absolutely.
*  Those are the kinds of life lessons that only work when you kind of step away for a while.
*  They don't work in the moment, in the moment of excruciation. There is something about the fact of
*  knowing that all humans are in that experience together that is also incredibly uplifting.
*  LW Well, that takes time for people to realize, like, you know, like heartbreak
*  in your early teenage years or something like that could feel like this is completely the most novel
*  and the most dramatic pain that any human has ever felt. Right. Or maybe even when you're younger.
*  And then one of the process, one of the things you realize is that everybody goes through this.
*  There can be an awakening to the fact that we're all in this together. This human condition is not
*  just a personal experience, it's an experience we all share. And that's a kind of love, the unity of
*  it. LW Yeah, that's a really deep kind of love. And I feel like, you know, we're, we are prevented
*  from perceiving that love as it's actually like the most obvious kind of love. And it's right
*  there and it happens all the time, but we're prevented from perceiving it because we're not
*  really supposed to talk about things like that. It's like, there's something unseemly about it.
*  Well, it's also in the West is this individualist society. So like, there's a pressure to sort of
*  see the individual as a distinct sovereign entity that experiences things. And it's not the unity
*  between people is not, it's not obviously sort of communicated or talked about as part of the culture.
*  LW Yeah, it's not part of the culture. And yet, you know, you see it in our behaviors, because
*  we're humans. So, you know, why do people listen to sad music? I mean, one reason is,
*  their hearing expressed for them, like the musician is basically saying to them,
*  this thing that you have experienced, I've experienced it too, so have lots of other people.
*  And that they're saying it all without words, and it's transformed into something beautiful.
*  And there's something about that, that's just incredibly elevating. And people don't know it,
*  but there's one study that I have in bittersweet, they found that people whose favorite
*  songs are their happy songs, play it on their playlist about 175 times. The people who love
*  sad music play them about 800 times. And they say that they feel connected to the sublime
*  when they're listening to that music. LW What do you think that is? So what is that?
*  What is it in music that connects us to the sublime through sadness?
*  LW I mean, I have a bunch of different theories. Like, the whole reason I started
*  writing this book is because I kept having this reaction reliably to sad music. And I realized
*  that for people who I knew who were religious believers, the way they described their experience
*  of God was what I was experiencing when I would hear that music. Like all the time,
*  it happens over and over again. LW So you wonder what that is?
*  LW Yeah, so I started wondering what that is. And lots of people have tried to figure out,
*  you know, what that's all about. And there are different theories that it's expressing,
*  it's like a kind of catharsis for our difficult emotions, that it's, as we were saying, a sense of
*  being in it together. We don't react in that sort of uplifted way when you just see
*  like a slideshow of sad faces, which is something researchers have actually tested.
*  No one really cares when they're seeing the slide for the sad faces. But the sad music,
*  they're really reacting. And also, they don't really react when they're hearing music expressing
*  other negative emotions, like martial music or something like that. It's just the sad music
*  that gives people this elevated sense of wonder. So I think it's the combination of the sadness
*  and the beauty. And I think it's just tapping into the essence of the human source code,
*  which is a kind of spiritual longing, whether we're atheists or believers,
*  there's this feeling of longing for a state and a place of perfect love and perfect unity
*  and perfect truth and all of it. And like an acute awareness that we're not there in this world,
*  and in religions, we express that through the longing for Mecca or Eden or Zion.
*  And artistically, we express it with Dorothy longing for somewhere over the rainbow or
*  Harry Potter enters the story at the precise moment that he's become an orphan. So he's now
*  going to spend the rest of his life longing for these parents who he can never remember.
*  And there's something about that state that's at our very core. And I think that's why we love it
*  so much. Well, it could be, you know, you can have the Ernest Becker theory of denial of death,
*  where at the core of that, the warm at the core, as Jung said, is the fear of death. So where the
*  longing for the perfect thing has to do with sort of becoming immortal, as reaching beyond
*  the absurdity, the cruelty of life, that all things come to an end for no particularly good
*  reason whatsoever, one we can rationally explain. I know, you know, I wonder about that all the time.
*  Like, I know, obviously, there's that idea from Becker and throughout philosophy and the tale of
*  Gilgamesh about the idea that the thing we're longing for most of all is immortality. But
*  I feel like it's not only that. I think it's
*  more so or also, let's say, a longing for the lions to lay down with the lambs,
*  finally, you know, for like the fundamental calculus of the universe to just be different,
*  where life doesn't have to eat life in order to survive. And yeah, just a completely different
*  situation that immortality would not solve. I wonder that could be a very kind of
*  modern thing. Because surely so much of human history is defined by violence and glorified
*  violence that doesn't give inklings of this lions and the lambs. So much of-
*  The Bible. I mean, I know all the other stuff is in the Bible too.
*  There's other stuff in the Bible, and the Bible is, that particular aspect doesn't necessarily
*  reveal the fundamental motivation of human nature. That could be deeper stuff, you know. But yeah,
*  that is a beautiful, that is a beautiful picture. But is it just about humans or is it all about
*  all of life? And you have to think about what does the perfect world look like? It's not just the
*  lions and lambs laying together. It's, you know, how many lions, how many lambs?
*  Right, right.
*  And, you know, what, having just had a few very technical conversations about Marxian economics
*  versus Kenzian economics versus neoclassical economics. What does the economic and the
*  government system look like for the lions and the lambs that we're longing for? So then you
*  start to build society on top of all those things and, but you still, you return to this. What
*  is it, what are we longing for? And what's the role of love in that? What's the role of
*  that sad, melancholy feeling, the feeling of loneliness? Is the feeling of loneliness
*  fundamental to the human condition? Like, are we always striving to sort of channel that feeling
*  of loneliness to connect with others? Like, we want that feeling of loneliness, otherwise we
*  wouldn't be connecting. Is that fundamental? That feeling like you're alone in this, even when you're
*  with other people, sort of alone together. You're born alone, you die alone. Maybe loneliness is
*  fundamental.
*  I think the longing for union is fundamental. It's just that it looks so different for different
*  people, you know? And coming back to where we were, what we were talking about at the beginning,
*  union looks incredibly social for a lot of people and hardly social at all for others,
*  but everybody needs some version of union.
*  Yeah, people have been telling me recently about polyamory and all those kinds of things. So I'm
*  having probably grown up in a certain part of the world. I'm very, I think I'm very monogamy
*  centric, not in a judgmental way, just for me, what makes me happy is one person for the whole,
*  for my whole life, basically just dedication.
*  Because I've just seen through relationships with people and objects in my life,
*  the longer we stay together, the deeper the tie. So that's just the empirical thing. And yes,
*  that probably is a personalized thing. That's just true for me. It could be very different for
*  others. Maybe it's connected to the introverted thing, maybe not. Who knows? Before I leave,
*  because you mentioned songs, sad songs. What are we talking about? What's a good, what song do
*  you remember last crying to? Oh gosh. Well, I mean, as you know, I literally dedicated my book to
*  Leonard Cohen. He's played such a huge role in my life. Like I love him. I love him. And I loved
*  him with this crazy love that I've never been able to understand for decades. I think I understand
*  it a little better now, but. So you're better friends with him than me, I'm jealous. So
*  does it make you, is it the musician or the human too? Because the human is a torsional soul in a
*  way. I'd say it's the musician. It's the musician. I actually was thinking about this the other day.
*  I mean, obviously he's not alive anymore, but I was kind of running the thought experiment.
*  If he were alive still and I had the chance to meet him in person, would I want to do that?
*  And I'm not really sure that I would because he represents for me symbolically everything.
*  Well, everything else in the sentence right there. And so, and I think that's okay. I think people can
*  express something through their art that they might or might not express if you were just
*  like hanging out with them and having a coffee. And I'm happy to know him that way.
*  He can express himself, I'm sure, in the way that you know him as over coffee too.
*  Yeah, maybe you would.
*  It just requires like a focus of remembering, like a deep focus of connection. That's why
*  like when I interact with folks, it's so draining for me because I'm putting all my, whatever
*  weapons I got in terms of like deeply trying to understand the person in front of me and doing
*  that dance of human interaction, the humor, the intense kind of delving into who they are.
*  Which requires like navigating around like small talk type of stuff and just like compliments and
*  so on. In general, like people, depending on the culture, depending on the place, they'll sometimes
*  flower stuff with smiling and like compliments like, oh, I love you. This is great. I guess that's
*  all great, but you want to get to the core of like, what are the demons in the closet? Let's
*  talk about it. And that could be exhausting. That can be really exhausting. So from a Leonard Coe
*  perspective, you get more and more famous. It can be hard sometimes because he probably is also an
*  introvert. Oh yeah, I know he was an introvert because he actually tweeted about my book when
*  it came out. So that was a precious moment for me. Something about we should all be listening to the
*  quiet. I can't remember exactly what he said. But yeah, yeah, no, he definitely was. He struggled
*  with depression, which I wonder if that's something that's also connected to introversion.
*  But perhaps not actually, perhaps that they're very disjoint and also connected to sensitivity
*  and many sensitive people are introverts. So it's kind of like a Venn diagram. It's about 80% of
*  highly sensitive people are introverted, but then some are extroverts and then not all introverts
*  are sensitive. So it's complicated, but he was definitely a sensitive type. Well, there's on top
*  of that, you see like the percent of artists relative to the average that suffer from depression.
*  So creative people is very high. Very, very crazy. Yeah. And then the number of artists and successful
*  artists who were orphaned when they were young, who lost one parent or both parents, it's like an
*  astronomical number. I have it in the book. I don't remember the percentage, but huge. And he was one
*  of them. He lost his father when he was nine and his first act of poetry was, was he took his father
*  made suits. That's why I thought of him when we were talking about you in your suits. And,
*  and he took one of his father's bow ties and wrote a poem in his honor and buried the poem
*  and the bow tie in the backyard. And that was like his first creative act. You know, that song,
*  Chelsea hotel number two, where he met, I guess it's about Janis Joplin. Yeah. Oh, what a fun,
*  intense and cruel person she is. So I guess, have you ever seen, I'm sorry to interrupt you,
*  but have you ever seen his son, Adam Cohn and Lana Del Rey perform that song together? Oh,
*  wow. No, it's incredible. I have to send it to you. Yeah. So that for people who don't know,
*  I don't, I mean, maybe I don't know. It goes, I remember you well in the Chelsea hotel.
*  You're talking so brave and so sweet, giving me head on the unmade bed while the limousines
*  wait in the street. There's a good line in there about, um, about being ugly. Oh yeah. We are
*  ugly, but we have the music. No, before that, from a guy's perspective, it was, uh, oh,
*  you told me again, you preferred handsome men, but for me you would make an exception. Yeah.
*  So good. Well, she continued that thread in later because I think she said that he was lousy in bed.
*  Oh, is that right? Yeah. She publicly said that, which is like, ah, man, did there,
*  uh, just, okay. For people who don't know, I think this is a true story about them interacting and,
*  and being together for a very brief time. I don't know dating, but just connecting,
*  falling in love or in this only in this very particular way that I think famous musicians,
*  poets can, can, which is like, it's impossible for that kind of thing to last. Uh, but they,
*  they did for brief, um, moment. There's like a sadness to it because it's so momentarily,
*  but it's so epic. Yeah. And that these two paths cross and then you just look at it. We know these
*  famous people and it's, it's, it's interesting to watch. Yeah. And you don't even have the impression
*  that they're thinking it's going to last. They more know that it's like a blaze of an intersection
*  and the limousine's already waiting while they're in the moment in the middle of it. And then it's
*  done. Um, yeah. And he's talked about how his music, he said, he said something like some people
*  are more inclined to say hello with their music, but I'm rather more valedictory. That's what he
*  said. What is valedictory? Like saying goodbye, like the valedictorians address. Interesting.
*  You know, so many of his songs really are about some form of parting or goodbye or an imperfection
*  or something, or like the broken hallelujah. Um, yeah, that's the thing that's so incredible about
*  him is, uh, is the way that he's taking all of that and pointing it in the direction of transcendence.
*  Like it's not, it's not just pure sadness. It's sadness and beauty. And that's the thing.
*  Yeah. There is a feeling of transcendence in a lot of the songs. It's like sadness and transcendence.
*  You're right. It's a goodbye, but you're moving on to some bigger thing. Uh, but in a, in a sort
*  of a ethereal way, like not like a proud, arrogant way. Yeah. So his favorite poet was Garcia Lorca.
*  He actually named his daughter after him. His daughter's name is Lorca. And, um, and he talks
*  about how there's some poem that Lorca had written that made him realize that the universe
*  itself was aching, but the ache was okay because that's the way you embrace the sun and the moon.
*  And that's what I think is, that's why I think there's this whole, um, rich vein in,
*  in this bittersweet tradition that he embodies. That's like the essence of beauty. You know,
*  it's the way you embrace the sun and the moon. The song, hallelujah. I return to that often.
*  Have been meaning to play it. Um, I have now a friend who wants to sing it with me. Um,
*  it's just, um, when, when, when somebody says they're a singer, do they have to be good?
*  Because then no, but I would say yes, I was in a band for a while. I sang for a while. I was
*  always bad, but I, um, I enjoy it. I enjoy it. I enjoy lyrics. I enjoy words. Yeah. When sung
*  or spoken, they capture something. They could get in that moment. Uh, Tom ways is a huge favorite
*  of mine for that reason. Um, although he often, his lyrics are often not that, not that simple.
*  I'd rather have a bottle in front of me than a frontal lobotomy. He's always playing with just
*  like these weird word play that's especially in the English language is trickier to do.
*  I'm fortunate enough to know another language, which is Russian. So I get to understand that
*  certain languages allow for more world word play than others. Um, English for that reason,
*  I don't think has a, um, like, like a, like a culture of, you know what I mean to push back
*  on what I'm about to say, but there was no culture of word play until hip hop came along.
*  So like, like distorting words in interesting ways for there to be a rhythm, a rhyme,
*  and at the same time you're capturing some really powerful message. Um, plus humor, all of that
*  mixed in. Actually hip hop does a, does a really good job of this, but there wasn't a tradition.
*  If you look at poetry in the 20th century, there wasn't really a tradition of that in the United
*  States, but there was in other parts of the world and certainly in Russia. Interesting empowered
*  also, not just by the language, by the fact that you go through a world war where tens of millions
*  of people die. Something about mass, uh, mass death of civilians that inspires great literature and
*  music and art. Yeah, absolutely. Cause you start telling the real truth. I think, yes, there's,
*  there's no more reason for small talk. Um, that's funny. I, I always have thought that
*  if I could choose any other medium besides writing, it would be singing. Um, but then
*  no, I mean, like I'm really not, I just love the idea of it. But then I also think, you know,
*  I'm fundamentally a shy person, so I think it's much better that my medium is writing instead of
*  singing. So like it all worked out. That said, you also an exceptionally good public speaker
*  and you're not supposed to be mathematically speaking, mathematically speaking. You're not
*  supposed to be a good public speaker. Oh, you mean because of shyness or because of shyness,
*  because of introversion, because of all those kinds of things. Oh yeah. But lots of introverts
*  are public speakers actually. Like this is one of, I knew this from the studies, but then also when
*  I started going out on the lecture circuit, I realized that all my fellow speakers at all these
*  conferences I was going to, they're all introverts because you know, they're all people who like
*  spent years figuring out some idea and now they're out there talking about it. Oh, they're in their
*  head figuring out the idea. Yeah. How do you explain, how do you explain that the, the public
*  speakers, would you say the good public speakers are usually introverts? No, I think there's just
*  different styles of it. And I think that we just have, when we hear the word public speaker, we
*  have a really limited idea of who that person would be. Um, so for me, I used to be very phobic
*  about public speaking. And part of the reason for it was because I thought that being the kind of
*  person I was didn't equal being able to be a good public speaker. Cause you're, you're only imagining,
*  you know, like the super kind of out there showman. Um, but I think there's another style of public
*  speaking that's more reflective and thoughtful and conveying ideas and people like that too.
*  Is there advice you can give on how to overcome that? Like if you're a shy person, how to be a
*  public speaker? I can totally give that advice because I used to, before I would give speeches,
*  you know, if I had to do it in law school, if I knew like today was the day when I was going to
*  get called on in a law school class, I literally one time vomited on my way to class. Like that's
*  how nervous I used to be. Um, and yeah, the way to do it is through desensitization. You know, it's
*  like been figured out. It's the way to overcome any fear. You have to expose yourself to the
*  thing you fear, but in very small doses. So you can't start by giving the Ted talk. You have to
*  start. I started by going to this class for people with public speaking anxiety where the first day,
*  all we had to do was stand up and say our name and sit down. That's the victory. That's fun to
*  watch all those people with anxiety. Okay. That's the first step in this step. One step at a time.
*  Yeah. And then like with this class, you go back the next week and, and he would have us come to
*  the front of the room and stand up with other people standing next to us so that you didn't
*  have the feeling of being all alone in the spotlight through others sharing it with you.
*  And you would answer some questions about where do you grow up? You know, where do you go to school?
*  And you declare victory and you're done. And then little by little by little, you keep ratcheting up
*  the exercises until you get to the point where you can do it. And then you start having successes
*  and you realize, Oh, you know, actually I can do this. What about like writing versus improvising?
*  Because I knew a few people, sort of the colleagues of mine that were working on Ted talks and
*  feels like you're supposed to like write the thing like way ahead of time and you practice it. And
*  they help you and all that kind of stuff. I don't think I've ever practiced the speech
*  once in my life or a lecture or any of that. Like I know it's really good to do, but
*  do you find that relief some of your anxiety preparing well or are you now able to do not
*  preparing well at all? I definitely like to prepare before, but the kind of preparation that I've done
*  for my Ted talks is completely different from what I've done for everything else. Because
*  Ted talks are more like a theatrical event where it's like a one person show. And of course,
*  if you were going to go on Broadway with a monologue, you would know every word. So it's
*  kind of like that. And so I would rehearse it over and over the way you do that. Isn't that more
*  anxiety? Knowing every single word. It's so much anxiety because yeah, you're, you're not even so
*  freaked out about being on stage so much as what if I forget something? Yeah. Yeah, absolutely.
*  I mean, they do things like the last Ted talk I gave, I actually did forget something halfway
*  through. Like I just couldn't remember the next line. And so I had to walk over like over there
*  were my notes. And so I did that and the audience like very kindly clapped while I did that. And
*  then I came back to the spotlight and kept going and they edit that out. Nice. So there's a failure
*  mode. It seems really, it seems really stressful. Like I'm now, I'm not sure if I'll ever publish
*  it, but I've been mostly for personal journey, but I've been working on a series on wait for it.
*  Hitler and the Third Reich sort of looking at the historical context of everything because of my
*  family was so much affected by that whole part of history. So for me to rigorously,
*  I've read a lot about Stalin and Hitler and for me to force myself, one of the best ways to
*  force yourself to really consider material is to have to talk about it. Totally. And so that's,
*  that's why I'm doing it, but I'm playing with ideas of some of it, maybe like 20% is written
*  down on paper, but the rest of it is my thoughts in the moment. And it's a difficult balance to
*  strike because if you write a lot, you're going to be more precise. You're going to be more accurate,
*  but you're going to miss some of the deep, like honest emotion. The silences won't be correct
*  or the silences between the words won't capture the depth of feeling unless if you're somebody
*  like me, if you're like, I guess that's what actors and actresses have to do. Like basically,
*  even though the script is fully written, you improvise between the words, between the lines.
*  Yeah. But that's a skill. Well, it also takes so much time. I mean, I experienced that with the
*  Ted talks. It's like you get to a stage, so you're memorizing everything word for word.
*  And at first in that process, it comes out in a really wooden way, the way you're saying,
*  like the emotion's gone. But once you really know it, so you've internalized the words,
*  then all the emotion comes back and you can say them in a completely different way, you know,
*  when you're really speaking it from the heart, but you have to know it so well before you can do that.
*  I would never recommend it because it's just like, it's so time consuming.
*  It's an inch. Well, in your case, it works out beautifully. Like when it all comes together,
*  it is a theatrical thing. It's like a musical or whatever. I think I'm going to come out with a
*  one man show on Broadway singing. Now I'm inspired. No, but for real, where are you going to talk about
*  Hitler and Stalin and everything you're learning? Have you ever thought of using the medium of just
*  speaking into a microphone, but without the video? I'm curious about this because like I fell in love
*  with podcasts originally before there was ever this whole video component to it. And I realized
*  there's something so primal and magical about having someone's voice in your ear. And my favorite
*  kinds of interviews still very few people do it this way nowadays, but my favorite kind are when
*  it you're just talking into the microphone. So it's not over zoom. It's not in person. It's just
*  you in the microphone and the other person in the microphone and they're in your ear.
*  It's like the ultimate and intimacy. Oh, you mean from the interviewer perspective, that's
*  the favorite. Yeah. But it would be interesting also as with the kind of thing you're talking
*  about of just speaking, like just you in the mic. I would love to be in person, but you can't see
*  the person. I wonder what that's like. What do you mean? Like they're all there, but behind a curtain?
*  No, you just have your eyes closed. You're just talking. You have your eyes closed or whatever.
*  Because I think you still have to get the same kind of chemistry because it's not just the visual.
*  I don't even know that because obviously I have trouble making eye contact, but I don't know if
*  the visual stimulation is the necessary thing. There's something about the way audio travels
*  that captures the intimacy where some people actually have headphones on like Joe does this,
*  have headphones on. That's really intimate. Like there's something about that sound going
*  directly into your ear. Yeah. Yeah. There is something primal there. Yeah, for sure.
*  I've thought about it definitely. Some of my favorite podcasts are like that.
*  WTF with Mark Maron. That's audio only. There's a few audio only podcasts that I just love.
*  What is that? I still go on Clubhouse. That was a social media platform where it's audio only.
*  And it's so interesting that people, the interesting thing about Clubhouse in particular
*  is people from all walks of life can tune in and they just have, it's, somebody needs to do some
*  research in terms of introversion on that one because I don't feel any of my introvert
*  like triggers happening because nobody can see you. It's just audio. And nobody is offended if
*  you're just sitting there quietly, just listening so you can participate whenever you want or not.
*  Yeah. It's like the ultimate social freedom. You can listen as much as you'd like. You can
*  participate if you want, but you don't have to. It's no big deal. Yeah. If I'm actually at a
*  physical party, somebody's going to look at me and be like, why, you know, there'll be that pressure
*  to speak, but you don't have to in that kind of audio setting. And there's that intimacy.
*  Like you can, when it's audio only, it feels like you can reveal a lot more of yourself in some kind of
*  honest way. I don't know what that is. What is that? I don't know, but I assume it's tapping into
*  something really ancient. Like we used to tell stories around the fire. Like our whole storytelling
*  tradition was oral originally. So maybe it's that, but we used visual stuff.
*  That's true. You could actually see the person on the inside of the campfire. It seems like the
*  visual elements so fundamental to the social interaction, but there is something primal about
*  audio. I wonder what that is. And still, that's why I mean, most people listen to podcasts. I think
*  audio only they have it in their ears while they're doing stuff. Yeah. That's how I do it.
*  And then there's, yeah, it's how I do it. And that's, that's where the friendship like is formed.
*  It's weird. The deep connection with other humans is formed because they're in your ear.
*  And you get to see them grow. You get to see them be bored, experience excitement and anger and fear
*  and all those kinds of things. It's fascinating. It's fascinating. The world of podcasting is
*  fascinating because we're, we're, we're in this world of essentially radio, even though we all
*  have all this high definition content, all this like tick tock style fast stuff and still,
*  I know. And we still choose to do this. It's weird at the end of the day. I think that's really what
*  people want most is just to talk to each other and to know what people really think. And podcasting
*  of all the media that I've ever seen is the one where people come closest to telling you the truth
*  and to telling you like the good and the bad and the bitter and the sweet and all of it.
*  Especially long form. There's not enough time. Yeah, exactly. I had to explain this to people.
*  Like you talk to CEOs and stuff, they don't understand. They're understanding, they're
*  starting to understand much better. Now as a hard requirement with like CEOs and stuff,
*  it's, it has to be three hours. I say like this. Wow. Because there's something there,
*  they can't be doing marketing stuff for three hours. They break. They start being human,
*  they start joking, they start relaxing. And if they can't, that also tells a kind of story.
*  But I do that kind of torture for CEOs only. Anyway. Yeah. When I was there getting my
*  publishing house did media training with me before Bitter Sweet came out and they were preparing me
*  for like the five to seven minute interview that you might have, you know, if you go on some quick
*  TV thing or something like that. And God, I hate that. It's like, it feels like they're,
*  you're basically having to not tell the full truth somehow because you can't, you can't tell it in
*  such a short amount of time. So to me, podcasting is just the best thing that's ever happened.
*  The other downside of the seven minute interview is I think you could do a really good job with that,
*  but the dance partner has to be very good. It's actually challenging for everybody involved.
*  It's much harder for everybody involved. Because if you can do, you know, I can imagine like a
*  Christopher Hitchens type character who's just super witty. Then that you could do a seven minute
*  thing. You can get to the core of Bitter Sweet. You can get to the core of the book without asking
*  those generic small talk questions. Because too many people in that short form interview
*  are just asking very generic questions. They're doing small talk for seven minutes.
*  Yeah.
*  It's like, all right, like you only get seven minutes. You only get one interesting question.
*  Go ask the weirdest, the deepest question that also energizes the other person.
*  It's an art form that people don't take seriously. I think the seven minute thing,
*  five minute or even less. And then the commercials, which I...
*  Yeah. And I've noticed that many of the best podcasters are ones where when you're on my side
*  of the table, you feel like it's more of a conversation and less like an interview where
*  you're answering all the same questions you've asked. You've answered a million times before.
*  Yeah.
*  It's really interesting how different the experience is.
*  And you're right. The audio thing, if you can lose yourself in that, the intimacy of that,
*  and you don't even remember what stupid stuff you said. Because people, I've seen that,
*  I mean, people don't give them enough credit as you might not be aware or might not be a fan,
*  but Joe Rogan is an incredible conversationalist in that he makes you forget that anything is being
*  recorded, that you're talking at all. He makes you forget time and you just enjoy yourself. And
*  whatever that is. And then you plug into that primal connection to other humans.
*  What's your favorite Leonard Cohen song?
*  Famous Blue Raincoat. Do you know that one?
*  Yeah. Maybe I'll play it.
*  Yeah. For people who don't know Leonard Cohen, and this is your first introduction to him,
*  it's going to sound so gloomy, but it's so good.
*  He's got this deep, rich voice. Tori Amos covering Famous Blue Raincoat. Yeah, yeah, no.
*  We want the original. Just like Hallelui, Jeff Buckley covered Leonard Cohen. That was a really
*  good one.
*  That was a really good one. Yeah. And I also really like Rufus Wainwright's cover.
*  But Famous Blue Raincoat, for people who don't know it, it's basically about
*  a love triangle. And it's told from the perspective of a man whose wife has just been
*  with another guy who is also his friend. And he's writing a letter to that other guy. And
*  he's reflecting on the way that all their relationships have changed in the wake of this
*  event. So they're still friends.
*  Well, he refers to him as my brother, my killer, which is such a Leonard Cohen thing to do,
*  because it's always like, you know, it's light and it's dark all at once.
*  Nothing is ever all one thing.
*  Yeah, I love this song.
*  Yeah, right? I mean,
*  he just speaks in it.
*  It's four in the morning, the end of December.
*  And the fact that it's four in the morning and it's the end of December, like those are
*  transitional moments. You know, it's night going into day and it's December going into the new
*  year. It's not an accident.
*  There is something about December, whatever, there's certain scenes you can paint in your mind.
*  There's a poem by Charles Bukowski called Nirvana. It's a young man traveling through the middle of
*  nowhere in the snow. There's something about the snow, either the rain or the snow can put
*  you in a certain kind of mood. It's just, what is it? James Joyce, the dead, the snow is falling
*  on Dublin. Yeah, it can put you in a place.
*  I mean, David Yaden, he's a researcher in psychedelics and consciousness at Johns Hopkins.
*  He's a great guy. And he's done research that has found that when people are in their transitional
*  moments of life, you know, and it could be a career change, it could be a divorce, it could be
*  that they're nearing the end of their life, that they very often will say those are their most
*  meaningful moments and their most spiritual moments. And so I feel like that's what Leonard
*  Cohn knows how to tap into instinctively. The year after he died, his son, Adam Cohn,
*  made a memorial concert for him where all these famous musicians came to Montreal where they had
*  lived and performed his music. And my husband, who's not a Leonard Cohn fan and he's not a
*  bittersweet type at all, but he knows how I feel about him. He's like, you know, you should really
*  go to that concert. And I felt so ridiculous. The whole family went all the way to Montreal
*  on a Monday. On a Monday. On a Monday. It was just like a random Monday.
*  And we got on the plane. So like everyone's out of school just so I can go to this concert.
*  And I got there. And at the beginning, I was feeling like, this was all a terrible mistake
*  because it's all these other musicians playing this music and I don't actually really want to
*  hear them. I'd rather listen to him on YouTube. And then a musician named Damien Rice came and
*  played famous Blue Raincoat. And he sang it. And he did the most amazing thing at the end.
*  The whole thing was amazing. But then at the end, he sang this musical riff that was like,
*  all I could say is that it was like a musical lamentation of the ages. And the whole audience
*  just rose silently to its feet. And it was one of the greatest moments that I've ever had.
*  There's sometimes certain artists in a cover can capture in some kind of deeper way,
*  like carrying the thread of the power of the song. So I've been listening a lot to Johnny Cash,
*  which is a Nine Inch Nails, Trent Reznor song.
*  You talked about it on your podcast with Rick Rubin, which is when I reached out to you.
*  I love that interview and I love that song also.
*  Yeah. So there's the Kennedy Center Honors where they celebrate a certain artist that did that for
*  Led Zeppelin. And I forgot what her name is, but the lead singer of Heart performs Stairway to Heaven.
*  If you take one of the great rock songs of all time, what do you do in front of it? Oh, the cool
*  thing is you get to perform this in front of the artists while they're still there. They're still
*  alive. So you get to watch you perform. In that case, the president and President Obama is there
*  and she just knocked it out of the park. But at the same time, without
*  outdoing the original somehow. Right. You're just making it your own. You're making it your own.
*  It's not overlapping it. Not departing from the spirit of the original. It's tough because
*  the original Hollywood by Leonard Cohen, it's just not, it's so powerful, but it's just not as good.
*  Some of these covers. Well, I think it's the words and the melody and then the covers take it to a
*  different place. The thing that Leonard Cohen seems to do well, I don't think he did it on
*  Hallelujah because he was almost being playful on Hallelujah. I don't know,
*  as opposed to that deep melancholy, painful longing thing that Jeff Buckley did and others do too.
*  I wonder if it's because in a way he, I don't mean that he over-edited it, but he apparently
*  worked on that song for years and went through gazillions of verses and checked most of them out.
*  So I wonder if we're hearing his version after he's a little tired with that process.
*  Yeah. Well, that's the other thing is maybe from a book tour, you know,
*  is like you get tired of saying the same thing over and over and over and over. You forget the...
*  You forgot the initial heart of it. Yeah. But I actually got a chance to hang out with
*  Dan Reynolds, who's the lead singer of Imagine Dragons. This incredible band, Super Pop,
*  the most played band on Spotify or something. Is that right?
*  His kiss went through a huge Imagine Dragons face, so we were listening to their music a lot.
*  It was so surreal to be hanging out with him and he's such a good, like very few people I've met in
*  my life are just as good of a human being. And that has to do with the fact that he struggles.
*  He still, I think, struggles, but he struggled for a long time with depression.
*  And so out of that pain, you see born this really good human being,
*  this really good relationship with his wife, like that, like when times are good, they lean
*  on each other for like, they're deeply grateful for those precious moments. So it's beautiful to
*  watch. But he said that it's really important to feel the song every time. Otherwise people know,
*  people are really good at detecting your bullshit. You can't fake it.
*  You really have to feel it every time. You have to feel the emotion of it,
*  whatever the emotion is of the original time you wrote it. Yeah. So it's just interesting because
*  I thought you could maybe fake it, but he believes personally, because he played in front of gigantic
*  crowds and over and over and over and over and over. He's like, no, every time you have to be there.
*  But there's got to be times when he's about to go out and he's not feeling it and he has to
*  figure out some way of getting himself into that heart space.
*  Well, that's what he's saying. You have to, otherwise you're just, that's the job.
*  Don't take the job then. And he loves it. He says the biggest struggle in fact,
*  is the come down from that, which is like, you have this such a beautiful experience of connected
*  with this large number of people sharing a song that you love. And then it's such a rush of
*  connection. And then you have to, you know, when you get off stage, you're now back to normal life.
*  And that's why a lot of musicians get into heavy drugs and all that kind of stuff, because you're
*  looking for that rush again. It's very tough to then go into this, speaking of introvert,
*  because he probably is an introvert, is like, you have to find that calmness. And how do you find the
*  calmness when you were just playing in front of tens of thousands of people or hundreds of thousands,
*  whatever that number is, that rush of connect and everybody, there's love in the air. And you still
*  have to find that like inner peace and calm. That's interesting. Because I, so I don't know
*  if this is the introvert in me talking and the writer in me talking, but I don't know, like I
*  love most the moments where let's say I'll get a letter from a reader who will tell me what something
*  I wrote meant to them. And they'll talk about having had that kind of moment of, you know,
*  the communion between the writer and the reader. And obviously I wasn't there physically when it
*  happened. So I wasn't getting that kind of rush that a musician would get in a concert, but just
*  the knowledge of that having happened out there in the world, do you just something that I added to
*  it? Yeah. It's the most amazing thing. But see, imagine, imagine reading like thousands of those
*  letters and then it's such a strong rush and everything else doesn't, it could be overwhelming,
*  I guess. But like anything else, you have to come down and find a calm place. Like for example,
*  the danger with getting letters like that, you start taking yourself too seriously. You think like
*  you are a special person somehow, but that's, you really want to avoid that feeling too.
*  Yeah. I don't, I don't actually experience it as that much different from when I'm on the other
*  side of it. Like if I'm the reader and some other writer has made me feel that way, to me it's the
*  same thing. Yeah, me too. Yeah. It's a, it's a cool, it's a, it's a, it's a virtual hug.
*  I think it's like, I was just listening to something about the different Russian writers.
*  I was mentioning him to you, this academic, his name is Gary Salmorson and he studies
*  Russian literature. And he was talking about, I don't know if I'll be able to get this right,
*  but basically that the people misunderstand a work like Anna Karenina and that we think of it as
*  telling us that you're supposed to live, you're supposed to have like these grand tempestuous
*  romances that might end in death or despair or whatever it is, but you know, you should be in it
*  for the intensity of the emotion. And he's saying actually that's not, that's exactly not
*  what Tolstoy was saying, that actually it was the opposite, that he was really making,
*  he was really advocating for everyday life. He was saying it seems from everyday, like he
*  was juxtaposing Anna Karenina with all these other couples who were just living happily and quietly
*  day by day. And that was what he believed was the ideal. So as opposed to the grand rush and as
*  opposed to the intensity. I wonder if he, is there a depth to the, is there a romance or just the day
*  to day? I think there is a romance to the day to day. Absolutely. Don't get distracted by the
*  dopamine roller coaster ride of the grand romantic notions. Yeah. And enjoy it while it's happening
*  because those are life experiences also, but not to mistake those for being everything. Where is he
*  from? He's a professor at Northwestern. At Northwestern. And apparently his lectures
*  are like the most popular on campus. Wow. People love him. Gary Saul Morrison is an American literary
*  critic and slob this. He's particularly known for his scholarly work on the great Russian novel
*  lists, Leo Tolstoy and Fyodor Dostoyevsky. Morrison is Lawrence D professor in the arts
*  and humanities at Northwestern University. Yeah. Wow. And there's a lot of incredible work.
*  And then I'm sure looking through the lens of Russian literature and the romance of all of that,
*  he's looking at the modern world. Yeah. I think you should have him on your podcast.
*  And quiet flows the vodka or when Pushkin comes to shove the Karmunjian's guide to Russian
*  literature and culture. This is one of the silly books he has on the list. Okay. Cool.
*  What were you saying? I'm sorry. Oh no, I was just saying, yeah, like I find that when I take photos
*  on my phone, I hardly ever take photos at the moment you're supposed to. Like everybody's
*  gathered for some event. I'll forget to take the photo, but I take a lot of like scenes from
*  everyday life. Cause that's what I actually want to remember in the end. Yeah. Yeah. I'm the same,
*  the same. It's actually concerning because it's bad for productivity. Cause I love everyday life so
*  much. Then why, why do any ambitious big thing? Your productivity is pretty good. I don't know
*  that you have to worry about it. I do. So I want to launch a business. You know, I have, I have a
*  dream outside. This is like a fun side thing that, you know, I want to, there's been a lifelong
*  passion. Anyway, that's a, I like building. I like building stuff and I haven't been doing that as
*  much as I would like. That's because largely cause I like sitting in silence and enjoying the beauty
*  that is just nature and life. And, and uh, when there's people, there's people, I love people,
*  I love everything. And so when you love everything, why go through hell to build a company?
*  Yeah, that's a valid question. I mean, I think you have to have a really good reason for wanting to
*  do it. But then your heart calls you for the certain, sometimes you look out into the mountains
*  and you say, for some reason, I long to go there. Even if it means leaving the tribe and putting
*  yourself in danger and doing stupid shit. That's the human, um, imperative for exploration.
*  Yeah, absolutely. Like when we were talking about, um, you know, this idea of longing being like the
*  source code of humanity. I think that's also the source code of our creativity. It's the same
*  longing for Eden. It's like, uh, you're always reaching for something that you want to get to
*  or that you want to build. It's the best of us. What do you think, uh, you've read about creativity
*  and sadness. You practically speaking, how should we leverage sadness for creativity? Is that
*  sort of in the artist domain, in the writers domain, in the, um, engineering domains and so on.
*  It's definitely in those domains, but it's in all domains. Um, you know, we're all going to face
*  pain in this life at some point and we all have the ability to
*  weather it and withstand it and live with it for a bit and then try to transform it into something
*  that we find beautiful. Um, you know, and it's very easy to,
*  to notice the grandeur of like the, you know, the painting hanging on the gallery wall or the new
*  company that's just been created, but it takes a thousand different forms, right? You know, you
*  could bake a cake or like in the wake of the pandemic, we've had more people applying to
*  medical school and nursing school. And after 9 11, you had people applying for jobs as firefighters
*  and teachers. So there's something in the human spirit that takes pain and turns it into meaning
*  when we're at our best. And when we're not at our best, we deny the pain and then take it out on
*  ourselves and on other people. So there's a kind of fork in the road of what to do with it.
*  But we know, I mean, there's all these studies that I go through in the book. There was one, um,
*  where the researchers had people watch different movies, like happy movies, sad movies,
*  bittersweet movies. Um, and they found when people watched father of the bride, which is like the
*  ultimate bittersweet, you know, you're walking your daughter down the aisle kind of feeling that was,
*  they would give them creativity tasks after watching these different movies. And the people
*  who had been primed for bittersweetness were the most creative and they were like primed to remember
*  finality, you know, like love and finality, basically love and impermanence.
*  There's something about that. That's that gets us to our most beautiful state. I wonder if it is.
*  I mean, there's studies like that. There's a, I don't know if you looked into terror
*  management theory. Yeah, that's really interesting stuff. So they especially intensely have you
*  focused on not just sad, but traumatic like death, prime you with death and see how that changes your
*  mind. Like both, like, I don't, I don't know if there's creativity studies, but they have, um,
*  interesting, I think a little bit tainted by political bias, but maybe not. I mean,
*  psychology is a complicated field, but they, they study like, who are you likely to vote for?
*  Right. If you're primed by existence, like by thinking about death, fear of mortality,
*  fear of mortality. I forget what the conclusions are, but I think they find that people become
*  more tribalistic. Yeah. You know, like there was one study where they found that after they primed
*  people that way that, um, that they would get, then give them the chance to put hot sauce on a meal
*  that their political opponents were going to be eating. And they put way too much hot sauce on
*  after they've been primed to worry about death. I think at the core were simple creatures.
*  So I actually, like in the book, I spent a bunch of time with people who are working on
*  radical life extension, you know, or the quest to live forever. And people ask them a lot questions
*  like, you know, the kinds of questions you were talking about earlier. Well, like how are you
*  going to feed everybody and how is there going to be space for everybody? Um, if everyone really
*  could live forever and, um, and what about conflict when we have an intensified conflict?
*  And their answer to that is they point to terror management theory, you know, and they say,
*  because it's the fear of death, they're basically saying it's the fear of death that are causing
*  our conflicts in the first place. And that if we remove the fear of death, uh, we'd have less
*  conflict to contend with. And that I don't really buy that. It's possible that that's true, but are
*  you also, how does the expression go throwing out the baby with the bathwater? I, are you also going
*  to remove basically any source of meaning and, um, happiness in the human condition?
*  Like it's very possible that death is fundamental to the human condition, the finality.
*  Yeah. And that's the great philosophical question. And I went to a conference of,
*  of people who are working on this and I thought that they were going to be talking about those
*  questions all through the conference, but the MO is much more like, we're so happy that we're
*  here with people who have gotten past all those quibbles. Um, you know, and we just know there's
*  going to be meaning no matter what the basic assumption is, let's try to extend life indefinitely
*  and then we'll figure out if that's a good decision or more like we're sure it's a good decision.
*  We're sure at least that was what I felt. It's either, it's either, we're sure it's a good
*  decision or we're sure that it's good to believe that it's a good decision.
*  Meaning like there's no downside, uh, to, to that, even if we find out it's wrong, but yes,
*  there's a kind of certainty. Obviously you want to extend human life. That's the kind of assumption
*  that always seemed, um, now it could be true, but just like the people who over focus on
*  colonizing other planets, it feels like you neglect the beauty and the, the, the struggle
*  of our life here on earth. I have sort of the same kind of criticism, whether it's thinking about
*  Valhalla or any other afterlife is you can have, if you're not careful, forget to, uh, to make this
*  life a great one, whatever happens afterwards. So yeah, definitely. But from an engineering,
*  from a biology, from a chemistry perspective, it's very interesting to think,
*  uh, how do we extend this thing? Cause it does seem that nature, the way it designed living
*  organisms, it really wants us to die because that's part of the selection mechanism. This part,
*  this seems to be fundamental to evolution. It, uh, gets, because people young, they need protection.
*  Once they're, once they're young brain, they get to explore a lot, get to figure out the world,
*  they come up with their own novel ideas, how to, uh, adapt and how to respond to that world.
*  And then as they get older and older, older, they get like stubborn and stuck in their ways.
*  And so we need them to die. So we make room for new life that's able to adapt to the changing
*  environment. If the old doesn't die, then you're not, you're going to get stale and
*  not be adaptable to the changing environment.
*  But maybe it doesn't have to happen so soon.
*  Yeah, maybe it doesn't. It's like pressing, listen, I'm a big fan of pressing snooze,
*  uh, on the alarm clock. I, I'm in the same way. Um, I do, I'm one of the people that believe it's,
*  or I don't definitely believe, of course, um, I don't know, but I think death is a,
*  I don't know, but I think death is a, is a fundamental part of life. Uh, but yeah,
*  if I'm on my deathbed, I would sure as hell press snooze as many times as possible.
*  Yeah, I know. And it's interesting because I, in some ways I really, I share your instinct. Um,
*  there was one scientist who I spoke to at that conference. He's one of the leading advocates.
*  And he said, you know, that's a story that we've invented for ourselves because we have
*  no choice. And if you really believe that you have no choice, then you're, then it's,
*  it's adaptive to tell that story that death gives meaning to life. But if you really think you don't,
*  if you really think you could triumph over it, would you still be telling that same story?
*  And I've been thinking about that question ever since.
*  Yeah. Yeah. No, they got a good point. They got a good point. No matter what,
*  as an engineering and the scientific pursuits, it's a beautiful one
*  one. In your own personal life, if we can go there. Sure. What's have been some
*  dark places you've gone in your own mind? Grief, loss,
*  sad moments, moments of sadness that have made you a better writer,
*  better creator, a better human being. Well, I mean, I've been through a lot of bereavement
*  just in these last couple of years with COVID, but even before that, I mean, there's,
*  there's all kinds of stuff I, I write about it in the book. And in some ways I feel like I can
*  write about things, those kinds of things better than I can speak them. But I had a really complicated
*  relationship with my mother growing up where we had a kind of garden of Eden during my childhood.
*  Like we were intensely, intensely close. And, and my mother, because of
*  some vulnerabilities that she had reacted with a lot of trouble to my adolescence and to,
*  you know, growing independent from her and starting to have different religious views
*  and different political views and all kinds of things. And,
*  and we had a pretty intense break that I described in the book. And, and it was so intense that even
*  though after that, we still would get together for holidays and talk to each other on the phone and
*  all that, there was a sense in which like it was over at that point, the relationship was over.
*  The garden of Eden was no more. Yeah. Yeah. It was like a feeling of like,
*  yeah, like I know what Eden was like and, and it's not there anymore. And I think it was all the
*  more confusing because like, if you lose someone to actual bereavement, you go through a mourning
*  process and people have thought for thousands of years about how to do that. But with something
*  like this, there's no process because you're not even admitting to yourself, especially when you're
*  like in your teens and twenties, that you're mourning something. So,
*  but it was the case that for decades, for decades, I could not answer even the simplest question
*  about my mother. Like where did she grow up without tears in my eyes or more than tears in my eyes,
*  like embarrassing tears. So I would just try to steer the subject in another place.
*  Um, but I will say, you know, two things happened. One is that I've spent the last six, seven years
*  writing this book about joy and sorrow and loss and love and all of it. And I've really come to
*  terms with all of it. And then the second thing that happened is my mother now has Alzheimer's
*  and in her Alzheimer's, she's still actually the same person. Like she's forgotten most
*  things, but she still has these conversational lanes that you can travel down that are like the
*  way she always was. And the way that she was when I was a kid, which was like so incredibly loving
*  and so connected and so warm and sweet and funny and all of it, all the things I remembered,
*  like it's all come back. And for all these decades, I had been wondering whether that Garden of Eden
*  I remembered had actually happened or whether, you know, that was just like the fantasy of a
*  child. And, you know, maybe it was always difficult and I had not seen it, but I'm seeing her now and
*  I realized that it was all true. Everything I remember, it was all true. It all happened
*  because it's happening again. And you returned to the Garden of Eden for a time. Yeah. And to
*  childhood. It's always a question of whether you can return to that place. Well, I don't know. I
*  don't even know if I'd say I've returned because I'm a different person now and I don't need her.
*  Are you sure? You're different than the 10-year-old? Well, okay. No, I mean, I'm the same person
*  in terms of my need for love and love of love and all of that, but I don't look,
*  I'm not dependent on my mother for it the way I was then. And that makes the experience really
*  different. Yeah, when you're younger, she's a God figure. What is that? That the roots, the parents,
*  such a funny civilization will live. And there's a depth of connection to parents that's
*  probably more powerful than anything else in terms of its formative effect on who you are.
*  I think it's the most powerful. And in fact, when this started happening, I got to college and I took
*  a class in creative writing and I tried to write a story, a fictional story, a fictionalized version
*  of what was happening. And I called it the most passionate love because of what you just said.
*  And the teacher actually said to me, she was like, you know, you should put this story in a drawer
*  and not take it out again for 30 years because you're way too close to it. Yeah. So I've now
*  finally written it 30 years later. Yeah, you're probably still too close to it though.
*  I don't know though. I mean, I do think like, I think everybody goes through experiences in this
*  life where you're experiencing like a fundamental pain of separation and desire for a union. And it
*  takes so many different forms. And this was my primal form of it. But, you know, for someone else,
*  it's a betrayal or a bereavement or an exile from a country of their birth or whatever it is.
*  And then you get to solve that puzzle for the rest of your life.
*  Yeah. I really do believe that, you know, that the original love that we long for, like that one of
*  the great things that you learn as you grow older is that the love exists in some plane that's
*  more general than the particularized form in which you first knew it.
*  Yeah. I mean, that's why despite all the creepy interpretations was why, even though
*  Sigmund Freud is probably wrong in the details, he was the first one to sort of suggest that
*  our experiences, I mean, he said that that was really controversial at the time when young people,
*  they start having sexual thoughts like at like age two or something, whatever the hell he said.
*  So you develop this kind of connection to the opposite sex or whatever it is, to your mother,
*  to your parents. And I think while a lot of that is shown to be probably not true,
*  what is like a deeper truth there is your first early experiences of love or depth of connection
*  are probably somehow strongly formative of your conception of love and your definition
*  of the perfect thing you're reaching for, for the rest of your life.
*  Yeah, I think that's right. And you can really see it when you become a parent too.
*  You know, you can just see like there's-
*  Don't screw it up.
*  You know, I have to say, like, I mean, knock on wood, I actually feel like, like we're doing
*  pretty well. Like my kids are teenagers now. And I really had thought that I wasn't going to repeat
*  the issues that I had been through with my mom. And I can say, I really am not.
*  Yeah, like my mom for various reasons just had a lot of trouble with my independence and I just
*  don't feel that at all. So-
*  Yeah, there might be other things you're totally blind to.
*  I guess that's possible.
*  Isn't that the way of parenting is you solve the problems of the past, but there's always
*  going to be new problems.
*  But there's some other new ones. I guess I'll find out in 120 years, but like so far so good.
*  What wisdom about parenting can you give from your own experience and from your writing?
*  Yeah, well, oh my God, there's a lot to say. So on the bittersweet side of things,
*  the wisdom that I would give is that especially for kids who are growing up in relative comfort
*  with everything going pretty well, they get the idea that real life is when things are going well
*  and when things don't go well, it's like a detour from the main road,
*  as opposed to understanding that it's all the main road. And I tell this story in the book of
*  this time that we went on this family vacation where we rented a house in the countryside
*  and the house was next to this field where we lived two donkeys that our kids fell in love with.
*  They were like really little at the time, two boys, and they're spending all this time feeding
*  carrots to the donkeys and it's all beautiful. And then comes the day where they realized that
*  we're leaving in like two days and they're never going to see these donkeys again.
*  And they start crying themselves to sleep. And the usual things that parents might say at a moment
*  like that of like, you know, maybe we'll come back or another family will feed them,
*  we'll feed these donkeys. None of that made any difference. But when we said to them,
*  you know, goodbye is part of life and this feeling you're having, everybody has it,
*  you've had it before, you're going to have it again, you'll feel better in a couple days,
*  but this is the way it's supposed to be, this is natural. That's when they stopped crying
*  because I think that's when they stopped resisting. Like it's one thing to feel the
*  pain of goodbye and it's another thing to be feeling like this isn't supposed to be happening.
*  It's the resistance part of this isn't supposed to be happening that makes life really difficult.
*  Yeah. As opposed to a more clear-eyed view of what it really is.
*  This is indeed supposed to be happening. There's a show called Yellowstone that I
*  recently started watching. Yeah, no, I've heard of it. We actually started watching it, but only a
*  few minutes and didn't get into it. So there's just a quick, it's not a spoiler of any kind,
*  but there's a father taking out the son for the first time to go hunting and, you know,
*  to shoot their first buck. And the son is getting really sad because he pulls the trigger and he
*  took a life. And the father says that everybody gets killed in this life. That's the way of nature.
*  That's the way each one of us is going to get killed. And it's interesting because I didn't
*  really think of it that way because you think you die, but he really framed it as killed
*  because he's like, there's no such thing as dying of old age. Medically, let's discuss that a bit,
*  but basically there's something, whether it's a truck or a bacteria, something's going to
*  kill you in the end. And that was an interesting way to look at it because we tend to think of
*  humans aren't supposed to be killed. We think of murder as one of the sins, sort of one of the
*  things that you don't do in society. But you know what? We do. That's a more technical discussion,
*  whether we ultimately get killed by something in the end. But to some degree, that's true,
*  at least for most of us, that there's something that gets us, whether it's cancer,
*  those kinds of things. It's interesting. But yeah, it's that reframing of it's not,
*  it's supposed to be, this is the way of the world.
*  Yeah. So it's funny. I mean, you know, at the same time that I just wrote a whole book about
*  the fact that this is the way it is, like, I really do believe this is the way it is. And
*  and with this reality, there's an intense beauty that comes along with it.
*  So we have to accept the reality to get to the beauty. I believe that. And at the same time,
*  there's a part of me that's just like, yeah, but give me the magic wand to make the world different.
*  Yeah. Yeah.
*  I don't know. I don't know how much of this is a female thing too. Like I was watching with my son,
*  my 12 year old the other day, we were watching this show about the battle of thermopoly.
*  And yeah, and it was like all about, you know, valor and glory on the battlefield. And,
*  and I said to him something like, gosh, don't you just wish we lived in a world where
*  you didn't have to do all this in order for everyone just to live their lives?
*  And he just looked at me completely puzzled. Like, no, you know, like to him at all, just
*  seemed self evident that the world would be structured that way. You know, and he had like
*  the 12 year old's like admiration for the valor of it all.
*  But you wonder if that's, if that's nature or nurture. I wonder what that world looks like.
*  We do live in a world where murder is seen as bad, but you look at a lot of the human history.
*  I don't know if they had the same kind of conception of that in terms of you have to ask
*  what kind of murder, you know, for what purpose, you know, war was a way of life.
*  It's interesting. It's interesting if we can imagine properly a future that is
*  different than ours in terms of operating under different moral systems. I'd like the same with
*  living indefinitely or living in a society with no war. Like how fundamental is war?
*  How fundamental is death? I mean, I think it's so fundamental to our source code. I just wish that
*  our source code were different. Basically, like I can't get people working on that wish.
*  There's, there's brain computer interfaces that try to merge. So greater and greater with smartphones
*  were already kind of cyborgs, but greater and greater merger of computational power.
*  So literally adding source code to our original source code, just a different,
*  there's the mushy biology that runs source code and then there's more cold electrical
*  systems and then they integrate together and potentially one day we offload
*  the magic that is human consciousness also into the machine and then we'll get to see,
*  maybe, maybe they'll be a little bit less assholish about the whole war thing. That'd be more,
*  but there is, I think even when I, when I think about engineering human intelligence or superhuman
*  intelligence systems, I feel like they also need to have the yin and yang of life. They have to be
*  able to be afraid and to, to be sad and all those kinds of things, but maybe it's because I'm
*  a product of this particular environment. Maybe sadness is a human, useful human invention,
*  but not a universal one. This is what I don't know. Cause this is where I come back to the,
*  as I told you, like the original reason that I wrote my whole book was the feeling that somehow
*  in the expression of sad music is what other people see when they talk about God. Like there's
*  something so there's like an ultimate beauty there that I don't know if we have access to
*  without that, but maybe we do. But I can say in this world, it's a great way to get
*  access to that state. Is it within the reach of science to deeply understand this? You think
*  to understand that why you feel sad when you listen to a song or why you feel so much love
*  when you're listening to a sad song, to a sad song, right? Why, why the sad, why the sad song
*  opens up some kind of deep connection to something you can call divine or something,
*  whatever the heck that is. Yeah, I do think, I mean, we have like really early signs of it
*  from the research and I'm sure we're just at the scratching the surface stage. But I mean, like we
*  know, for example, that, you know, the vagus nerve, which is so fundamental that it governs our
*  breathing and our digestion, our vagus nerve also activates when we see another being in distress.
*  There's like an instinctive impulse to want to make it stop. And the theory is that that's
*  an evolutionary design because we had to be able to respond to the cries of our infants, you know,
*  and from that ability grows the greater ability to respond to other people's cries too. So
*  that's probably just, you know, like the very first step in being able to understand what all that is.
*  We've already given plenty of advice, but broadly, what advice would you give to young folks
*  today about career, about life, whether they want to be writers, lawyers, scientists,
*  musicians and artists, whatever the heck they want to be, how can they live a life they can be proud
*  of? Okay, here's what I think. You should absolutely do that thing that you're dying to
*  do, but you should always have a plan B, like a backup plan and a way of earning a living,
*  no matter what happens. Because I feel like people, we have this narrative in our culture of like,
*  that the glamorous thing is to figure out the thing you love and then risk everything to achieve
*  that. But first of all, a lot of people aren't comfortable with that level of risk. And second,
*  when you're living with that level of risk, that's a cognitive load too. And so you don't have
*  the full emotion and heart to be able to focus on the thing that you actually really love because
*  you're like stressed out about it. So I'd say like, get the backup plan in place and then do the thing.
*  My advice would be the opposite. I'm moving the romantic. Well, I think the best, the truth is,
*  be aware of the costs not having a plan B has. So do it deliberately if you don't.
*  But I'm with Bukowski on find what you love and let it kill you. I think,
*  now you have to actually know your personality. I know if I have a plan B,
*  I will not try as hard on plan A. I would likely take plan B because if plan A is the risky thing,
*  I just work way much better when in the state of desperation. So with my back against the wall.
*  And you have to know that about yourself. I think that has to do with-
*  So I think we can refine it to say you actually have to really know yourself and how you respond
*  to different kinds of risks. Like I would not do well in that kind of situation. I'd be like up at
*  two in the morning worrying about it. Whereas if I have some, like it doesn't have to be paying the
*  rent in some grand way, but if there's some basic way of paying the rent, then my heart's free to
*  do the thing I really love. That's hilarious. I, for me, the only way I'm free is when I don't know
*  how I'm going to pay the rent. Huh? Yeah. Cause that's, cause otherwise I'll find a way to pay
*  the rent. That's not at all a source of deep fulfillment for me. So I see. So it's like,
*  if you don't have like the, what's the expression? I don't know, something like the dog at your back,
*  you know, deadlines, then you won't actually do it. I create real or artificial deadlines,
*  anxiety and so on. So yeah, you have to, you have to, yeah. So really the advice is know your
*  triggers. But, but, but we're still saying that the same basic thing of like do the thing you
*  really love, but just set up the strategies, the rest of your life, appropriately to your personality.
*  Exactly. What do you think is the meaning of life? The meaning of this whole thing
*  probably has something to do with whatever we feel when we listen to a sad song.
*  Yeah. Cause two things come simultaneously to my mind when you ask that question and I've been
*  asking it since I was four. I remember the first time I did. The question is more important than
*  the answer probably. Just keep asking. I don't know. The first one is beauty and I don't know
*  why beauty is so important, but I just know that it is and possibly defined perhaps. Is it, is it
*  definable? Other than, you know, it, when you see it, I don't know. I mean, just has to do with that
*  line. You feel something when you just see it or you hear it. Yeah. You just see it and it's like,
*  like some it's whatever can deliver you to that mode of transcendence where you're no longer
*  purely in your own self and you're in something higher. And when you're in those states of mind,
*  you know it because you have the temporary sensation that, that you could die at that
*  moment, that the people you love could die and it will all be okay because there's something else.
*  So that's my first answer. And then my second answer is the need to relieve
*  psychic pain. Like other people's psychic pain. I don't know why that's just, that's just like an
*  impulse that I have. Psychic pain is more like, like suffering of any form. What is it? Yeah, but I mean,
*  what is their particular? Yeah, just make making the world
*  the world better and less pain, less pain to go around in general.
*  Hence your sort of optimistic desire and longing for a world without sort of destruction, without
*  malevolent destruction. Yeah. A world where that wouldn't be necessary. Yeah, exactly. Exactly.
*  But yeah, like I, so I had this moment, it wasn't so long ago, I was doing some interview
*  and somebody asked me like, what are you longing for right now? And my answer at that moment was
*  like, you know what, I'm actually at this moment in life where I'm not longing for anything. I'm at
*  this particular way station where everything is the way I want it to be. And of course, the minute
*  you say something like that, you know, you're going to be proven wrong because like an hour later,
*  I get a letter from a reader who I've been in touch with over the years. And he was telling
*  me about like a psychic struggle that he's going through. And I just felt like, oh my gosh, if there
*  were anything I could do to make it that his life wouldn't have been such that he would be in this
*  position in the first place. Like his struggles had to do with a long life history. So I don't
*  know why I feel that. It's funny, but I do those moments when you are just at peace, there's nothing
*  else you want. I feel like that's like a temporary repose, like a pause. Exactly. You bet your ass,
*  a desire follows that at some point, but you get to enjoy those little moments. Yeah. And even when
*  he asked me and I answered that way, I said, this is a way station. Like I knew it was temporary,
*  but I didn't realize it would be disrupted like an hour later. And that sort of to give you pushback
*  to your, to your statement about the possibility of, uh, create beauty and basically alleviating
*  suffering. There's a quote I really like from Hunter S. Thompson that pushes back against that,
*  which is for every moment of triumph, for every instance of beauty, many souls must be trampled.
*  Hmm. But that's a very Hunter S. Thompson. And you know how he ended up,
*  he's not the greatest philosopher of all times, but he's certainly a, a beautiful, chaotic human
*  being. Well, that's true. And I will tell you that my nickname for my husband is Gonzo kind of because
*  of him, you know, he invented that form of Gonzo journalism where like the, the writer is totally
*  in the story and my husband, like that's his personality. He's like in everything that he does.
*  He's really in it. He's really present. He just lives that way. So well, then so his name is Ken,
*  but I call him Gonzo like 90% of the time. Well, then that's a beautiful way to end the season.
*  This is a thank you for your work. Thank you for being who you are. Thank you for initially,
*  at least making me feel okay about being an introvert and educating and making the rest of
*  us feel great about being introverts. It's like half the world or whatever the heck it is. It's
*  a lot of people. Thank you for being you. Thank you for talking today. This is awesome. This is fun.
*  Thank you so much. It was so great to talk to you. And I think it was the,
*  what I said to you when we first got connected is thank you for your way of being in the world. I
*  really, really love it. Thanks for listening to this conversation with Susan Cain to support
*  this podcast. Please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you
*  with some words from Susan Cain herself. The highly sensitive introvert tends to be
*  philosophical or spiritual in their orientation rather than materialistic or hedonistic.
*  They dislike small talk. They often describe themselves as creative or intuitive. They dream
*  vividly and can often recall their dreams the next day. They love music, nature, art,
*  and physical beauty. They feel exceptionally strong emotions, sometimes acute bouts of joy,
*  but also sorrow, melancholy, and fear. Highly sensitive people also process information about
*  their environments, both physical and emotional, unusually deeply. They tend to notice subtleties
*  that others miss, another person's shift in mood or a light bulb burning a touch too brightly.
*  Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
