---
Date Generated: April 09, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 9892s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence', 'artificial intelligence podcast', 'bethesda', 'elder scrolls', 'fallout', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex podcast', 'mit ai', 'skyrim', 'starfield', 'todd howard', 'video games']
Video Views: 2122176
Video Rating: None
---

# Todd Howard: Skyrim, Elder Scrolls 6, Fallout, and Starfield | Lex Fridman Podcast #342
**Lex Fridman:** [November 29, 2022](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H9AAnV59ddE)
*  Blink once if you know when Elder Scrolls 6 is coming out.
*  But are not going to tell me.
*  The following is a conversation with Todd Howard, one of the greatest video game designers of all
*  time. He has led the development of the Fallout series and the Elder Scrolls series, including
*  Arena, Daggerfall, Morrowind, Oblivion, Skyrim, and the future Elder Scrolls 6. And a totally new
*  world in an upcoming game called Starfield. Many of these have won Game of the Year awards and have
*  been some of the most celebrated and impactful games ever made. To me, Skyrim is quite possibly
*  the greatest game ever. This is the Lex Friedman podcast. To support it, please check out our
*  sponsors in the description. And now, dear friends, here's Todd Howard.
*  Is it possible that we are currently living inside a video game that the future you designed,
*  can you give hints as to how one would escape if this was a video game? How can a video game
*  character escape to outside the video game? Are these things you don't consider when you design
*  the game? Actually, we do, because in the kind of games that we make, we want it to be as open as
*  possible. So, you know, when you start a game, you're always testing it. What can I do? What
*  would the game allow me to do? And you check everything. You try to pick up the, you know,
*  the mugs. You try every door. You collide with everything. Like, hey, what are the rules
*  of this world? We try to do games where, you know, we say yes as much as possible. That leads to
*  some level of chaos. But if you were stuck in a video game, you would try everything. And usually
*  you're going to find a door or a space where the designers didn't anticipate you piling all those
*  crates up and getting over a wall that they didn't expect. Right. So it's not a designed doorway out.
*  It's an accidental, unintended doorway out. And it's a happy bug. You could like Truman's show.
*  Just get in the ocean and go to it. Just keep going. Right. Right. Right. But the more realistic
*  the game becomes, the harder it is to find that door. The bigger the world, the bigger the open
*  world. And then as we do it, we learn they're going to find a way. So just don't try to pen them in.
*  Usually we leave like this developer test cell area in the game that we don't anticipate anyone
*  will find. And they ultimately find it. It usually has crates of all the weapons in the game and
*  things like that. The little hints you drop now will just drive people mad, which is something
*  I enjoy deeply. So Skyrim NPCs have at times hilarious dialogue. What does it take to build
*  a good NPC dialogue? The main thing is to make them reactive. A lot of times when you write
*  characters for movies or things like that, you want to make that character interesting for
*  themselves. Right. What's their story. And there's some characters like that, that the player
*  definitely cares about, but the best characters are the ones that react to you. So you'll find
*  a lot of people love our guards and the guards are written almost purely to be reactive. Hey,
*  nice tie. I like your jacket. Do this cool watch. You know, Hey, what'd you do? And so that, Hey,
*  you're the man. As you walk by that makes them interesting or the way they react to something
*  that you do. Lydia in Skyrim, who everybody loves, I'm sworn to carry your burdens. That's a generic
*  line that all of the, you know, house carls have. And it just kind of lands when she says it.
*  Why does it land? What do you, what do you, and did you anticipate it would land?
*  There's a slight snarkiness in that particular read of it. And you're asking her to do something
*  and she's reacting to you. What about the, the trade off between maybe the randomness
*  and the scripted nature of the dialogue? Like, is there any room for randomness of the dialogue
*  tree? Oh, absolutely. We tend to write them in stacks with, you know, it's a, it's a very small,
*  think of it as a small state machine that just says, okay, this is what's happening. Here's a
*  random list of things I could say to that. And then some of that plays out in ways you don't
*  anticipate, but we look at the things, what are the players doing that we could have the characters
*  respond to that they don't expect, you know, jumping on tables or stealing stuff or,
*  you know, sneaking in in the middle of the night or those kinds of things. The more that we can do,
*  the more reactive and interesting the characters appear.
*  And these state machines, how big are these things? Are these individual to the individual
*  characters? That's just fascinating how you design state machines. Is it just a, just a giant?
*  I would think of the AI as one big one. Yeah. Oh, for, for sort of everybody.
*  So there's an AI. There's a manager for all the people. And one of the things that manager,
*  right. Nice. One of the things that makes what we do particularly unique is,
*  and this is a trade-off for what people are seeing, because a lot of it's not on the screen,
*  but we're using cycles to run this, which is we're thinking about everybody in the whole world
*  all the time. The ones that are further away at a much less tick rate, they go into low,
*  but we know if they want to walk across the world and we're running every quest at the same time.
*  Whereas in other open world games, you start an activity, the rest of the world's going to shut
*  down so that they can really make that as impactful. We're, I really prefer that the rest
*  of it's going on. It's more of a simulation that we're building. So when those things collide,
*  that's where it gets the most interesting. And so we're running all of those people and understanding
*  where they want to go and their cycles and what they want to do. And the ones that are closer to
*  you, we just update a lot more. It's one way to think about it.
*  I mean, that's really fascinating. That's something that people had,
*  they were wondering about to what degree it's possible to run the world without you. So there
*  is a feeling to role-playing games that you're the center of the world and the whole world rotates
*  around you as it does in normal life. Like when we walk around, there's a, when you forget yourself,
*  you start to take yourself very seriously. Like you are the center of the world.
*  You forget that there's 8 billion people on earth and you forget that they have lies.
*  That's actually a sobering realization that they all have really interesting life stories and they
*  have their worries. They suffer in different complicated ways. And yet when you play a role
*  playing game, there's a, I mean, both computationally and from a storytelling perspective,
*  you wonder if the world goes on without you. Like if you come back, if you take a break and
*  you come back, is there still a bustling town that now has a history since you have last visited?
*  So to what degree can you create a world that goes on without you or goes on at the same time
*  as you do your thing, whatever the heck you're doing? We don't prioritize the stuff you can't
*  see. So it's more like an amusement park. If you study like the design or level designers did this,
*  how do they build Disney world in these places? So it still exists for you, the player. So it is
*  fairly, you know, when you're going to come in, this is what you're going to see. The shops are
*  in the front. You're going to do this. It's just for us to make it far more believable and get some
*  more emergent behavior that not just make that sort of the verisimilitude of what you're in for
*  that moment. But you buy it all. I always say like, you know, we got to do the little things
*  so that you buy the reality of the virtual world you're in. So we want to do something crazy,
*  you know, when a dragon lands or a death law comes out of the wasteland or those kinds of things that
*  you, it has the impact to you as the viewer, that it would to the people in the world.
*  Okay. But still you're simulating stuff that's close to you. It is a bit of a simulation going on.
*  Oh, absolutely. Yes. And so that creates some interesting dynamics then.
*  And the stuff that we're looking at in the future, you know, our plan is to push that even more,
*  to think about how these things exist in the world first. And we do some of this, but even more so in
*  the future to say, how do these things exist? Take like a faction in the world. What is their role in
*  the world? As opposed to just their role is for the player to join it, go through a bunch of quests
*  and become the head of the faction. You know, think a little bit deeper about the simulation and
*  what would the mages guild be doing in a fantasy world or the fighters guild be doing in a fantasy
*  world versus just sign up, do quests, get gold. And so that when you show up to that mages guild,
*  it's a bustling guild full of stuff going on. It's not just that it's bustling is that they
*  feel rooted in it. They don't feel like a storefront for come here, do quests, get experience.
*  Is that one of the essential components of randomly generated worlds?
*  So when I think back to Daggerfall, it's a gigantic world. When I first played it, I thought like,
*  I mean, you're just struck by the, the, the, the immensity of it, the, the immensity of the
*  possibility. When you're young and you look into your future, it's, it's wide open and you can do
*  anything. And that's what Daggerfall felt like. The openness was gigantic. And Daggerfall is
*  interesting coming off Arena where Arena does the same thing, but Daggerfall in many ways is bigger
*  despite focusing on an area because of how the density of, okay, this is how much physical
*  game space will do for these villages and towns. And it does feel endless, even though you're
*  looking at a map that has constraints. And Daggerfall actually was a touchstone for us
*  going into Starfield for how we do the planets because there is, there's a different kind of
*  gameplay experience when you just wander outside a city in Daggerfall. Then, you know, follow a
*  quest line and go through, go to this place and it's completely handcrafted and everything around
*  every corner we've kind of placed like Skyrim, you know, Starfield's a bit more like Daggerfall.
*  And if you wander outside the city, we're going to be generating things and you kind of get used
*  to that game flow, different than we've done before and fun in a different kind of way.
*  We'll talk about Starfield. So just for people who don't know and how dare you for not knowing,
*  but we're, with Daggerfall, we're talking about the Elder Scrolls series that started
*  sort of talking about the big titles within the series started with Arena in 94, Daggerfall in 96.
*  I didn't look up the years before this. This is depressing or awesome. So all of these games
*  brought hundreds, probably for some of them, thousands of hours of joy for me. So Arena,
*  Daggerfall, Morrowind, Oblivion and Skyrim. So I don't remember Arena being that open world.
*  Well, it's all the provinces. It follows kind of the same pattern. It just doesn't have all the
*  number of villages and places that Daggerfall has. While Daggerfall focuses on the Iliac Bay
*  area, Arena does it all. It just changes the scale in terms of,
*  you know, one block on the map equals this much space.
*  There is something that, I mean, I'm speaking anecdotal experience, but I just remembered feeling
*  wide open Daggerfall.
*  It definitely was, yes.
*  The way Arena didn't. I don't remember. Maybe because Arena, it was so cool to have just the
*  role-playing game aspect. You were focused on the items and the character development.
*  Daggerfall has a lot more depth, particularly in the character system. That's what it introduces
*  all of the skills and those kinds of things. Arena, it's actually, it's a game I love.
*  And it's very, very elegant. If you look at the first one where it's just an XP-based system,
*  do this, get XP, level up. Very classic role-playing game. Daggerfall digs deep into
*  who's your character, how you're going to develop it, what are your skills, there's advantages,
*  there's disadvantages. And the environment going full 3D from Arena, which is actually like a 2.5D
*  Doom-style engine. I agree with you that Daggerfall feels like there's more possibilities
*  when you're playing it.
*  Were you able to look up to the sky in Daggerfall?
*  Yep.
*  My memory is-
*  It's full 3D, yeah.
*  So that's what full 3D means. And then you can go outside the city?
*  You can walk outside the city. You can do that in Arena too, but it looks more fakey, right? It's
*  all going to be a flat plane. Here comes things, and then a dungeon entrance is an 8-bit. Here
*  comes a little flat coming out the camera.
*  So before we go to the end, in the middle, so from Starfield to Fallout and the Elder Scrolls
*  series, let's go to the very beginning. What's the origin story? You know what,
*  let's even go before then. When's the first time you remember the thing that made you fall in love
*  with video games?
*  Well, I think it's partly my age coming up with the arcades and playing Space Invaders at the
*  Pizza Place, and then Pac-Man really- It's interesting about video games and what Pac-Man
*  did for video games where it popularized them in a way that was just insane at the time. Had a song,
*  had a cartoon, had all of the things. Nintendo comes along. So it was always part of- I think
*  if you were a kid growing up then, it was such a newness to playing things like that.
*  I remember being in fifth grade when the TRS-80 was brought into the classroom and there was a
*  Star Trek game. I was enamored with it, and they were going to start teaching some rudimentary
*  programming. Like, okay, would you like to know how this is made? I was hooked. I was like,
*  I need to figure out how to make this stuff. So I was a self-taught programmer, and my whole goal
*  was to write my own video games. By sixth, seventh grade, I had written my own much better Star Trek
*  clone for the Apple II. I really enjoyed programming on the Apple II then, and that I think was the
*  right level of complexity at that age where you could kind of- you were always learning,
*  but you could still understand a lot of the problem set for like, this is what I want to get on the
*  screen. I was also into art, so I did a lot of art, and I did a lot of programming, and I was always
*  making games. That was my hobby from the time I was 10 or 12.
*  LW What was, to you, involved in making games? How did you think of it? Was it from a graphics
*  perspective, like what shows up on screen? Was it how it makes you feel? Was it about the story?
*  Was it the text-based stuff and the dialogue and the prompting? Like, what does it mean to
*  create a video game at that young age? Do you? JG Well, it was a way of experiencing things that
*  I couldn't myself. So, you know, if you're playing Dungeons and Dragons at the time, too, where you
*  really feel, even pen and paper, these are like- they feel somewhat, in quotes, real to you as
*  you're playing them. You're very invested in your character and what you're doing. And then I loved
*  the games, The Wizardry and Ultima, that were able to bring that to a computer so I could, you know,
*  do it on my own time. It was very, very real to me. I'd sit in my bedroom and then go to bed and
*  think about it, and then, oh no, I have to go to school. I want to come home and figure out how to
*  do this problem in the game. And so whatever I was creating was something that I was excited about at
*  the time. I made Raiders of the Lost Ark games. JG Like with graphics and everything?
*  JG Yeah, so it was usually, you know, made a Miami Vice game, made a Gru the Wanderer game,
*  made a Traveler game. But every time I was doing it, I wanted to figure out a new method
*  on the Apple II of pulling it off graphically. Whether that was editing character sets to get
*  graphics in different formats, or how can I enable the secret double high res mode it had, or
*  just things like that where it became kind of this limitless, what can I make this do? And I had some
*  friends who were doing the same thing, and then you get into who can impress each other. And I was
*  middle of the pack, I would say. But again, this was the time where they're bringing computers into
*  the school, and the Apples come into the school, and the teachers are learning it because they have
*  to teach the students. But then I would say it was part of a group of students that were way past that.
*  And it was very much of a self-taught, how do you make this thing dance?
*  I'd like to ask a strange question. So at that time, a lot of people consider you one of,
*  if not the greatest game designer, creator of all time. You were middle of the pack then.
*  Did you have a sense that this would be your life, and you would also be creating the greatest games
*  ever? Not in the slightest. No, I don't think anybody, but I was very much like that was my
*  dream at that age. But you don't think that that's a job. And as I got older, I was really going
*  through college, and even the computer classes then weren't where I wanted them to be, so I was
*  still kind of doing my own stuff. And I ended up getting a business degree and then interviewing
*  for some jobs, like finance jobs. Well, I guess I should do this to make money, and I can keep
*  doing this on the side. And I remember I actually got to the final level of this corporate finance
*  job at Circuit City, and they turned me down. And I was like, fuck them. I'm just going to go make
*  video games. So thank you, Circuit City. Yeah, I remember Circuit City. I think they weren't
*  bankrupt, actually. They were based in Richmond. I was going to school close to there. And so.
*  So what's the origin story of you joining Bethesda Softworks at the time?
*  So I had gotten Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 for Christmas from my girlfriend at the time,
*  who's now my wife. I was in college, and I noticed that it was in Rockville, Maryland.
*  And oh, that's on my way home over Christmas break back to William & Mary, where I went to college.
*  And I was at this point committed, like this is what I want to do. So I'm just going to drive by
*  and knock on the door, which is what I did. So I drove by and knocked on the doors,
*  Martin Luther King Day, 93. And someone came out and met me and said, well, maybe what, and I said,
*  well, I'm in college. I'm talking about when I'm out of school. I'm like, well, okay, well,
*  contact us then. And I will say I would contact them every once in a while. I did work for a small
*  software company right out of school, down in that area of Williamsburg,
*  and still would contact Bethesda. Arena had just come out. So then we're in 94. Arena had just
*  come out, and I loved it. So I was into sports games, like the hockey stuff. They were doing a
*  basketball. They did a basketball game. Yeah, I'm just looking at they did a lot of, they did like
*  six sports games, six. Bethesda released 10 games, six of them sports games, and CAA
*  basketball, hockey league simulator. So it was really like sports gridiron, which is like the
*  first kind of physics-based football game at the time. And there's a famous story with Electronic
*  Arts trying to do Madden and then hiring Bethesda before my time to make Madden because they were
*  struggling. When I started Bethesda, I remember the owner had John Madden's Oakland Raiders playbook
*  in his office. I was like, can I see that? And I love sports, right? So I still play Madden to this
*  day. I love it. So there's an alternate reality where I made sports games. Yeah, absolutely.
*  This blew my mind. I wanted to make like the ultimate college football game. Well, it's always
*  like, you know, it's like music. You probably listen to lots of type of music. Like you don't
*  play every time. But I think of open worlds as fundamentally different. We sure. No, like source
*  of happiness, entertainment, storytelling, world, gaming, then Madden. I mean, it's just because I
*  love both. I love both worlds, but they're two totally different experiences. Just like when
*  you might watch a movie, you might be in the mood for Lord of the Rings one day, and then you want
*  some other, I don't know, competitive show or game show or something like that, or watch football on
*  TV, right? You watch football on TV, but then I want to watch, get really into Game of Thrones.
*  So I think all those things have validity. And actually, one of the first things I worked on
*  when I started at Bethesda was NCAA basketball road to the Final Four, too. So that was kind of an
*  external project was came in like, Hey, you, you know, sports, get this game done. And then went
*  on to, but they were doing everything I loved. It was like, this is where I have to work. They're
*  doing like the Terminator science fiction stuff. I love that. They're doing these open world role
*  playing games. Like I love that. And they're doing sports like this. I have to work here.
*  So I started there and you loved, I loved it. Yeah. So when I came in, it had just come out
*  and they were doing the CD ROM version. So CD ROMs aren't even out yet. Oh, it used to be floppy
*  discs. That's probably one of what was the arena. We would burn them in the basement. We had the disc
*  replicators. Right. So arena was not released on floppy. It was. Yes. I believe it's six floppy
*  discs, six floppy discs. Maybe it was eight. Yeah. But in those days, the number of floppy discs was
*  very, very important to what the money you were making. So, you know, if you want to do a big,
*  huge game, like, well, that's just too many discs. So the CD ROM became this,
*  this jumping off point for the whole industry where, oh, it's unlimited data.
*  By the way, I played arena. So that was, of course, attained
*  legally. As one does. Alternate means? By alternate means. Right. On floppy, on floppy
*  discs. And that was, that was such an incredible, as you probably have seen interacted with a large
*  number of people. It's a whole world. It's a world that you escape to in a way, like your favorite
*  book, like Lord of the Rings. It was just some, it was, it was unlike anything else. It was
*  incredible. It's probably, I mean, of course, as people say, the first game you play is the most,
*  is the one that really sentimentally means the most to you. I think the first role playing game
*  I played and it was just changed everything. Was arena? It was arena. Yeah. I think Daggerfall is
*  what I really kind of really played. Especially because like you said, the character development
*  was really rich, but just like that you can be, feel like you traveled to this whole other world
*  that's less about entertainment, like a shooting game and more about a world. It felt like it's a
*  world, like, like, like you're literally there. You can travel there. You can live there. You
*  actually feel like that person versus like a Pac-Man, like, like an arcade fun, entertaining
*  adventure game. So, so you joined, you made it. What did you work on first there?
*  I worked, well, everyone did a bunch of stuff. So I worked on the basketball game really just to get
*  it out the door and Terminator Future Shock. So we were doing Future Shock and Daggerfall at the same
*  time. They were developing a new engine. So it was one of the first 3D engines, the X engine. There
*  were, there were a bunch of guys from Denmark actually. It was like, there's like a big Danish
*  demo scene in those days in the PC. And so a bunch of the top programmers there. And one look, this
*  is not big. This is not a big company. Maybe there's 20 people in development. And we were doing both
*  Daggerfall and the new Terminator. And so Daggerfall was a bit more, again, behind the Terminator
*  game. So I was one of the main people on the Terminator team. And I don't know if things kind
*  of worked out. I very quickly, I don't know why, like I quickly became the producer and I was making
*  levels and doing all these things. And it was, it was awesome. And I like looking back now, I can
*  understand it better. But at the time, I didn't appreciate it, which is no one quite owned the
*  Terminator license. It was in like this limbo, legally. So there was no one to tell us what to,
*  like, no, you can't do that. So we would, you know, pick apart the movies and how does he mention the
*  gun he wants and the wattage of the laser and all these things. And so Future Shock is a game that I
*  still love today. It does a lot of things that if you go back and look at it, we're frankly still
*  doing. Like it's a large open world post-apocalyptic, you know, landscape height map with
*  instanced objects all over it. And that is still a lot of how we build our worlds.
*  What's an instanced object?
*  It's, you know, some games, every, you know, wall or building is kind of unique in its data. Whereas
*  we would just build, you know, these little husks of buildings and then place them all over the
*  place. So the memory and the way you render it is much more optimal.
*  So that allows you to build a bigger world.
*  It allows you to build a bigger world much faster and not, you know, not every single version of
*  that building is in its own unique architecture that is going to take up memory and processing
*  speed, et cetera, et cetera.
*  So you're there very much feeling the computational constraints of the system when you're creating
*  these open worlds.
*  And you know what? That's the thing then you see some of it now, but in those times, I do feel like
*  every year the technology moved and maybe it's because same thing. We're like that my age at
*  that time where every year somebody was coming up with some new method or some new game system.
*  And it was every year that innovation, innovation, innovation, and then, you know,
*  3D acceleration comes along and then these things come along and then HD comes along.
*  And it is true that as time goes on, there is visually a diminishing return in terms of
*  what you're able to do on the screen.
*  And it, there's a ton of work that goes into it now because just rendering this cup to the perfect
*  shine and material and roughness and how does the global illumination off this wall,
*  it's a ton of work, but you can pretty much do what you want now if you want to put the time in.
*  Whereas then, okay, you can't do everything you want. So pick your battles really carefully
*  and technically you couldn't do what you want, if that makes sense.
*  How much trade off is there now in how much effort you put into
*  the realism of the graphics versus the story? And actually not even how much effort you put in,
*  but is there a trade off in the experience, the feel of the game in terms of realism and story?
*  Usually we will start with, let the player have as much agency and do as many things as they can
*  as possible. And we will sacrifice some graphic fidelity for that, some speed for that.
*  We could make a game that, traditionally our games are, we okay with 30 frames a second as long as
*  it looks really good and the simulation's running and all of those things. So we'll sacrifice some
*  of that fidelity for the player experience in the kind of things that I do. But from a manpower
*  standpoint, the graphics programmers work on graphics, the artists work on art and we have an
*  awesome team of artists and designers and writers and programmers. It's usually where we find as
*  time goes on, the amount of art time that it takes to create a cup compared to what it used to be.
*  That has increased. So we do use, like most people use art outsourcing as well so that we're not,
*  we still relatively compared to our industry and what we're doing have smaller teams.
*  What about the experience of the beauty of the graphics? So like one of the most
*  amazing things about Skyrim, and maybe you could say that about some of the other games,
*  but for me Skyrim is the outdoor, when you step outside, it's the outdoor scenery. So what does
*  it take to create the feeling, especially of that being outdoors of nature and just like
*  lost in the beauty, whatever it is when you go hiking and you feel the awe of it.
*  How do you create that awe? Is that graphics? What is that?
*  It's a lot of graphics. It's a lot of mood. We just talk about it in terms of tone and those are,
*  again, going back to my previous comment, the graphics are very, very important to us because,
*  and we always push them, because when you're doing the kind of things we do where you step
*  into a virtual world, it does have to have that moment of, wow, this feels real. I've never
*  experienced this. And it's okay, I think it's okay to let just like the time settle. Meaning you step
*  out, how does the wind sound? How are the trees moving? How are the clouds moving?
*  I enjoy strolling and watching the sunset. How does it land over the water? It doesn't have to
*  be like, hey, let's go, let's finish a quest, let's go kill things, let's figure out the next
*  step, let's level up. I like the quiet moments a lot. And I think when you play our games,
*  you can tell we spend a lot of time on them. Then you watch the weather roll in.
*  I think that's just part of being that character, being that person in that space.
*  Yeah. I saw that there's a mod that removes all enemies. I've been meaning to do that,
*  to just do a live stream where for hours walk around Skyrim and then answer questions and so on.
*  That just feels that's a completely stress-free environment. It's just you are, just like you
*  said, in this moment in time. It's so incredible. It feels as incredible as going hiking or something
*  like that. But in another totally different place, like Iceland or something like that,
*  this whole other surreal, ethereal place. Yeah, it's incredible how you kind of create that.
*  Graphics is a part of that, but also letting it, the temporal aspect of that, like the wind,
*  the rustling sound and look and all of that. The soundscape is really, really important.
*  In the sky, we spend a lot of time on the sky because it's taking up much more of the screen
*  than a lot of people give credit for. What about the rendering, the openness of it?
*  There's a lot of level of detail, streaming work. Nowadays, it's getting more common.
*  Frankly, the systems are built better for it. Hard drive speed is really prioritized. They're
*  so blazing fast. You take Skyrim and Oblivion and the fallouts of that 360 era. It was a lot of time
*  spent on how do we get all this data streaming in as you move and then levels of detail so you
*  can see all the way, but not crush the processor. You know what? Let's even step back because you
*  mentioned tone. You mentioned tone a lot. What do you mean by tone? It's all of it together. If you
*  look at, I think you can flip through, let's just take fantasy. You can sort of look at a couple
*  images or things and know how does Lord of the Rings different from Game of Thrones that is
*  different than a Thurian like Excalibur or your sci-fi channel series of the month kind of thing.
*  And so finding that what's going to make it kind of unique and usually I lean on something that
*  is grounded in reality for what it is and then have lesser kind of fantastical things, at least
*  at the start and then they kind of build. So even when we do Starfield, it's a science fiction game.
*  There are laser guns and spaceships that fly around, shoot each other and blah, blah, blah,
*  blah, but it's grounded in. You can look at it and say, okay, this is kind of an extension of
*  things as we view them today in space. And we sort of take the same approach with Fallout where
*  admittedly things can get even a little bit crazier the longer you're developing Fallout content.
*  So just to linger on this, the tone starts at or the defining the tone starts at creating a
*  realistic experience. Like you feel like I could walk into this and this feels like life.
*  What's their technology level? Like even for a fantasy world, like is magic, how prevalent is it?
*  Or are they making weapons and things and armor? Is it for utility? Is it for decoration? How do
*  they live their lives? Does this feel like a place that you believe that has some grounding in our
*  reality, whether that's historical or near future or that it's grounded in some semblance of the
*  reality that you and I understand so that it can feel, it's also making it feel a little bit
*  welcoming. Like, okay, I understand this. I understand that. I understand that. I understand
*  that. I understand that. Is that art or science? So like what, how do you know when it feels
*  welcoming and everything fits in his ground? I don't know. I mean, it's, I guess it's personal
*  taste. Some people like things that are weirder that have more fantastical from the get-go.
*  Even a game like Morrowind where we get into some more fantastical things, it intentionally starts
*  a little more grounded. You know, it's a very classic medieval looking town that you come into,
*  but you look just beyond it and there are mushroom trees and giant insects and things like that.
*  So in Skyrim, when you put a dragon in it, what are your thoughts about dragons and tone?
*  How does that fit into a tone? That's a great question.
*  It's a ridiculous question, but yeah, I just love dragons. I want to bring it up.
*  No, no, no. These are the things that we debate with.
*  Do we include a dragon? Why didn't you include a dragon in Daggerfall? That's what I want to know.
*  I think there's dragon, there's dragonlings. They're hard to do. Dragons are hard to do.
*  So when you start Skyrim, say, hey, look, you know, dragons are going to be a theme.
*  Start visually. You know, you can make the argument that dragons existed. Okay. What would
*  they look like? How close to dinosaurs would they be? And ours are less, I believe they're less
*  fantastical looking in general. They look like beasts that could exist in that world.
*  And then how we introduce them, it's kind of a little bit of a slow
*  role in Skyrim and that the people in the world are reacting to the dragons appearing.
*  You want something that mirrors the player experience as well. It says back to you like,
*  hey, no, these are, this is, have you heard this? Someone saw a dragon.
*  That's what Daggerfall is there. Isn't there mentions of dragons or something?
*  Cause I remember, I remember being sure that there's dragons in Daggerfall as I'm playing it.
*  I'm pretty sure. Well, is there a dragon Daggerfall?
*  There's dragons in Daggerfall.
*  Look, I guess someone would probably correct me. Like actually there is a dragon here,
*  but I'm pretty sure they're sort of, they're not. And then game I did Redguard, which we bring back
*  a dragon takes place beforehand. So we have a dragon there in that game. And that was unique
*  to that at the time. Yeah. Just a brief tangent on that. I thought Redguard was a dragon.
*  Again, you don't, you know, you forget stuff, but I remember getting, I guess it was the first in
*  the Elder Scrolls series to put it in into that world, but it was like an adventure game.
*  It reminded me of another game I really love, like Prince of Persia.
*  That was the one of the inspirations. Prince of Persia is a game that I played in the early
*  20s, early 30s, early 40s. And I remember playing it, I remember playing it, I remember playing it,
*  I remember playing it, I remember playing it, I remember playing it, I remember playing it, I
*  remember playing it like I'm in a real game game, and it made me feel proud of myself and
*  it made me feel happy. But it reminded me to tell you how many years ago we were watching
*  that game. It's real, like I remember the stayed in重 motivators of the 50's,
*  and we were seeing it question by question. But I wanted it,
*  I wanted it, I wanted it to be good, to see that time it was coming.풀
*  But it just happened, it just happened to be an Titanic episode, and I think
*  A game that I love and really got us going on a handcrafted world.
*  So we're coming off of Daggerfall.
*  Morrowind is sort of in design.
*  And then part of our development teams broke up to do different things.
*  The game that did Battlespire and Redguard was my game.
*  And I wanted to do something a little more Ultima feeling, handcrafted world.
*  I really like things that blend up genres.
*  So I know it's in the adventure game category, but it really does a lot of things.
*  It's a love letter to Prince of Persia.
*  There's a little Raiders of the Lost Ark in it.
*  There's a lot of Ultima in it.
*  And really see what we could do with the engine.
*  But it's very much, I think, plays like it would have had a much better home on say PlayStation
*  or Xbox.
*  This predates Xbox, right?
*  Where it's much more like constantly Tomb Raider had come out.
*  You see those influences of Tomb Raider on that game.
*  And 3D effects cards had just come out.
*  So okay, we can do...
*  And it was the last, I think it's one of the last like DOS games in a Windows world.
*  So I think it missed kind of a technology window as well as ultimately not what people
*  wanted from us.
*  And I felt I was really kind of the company let me make that game and it was a big flop.
*  Battlespire hadn't done well.
*  The company was in a really bad shape and I felt really like personally responsible.
*  Like they let me do this creative thing.
*  It didn't do what we needed it to do.
*  And now we're in a very, very bad situation.
*  The company almost went out of business.
*  And that's when it got reformed with ZeniMax Media and Robert Altman came in and we were
*  starting Morrowind.
*  We had just sort of started and it was sort of that whole experience that made you sort
*  of realize someone says, you're okay, you're going to get another shot.
*  And that's where like, okay, we're going to make Morrowind and make the biggest best RPG
*  we can make.
*  We know what the audience wants from us.
*  We know what we could do building a world.
*  So there's like callbacks to how we built the world in Redguard.
*  Morrowind is a large scale handcrafted, but if you were to put it, you know, pixel per
*  pixel with Daggerfall, you wouldn't even see Morrowind because Daggerfall is so big.
*  But the impact of playing it, I think, is in many ways equal but different.
*  Just you personally, psychologically, did you have doubt about yourself from the performance
*  of Redguard?
*  Like do I even, do I know what it is?
*  Of course.
*  Where do you get the, how do you overcome that?
*  I don't know.
*  I would say this honestly, I enjoy it so much.
*  You know, like I'm so, I'm so heads down, like that becomes, for better or worse, like
*  my life.
*  Yeah.
*  And it's just something that I want to play so much, it becomes like there's a little
*  bit, you get a little obsessed with it.
*  No, but I mean, you love Redguard, right?
*  So like, doesn't that mean, isn't there a kind of self-doubt about, do I know what it
*  takes to create a great game?
*  Well, no, I think Redguard's a great game.
*  Right, so you were sure, even if it wasn't...
*  Okay, so if you're going to debate like, do I like that game?
*  It's about finding an, okay, so I love Redguard.
*  And the people who play it, it won a bunch of awards and it, you know, it like, critically
*  was a pretty good game, did not sell.
*  And the reason for that, again, like we probably made the wrong type of game and we missed
*  the technology window.
*  We also thought it was very conservative.
*  We're going to do this.
*  So my main takeaway was, I'm not going to be conservative again.
*  I'm going to swing for the fences.
*  And we've had, you know, there'll be some rough edges in swinging for the fences and
*  shooting for the moon, but we'd rather do that and land where we land than be very,
*  very conservative in what we're putting out there.
*  You've mentioned just referencing this game on Reddit AMA that long time ago doing Redguard,
*  the lead programmer made me, made all the buildings up and down after you played for
*  10 minutes just to mess with me.
*  Just a curious tangent.
*  What's involved with programming in open world game?
*  So we talked about, we will talk about design and so on, but specifically the programming,
*  because I think this question came from, what are some interesting sticky bugs that
*  you've encountered throughout your life in creating these games?
*  And this is one of them that you mentioned.
*  So what are some of the challenges of programming these open world games?
*  I mean, there are different flavors of them, right?
*  Your GTAs will have different issues than, you know, the Ubisoft games versus R games.
*  Things sort of speak to ours, which is you want to build systems, right?
*  Because they're going to play the game for a very long time as well, which we've learned.
*  And you can't go through and touch everything by hand per se.
*  So you have to rely on some systemic level of creation and a lot of systems that are
*  robust enough so that when they touch another one, things aren't breaking apart.
*  So there's like a, what are the major systems?
*  Is there like the physics of the game, the engine of how like stuff?
*  Yeah, like, yeah, the physics, the motion and maybe how light is rendered and all that kind of stuff.
*  Right. So you have the rendering, right?
*  Of like, okay, this is how I'm going to render the data that I have.
*  So a lot of people confuse engines with rendering.
*  I mean, they're combined, obviously, but there's the data you're going to give to a renderer,
*  which is the thing, you know, that draws the pixels on the screen.
*  So there's a, most of the engine is how are you going to bring in that data and give it to the renderer to draw it?
*  So you have that whole system of walking through the world, feeding in the data and drawing it.
*  You then obviously have the physics and the interactivity.
*  What are the things that are there just to be drawn?
*  And what are the things there that are meant to be interacted with and touched?
*  We put a big premium on the ones that can be interacted with and touched, whether it's flowers,
*  whether the trees move, whether you can sleep on the sofa, sit in this chair, pick up all this stuff, bake bread, blah, blah, blah.
*  You then have the AI, which loops in the stuff we talked about earlier in terms of processing everybody and.
*  Combat systems, which is a lot of what people end up doing, combat systems on top of that AI.
*  How do they react to those types of things?
*  And then how do they look at the things that can be interacted with?
*  One of my favorite things is when NPCs will go pick up weapons in the world, which you don't see in other games.
*  And the first time you see it in one of ours, like very unexpected.
*  You can drop like a crazy weapon, be in a fight and an NPC runs over, picks it up and uses it on you.
*  It's not something you would expect.
*  But I love that stuff.
*  And that's integrated into a larger system, the ability to pick up the NPC, picking up.
*  So it's not like a little quirk that's hard coded in.
*  It's part of a bigger system.
*  They have their own AI for scanning the environment.
*  And that's one of the rules. Hey, is there a weapon that is better than the one I have?
*  I'm going to go get it.
*  Now, we do lock off if it's in a chest and that's treasure we left for the player.
*  But it's in particular because what you don't want, we actually had this problem started in Oblivion, I believe,
*  which is we set up a level.
*  Hey, let the enemies go pick up the weapons if they're better.
*  So we make a level and go in and all of the enemies are armed to the teeth and there's no treasure for the player
*  because the enemies went and took all the good weapons.
*  And he's OK. They don't take those.
*  They take the ones that are dropped by other NPCs or the player.
*  That's such a fascinating world of designing the experience for the NPC.
*  Because in part, that experience is defines the experience of the player.
*  So how they interact with their environment defines how the player experiences their environment.
*  Is there a room for further and further development of the AI that controls the NPC?
*  Sure. We're always iterating on it.
*  And again, as we look in the future, it's more about us finding those more reactivity to the player
*  and also understanding their roles in the world.
*  So they're not just there.
*  They're not just there for the player as a signpost for the player.
*  But they're reacting to the player.
*  But what about some of the richest experiences we have with people is like the chaos of it,
*  the push and pull, the unpredictability.
*  Is there something, I don't know if you've been following,
*  but the quick, amazing development of language models,
*  the neural network, natural language processing systems, dialogue systems.
*  Do you think there is some possibility of using these incredible neural nets
*  that can have open ended dialogue, basically chat bots?
*  Yep. I've seen some incredible demos.
*  I do think it's coming. I don't know when.
*  Yeah.
*  And there's a little bit of a question like what's ready for real deployment and release
*  versus, hey, let's use that to generate some things that is then static that we're giving to the players
*  versus it's generated on the fly.
*  But it's definitely coming. It's definitely coming.
*  And I think you'll see it in the types of games that we do.
*  It has great application.
*  I love the idea that you'll be using that to design different NPCs
*  and then testing if they're good enough.
*  If they're like, oh, too crazy.
*  You don't want the super...
*  Right. But if we go back to it being reactive, some of that bot stuff, it's pretty, it's incredible.
*  It's then translating that into voice.
*  And then is that being done by the client?
*  Is it being done on a server?
*  Is it baked into the game?
*  There's like different flavors of it.
*  So there's still computational challenges like how do you actually make that happen?
*  Right.
*  Well, what about in terms of creating the feeling of an NPC?
*  What's the role of voice actors?
*  Awesome. Yeah.
*  We work with a ton of voice actors and they bring so much to it.
*  And that's the thing.
*  They, you know, we can write some stuff and the best ones get in there and make it so much better.
*  Or even ad lib things.
*  And so we do a lot of voice recording.
*  And we used to do it kind of like at the end of the project.
*  And now we do it throughout.
*  We start really early and we just start recording.
*  So we're recording for years and years, literally.
*  Probably three years, four years.
*  So part of the actual experience of the recording will help define the characters and the tone of the game.
*  And we'll go back sometimes and, hey, we really like this.
*  We want more of this.
*  Let's write. Let's do another session.
*  Or, hey, we don't think this character is actually working.
*  We want you to do a different.
*  You're going to be someone else now.
*  Sorry, that got cut.
*  Do you ever try to sort of imagine that people fall in love with the characters, with the NPCs?
*  I do.
*  Like, do they get really attached to the...
*  Oh, yeah.
*  I mean, I've done it in games.
*  These are like close friends, right?
*  Like you can...
*  Like you miss them.
*  100%.
*  I actually like whenever I'm playing a game and there is, you know,
*  if there's like a friendship option or make friends or a romance thing,
*  I find those moments really...
*  I enjoy them.
*  I find them pretty impactful emotionally to what we're doing.
*  And so we've done a little bit of it.
*  It's one of the things that we actually have pushed in Starfield.
*  So we have a number of companions, but for them, we go, you know,
*  I won't say super complex romantic, but more complex relationships than we've had
*  in terms of not just some state of they like you or they don't like you,
*  but they can be in love with you and dislike something you did and be pissed at you temporarily
*  and then come back to loving you.
*  So that relationship status of it's complicated,
*  that they're existing in that gray area is complicated when not dating or just...
*  Well, it's in a lot of games.
*  You know, previous stuff, you just work your way up.
*  They like you more and more and more and more.
*  And now you're in a relationship.
*  Now you're in.
*  And when you make them upset, you drift out of like it never happened.
*  You know, you drift out of it.
*  Whereas we wanted one where, OK, we can be in a relationship and
*  we've committed to each other in some way.
*  But I just did something that really made you angry.
*  And as opposed to just drifting out of that status, you're in a temporary,
*  I don't like what you did state.
*  Well, so some greater degree of complexity in the relationship with a companion.
*  A little bit.
*  A little bit.
*  A little bit.
*  We're talking about...
*  I don't want to oversell that part, but my point is I think those things where you
*  meet a character in a game and you do spend time with them, a companion in a game,
*  and it leads to romance, you know, myself and others, and I find a lot of players,
*  those moments are really, really impactful and special to them because they did put in the time.
*  That's another thing that I always come at it with, which is people don't play video games.
*  They sometimes think like, oh, that's a waste of time, or that's not real.
*  That's not like you're not getting a lot out of that.
*  Like, well, you haven't really experienced it in the way that you can because these
*  moments that I spent in games, not the ones I made, other ones when I was growing up or even now,
*  those are that is important time to me.
*  Like, I love those moments.
*  I felt really like proud of what I accomplished.
*  And we want people to have that in our games.
*  And the fact that they have had those experiences and we hear from them and how important it is to
*  them, it's like, no, this is really, really special.
*  Yeah.
*  It's fun.
*  I mean, from a game design perspective, I wonder if you can honor the time you spent
*  together with the game because sometimes there's a heartbreak at the end of the game.
*  When you leave a game, it's a really complicated relationship, actually.
*  Because when you leave a game, it's almost like leaving a romantic partner because
*  it's like you spent so much meaningful time together.
*  And there's a sense in which it was ephemeral.
*  Like, this is not...
*  Didn't happen.
*  Yeah, it didn't really happen.
*  It was good.
*  It was like you went to Vegas, you got dropped and stuff for like, and now life goes on.
*  I wonder if there's a way to sort of always carry that with you.
*  I mean, I guess with words, you can kind of share with others.
*  It's weird.
*  Like, now that we're in the age where you have achievements and you can look at your
*  library and see your hours and games, it's almost like a scrapbook now.
*  Like, I wish...
*  One of my wishes was like, I wish I had that achievement list for everything,
*  like back to the late 70s.
*  Like every game you play.
*  Right.
*  Yeah.
*  I mean, that's one of the cool things with Xbox.
*  Like, we're moving towards that direction.
*  It'd be cool to be from like childhood.
*  The first time you play a video game, it will actually tell you what is the first game you play.
*  You know what?
*  Kids today, they will have that.
*  They will have that.
*  And see...
*  You could look back and see, oh my God, I put a thousand hours in Daggerfall.
*  What is the first game you played?
*  And my last save was...
*  1997.
*  Last save.
*  Man, I don't know, Golden Axe maybe?
*  I'm trying to think what was the first game I've ever played.
*  Uh, no, it's probably Commodore 64 games.
*  Yeah.
*  Yeah, arcade games.
*  Okay.
*  You mentioned Starfield.
*  What is Starfield?
*  And what's the origin story of this game?
*  We had always wanted to do something where you explore space.
*  You know, the explore space role-playing game.
*  So take the kind of games that we make and give it a little bit of a different spin.
*  And you know, the other games that I love, there was a pen and paper RPG I loved,
*  Traveler was one of the first games I made for the Apple II.
*  Didn't...
*  I never finished it, right?
*  I'm just doing it on my own.
*  And I love this game.
*  Star Flight was one.
*  Star Control 2 was a game that I loved.
*  Sun Dog was a big one in the Apple II days.
*  And a lot of people don't know that I loved.
*  And so a lot of us in the studio felt
*  it was time to do something new.
*  You know, we're going between Elder Scrolls and Fallout and going back and forth.
*  And I mean, we love that.
*  But hey, we've always wanted to do this explore the galaxy science fiction game.
*  You know, now is the time to do that.
*  And that's a brave move.
*  So Fallout is post-apocalyptic on a single planet.
*  You know, Elder Scrolls series is
*  on a single planet.
*  So this is going out into the open world of many star systems, many planets.
*  I saw that it's thinking about a hundred star systems and a thousand planets available to explore.
*  What is that world of stars and planets like?
*  Well, you mentioned Daggerfall.
*  We go back to some of that.
*  Well, the first one we did it was how are we going to render a planet?
*  Like pull it off for the player?
*  Like, can we?
*  Or do we have to sort of do it where you can't land on all of them?
*  Or you're landing in a very controlled, small world space that we, you know, kind of craft
*  and you would have a very limited set of those.
*  If you go back to tone, like, well, that's probably the wrong tone.
*  And how can we say yes?
*  Like, I want to land on that ice ball.
*  So it started, we started the game right after Fallout 4, so 2016.
*  And the first thing we did was can, you know, how can we have a system to generate these planets
*  and make them look, you know, I'll say reasonable as opposed to, you know, fractally goop.
*  What's the technical definition of goop?
*  Fractally goop?
*  You've probably seen a lot of like simulations, whether they're space things or landscape things
*  where using fractals and just the landscape does not look real.
*  It just is like highs and lows and it's muddy.
*  And so we did find a way, we came up with a way, had prototyped of building tiles,
*  like large tiles of landscape, the way we would usually build them.
*  We kind of generate them offline, hand do some things and end up with these very realistic
*  looking tiles of landscape and then built a system that really, really, really, really
*  built a system that wraps those around a planet and blends them all together.
*  And we had pretty successful results with that.
*  And so we thought, yeah, we could do this.
*  And so there was a big design kind of problem to solve in terms of, well, what's fun
*  about landing on a planet where there's potentially nothing?
*  Because there's a lot of planets and moons if you kind of write in reality that,
*  well, there's nothing on them except resources.
*  And so we spent a lot of time figuring out, okay, let's just lean in on that can A,
*  be a lonely experience as long as we tell the player, here's what's there.
*  Here are the resources that are there.
*  Go find them.
*  But I equate it to that moment, have we said about listening to the wind go and watching
*  the sunset?
*  And I do think there's a certain beauty to landing on a strange planet being somewhat
*  the only person there building an outpost.
*  And we are modeling all of the systems because that's how we like to do things.
*  So you can watch whatever that gas giant or moon, it will rotate and go and sunrise,
*  sunset and all of those things that you would expect.
*  And it's all really happening.
*  And most people probably won't notice or appreciate all of that.
*  But I think it gives them the ability to say, I want to go do that and see that on that
*  place as long as we tell them, hey, the quest leads over here.
*  Here's where the handcrafted content is that you would expect.
*  And then here's more of the open procedural planet experience.
*  So you're-
*  Long answer.
*  I don't know if I answered your question.
*  There's no questions are stupid and the answers are brilliant.
*  So that's how this works.
*  So this is the world's most immense simulator of the human condition of loneliness.
*  Because I can't imagine a more lonely experience.
*  I mean, you put it that way.
*  I don't know that was the goal.
*  But just on a planet alone, that must be a deep embodiment of what loneliness is like.
*  I mean, both on like when you hike alone, there's a deep loneliness to that.
*  It's like it's humbling that this thing will last much longer than you.
*  It's been here way before you.
*  Is it the line from the moon landing?
*  Beautiful desolation.
*  It's Buzz Aldrin, isn't it?
*  Beautiful desolation, is that what you said?
*  I think so.
*  Beautiful desolation.
*  Well-
*  Something like that.
*  But that's just words.
*  There's a feeling to it and you want that feeling to be real.
*  You just hear there's some resources here.
*  I just feel like it will hit people at a certain moment.
*  Like it does for me with Skyrim.
*  Like, holy shit, I'm here alone.
*  And then and whatever cruel nature that's out there doesn't really care about me.
*  Exactly.
*  That's the experience.
*  So you want to create the whole planet and you want to have many of them.
*  We have, we do have many, but once you build that system, I think the numbers become,
*  I mean, honestly, a little bit, we wrap it in so we can name them all and have a finite set,
*  even though it's a very, very large number, but a set that we can, you know, validate and know about
*  even though it's a huge number.
*  But once you're building a system that can build a planet, I mean, a planet is sort of infinite space.
*  We go back to the Daggerfall analogy, right?
*  If you have systems to build that much space, doing a hundred planets or a thousand or 10,000
*  or a million planets is not, it's just, you just press, you just change the number and press the
*  button, but you can't name them all.
*  You can't control like when you're getting in really big numbers.
*  Hey, what is the system way out here feel like if you take your ship and jump that far?
*  We do level the systems.
*  When you go to system, you'll see, oh, this is like a level 40 system.
*  And us being able to at least control that scale is how we kind of ended up with the
*  hundred ish systems we have.
*  What are the levelings?
*  What do you mean by level?
*  It'll be like when you look at a map in a game and says, this is the area for low level players.
*  This is level one.
*  Oh, got it.
*  Yeah.
*  Yeah.
*  So we do that on a system basis.
*  Star system.
*  I read that space travel is considered dangerous in this game.
*  Can you explain?
*  That's more of that goes back to a tone thing, right?
*  When you actually play the game, because it's a game where we don't really kill you
*  when you fly out in space, but it has a tone of there's some effort involved.
*  And we've dialed it back as we've been making the game, whereas we used to run out of fuel.
*  You jump and get stranded, which on paper was a great, like, it's a great moment when
*  you get stranded and you have to press this beacon.
*  You don't know who's going to come.
*  Um, it turns out that's not like it just stops your game.
*  We found you'd be playing the game and I ran out of fuel.
*  Okay.
*  I guess I'll just wander these planets, trying to mine for fuel so I can get back to what
*  I was doing.
*  It just, you know, it's a fun killer.
*  That's too realistic of a simulation of the human condition.
*  Yeah.
*  I know the idea was, well, it's for, you know, games do that.
*  If you had like a hardcore, you're right.
*  A hardcore survival mode.
*  That's the kind of thing you would do.
*  Maybe we'll do it in the future.
*  Um, but it's more of like a tone, how they build their ships.
*  Do they have all the right things for safety?
*  We do get into environmental things on the planets, you know, in your spacesuit, obviously
*  a lot of different spacesuits and buffs for, you know, the gases, the toxicity or the temperature
*  on, on various planets.
*  Are there robots?
*  Yes.
*  Those companions, are they robots by chance?
*  Can you, can you say?
*  One of the companions, the robot Vosco.
*  Yeah.
*  Okay.
*  So they have, they have a, they have a name and a personality and so on.
*  And Vosco does.
*  And then there's a whole bunch of, I call them generic robots.
*  They're you like, we use them for utility, you know?
*  Okay.
*  People, we actually dialed them back.
*  Cause if you think about, well, you know a lot about this more than, uh, me in terms of-
*  I'm offended right now.
*  You calling robots generic and you don't know the ones we use.
*  The ones we, we use, we made them more generic.
*  We didn't, we didn't.
*  We didn't say actually.
*  I'm very sensitive about this.
*  I understand.
*  If you were to chart the future, you would say robots would have a much bigger role in our future
*  than we are presenting.
*  Um, but that was the tone thing.
*  So we, most of our robots are there as utility robots and there are some combat ones as well
*  as enemies.
*  So it's the deeply human world.
*  Very much.
*  Yes.
*  In terms of tone.
*  Uh, so have you talked to Elon about this, about this game?
*  A little bit.
*  How much of reality, like the work of SpaceX is an inspiration for the decisions made in this game?
*  I wouldn't say it's for the decisions we made, but you know, visiting SpaceX and walking in there,
*  it was, it's like the Avengers meets NASA.
*  It's like the most amazing.
*  And here we're building the next gen, like see the, the dragon stuff before it was, uh,
*  other people saw it.
*  Like just, I was really in awe, you know, just giant machine that looks for imperfections on
*  the surface of these giant, you know, fuselage, just, you know, whenever, and because we're,
*  you know, we're in DC, go to the air and space museum a lot.
*  And so whenever I look at those kinds of things or, you know, you'll visit the space
*  shuttle, sort of overcome with how big it is.
*  And I go stand back by the engines and think about that thing, leaving orbit, you know,
*  and one of the things that Elon really impresses, like we're reaching the edge of physics on a lot
*  of the stuff where how hard it is to leave orbit, the gravitational pull.
*  And like, so the engineering that has gone into that, our space program, what he did,
*  gone into that our space program, what he's doing now.
*  I just marvel at, I don't understand, right?
*  I'm not at that level, but I marvel at the kind of human ingenuity and scale.
*  I was on the Delaware coast last month and I went, I was outside, I was outside for some
*  reason, it was dark and I saw this crazy light in the sky and I thought it was like a helicopter
*  and then it didn't go away.
*  I'm like, is someone, what is that?
*  I call my, we had some friends, hey, does everybody see this?
*  What is that?
*  And we just stood dumbfounded looking at this thing in the sky.
*  And like that is a UFO, nobody takes their phone out.
*  Everyone, I'm with like four people, everyone is too dumbstruck.
*  You would think, why don't you take a picture of this thing?
*  And the next day we found out it was in the news.
*  It was the SpaceX launch in Florida.
*  And I'm seeing it from Delaware, Maryland area.
*  It was one of the most, it was incredible.
*  It's just even just that I am in complete awe of.
*  Is there some aspect of that that you can replicate the majestic nature of that in the video game?
*  I wish I had the answer to that.
*  I think some of it we were doing when you're standing on a planet
*  and you see the other moons go by and then you realize
*  I could get my ship blast off and land there and build myself a home.
*  I think that's pretty cool.
*  There's a minor thing we do, which is we have other ships come and go
*  from the starports when you're there.
*  So you'll be in a city and then you hear this, you hear the engine,
*  you look up and a ship is taking off or coming.
*  That's great.
*  There's nothing for you to do, but I think it's awesome.
*  Yeah.
*  So then that's all about creating the soundscape to feel.
*  Seeing it and like, oh, that's real.
*  That's a ship that or you jump into a system and you see these freighters
*  and sometimes they contact you like.
*  It's not all just like jump in and combat.
*  Do you ever think about the fact that science fiction seems to make
*  a, it has a way of creating reality, not just kind of predicting it or imagining it.
*  It's almost like the thing you put out there with a video game like this,
*  like starfield that you can't anticipate.
*  It, it kind of fuels people's imagination of what is possible.
*  Maybe.
*  I don't know.
*  I don't know.
*  I can't, I can't say.
*  You're making me think now about other science fiction that movie.
*  I love minority report.
*  It's more of like a, not a space movie, but more like looking at the future.
*  If you look at a lot of the things in that movie, it's almost like,
*  I think those are coming true.
*  Yeah.
*  I mean, uh, is that the one that you do interface?
*  Does like, uh, it's the interfaces and then the, you know, the way he looks as child's
*  more like a holographic, almost AR VR kind of thing or digital billboards
*  or trying to predict human behavior.
*  Um, there's a, there's just a lot of future stuff in that movie as it comes to sci-fi
*  to your other question.
*  I don't know.
*  I, I, I don't know.
*  Well, I think it does.
*  And it's interesting.
*  I mean, I suppose you're trying to create the most realistic, sticking to the tone,
*  the most immersive, realistic world and almost by accident, you create the thing that is
*  possible because you want it to be realistic in some deep sense.
*  So accidentally it can become the possible.
*  And then that places that idea in people's heads.
*  I mean, if humans are ever to become a multi-planetary species,
*  we need, we need to play games.
*  We need to read sci-fi to help imagine that that's possible
*  to look outside of earth, to look outside, look up on the stars.
*  Then we can actually travel out there.
*  I don't know.
*  There's power to sci-fi to do that.
*  I guess you shouldn't feel the pressure of that.
*  I don't know if I'd make the leap now.
*  That's all that what we're doing might now maybe, you know,
*  one of our, you know, hopefully it might inspire some young people who are headed
*  in that direction.
*  I like, oh, I thought about getting into space and space exploration and being an engineer,
*  doing these things.
*  And I played this game and, you know, it really sparked that interest in me.
*  So I'm going to go take that as a field and maybe that's the person
*  who goes and does some of these things.
*  Yeah, because in the next couple of decades, a likely a human being will step foot on Mars,
*  which are the first steps towards us becoming multi-planetary.
*  And then if you read some of the stuff they're doing with the James Webb telescope
*  and them being able to look for signs of life on other planets, it's quite fascinating.
*  And, you know, recent stuff I read say they think in 20 years they will.
*  So it's actually quite encouraging to think.
*  I suppose the dream of mine, like in our lifetimes that we discover life on another planet.
*  Yeah, especially if it's intelligent life.
*  I've been talking to a lot of biologists and a lot of folks.
*  I imagine there's life everywhere out there.
*  The numbers would say so, yes.
*  The challenging question is what it looks like and how much of it is intelligent.
*  So a lot of biologists tell me the big difficult leap is from the
*  prokaryotes to the eukaryotes.
*  So like the complex life, it could be that a lot of our universe is just filled with bacteria.
*  I believe if I'm understanding it right, that there's two ways they're going to look at planets.
*  They can read, hey, this planet has this kind of gas.
*  They can now look at the ones that are created by potential life forms and then the ones that
*  are created the byproducts of industry.
*  There's only certain ones that are created if you have a society there.
*  And that they can start looking in these types of star systems and these planets.
*  But it takes a lot of time because you have to book time on that telescope.
*  You have to look at that planet over a long period of time.
*  But in theory, given enough time, given the amount of space out there, we would find one.
*  That would be a cool thing in this short life of ours to find out definitively that there is an
*  industrial intelligent civilization out there before you contact them.
*  So like die, end your life, not knowing the rest of the story, but just know that it's out there.
*  That's a cool.
*  And then if you have kids be like, well, this one's on you.
*  F this, I'm out.
*  And I'm fascinated by what it would do to the way, I think in a positive way, the way
*  humanity thinks about itself here.
*  Like, no, there is a definitively other life out there.
*  I mean, both things, if there isn't life out there, that's also a huge responsibility.
*  Both are super exciting.
*  If we're alone, it's super exciting because there's a responsibility to preserve whatever
*  special thing we have going on here.
*  This, whether you call it the flame of consciousness or whether it's consciousness
*  or intelligence, that's the special thing.
*  Preserve it, have it expand.
*  But if there's others out there, I mean, that like that sparks that drive for exploration
*  of reaching out into the stars and meeting them.
*  Most of them probably want to kill us.
*  But luckily we have the military industrial complex on earth that builds
*  bigger and better weapons all the time.
*  Space force.
*  Space force.
*  It will both protect us and destroy all our enemies.
*  This is 100% a video game we're living in.
*  Okay, back to dragons.
*  So blink once if you know when Elder Scrolls 6 is coming out, but are not going to tell me.
*  I have a vague idea.
*  Okay, vague idea.
*  So like if you have the quantum mechanical interpretation that allows for multiple
*  universes in the universe where you didn't blink, what would that, Todd,
*  tell me about the year it's coming out?
*  Would it be 2025?
*  That's a trick question.
*  Or 26.
*  I've been asked that question many ways, but never like that.
*  Yeah, I thought I would try to sneak it up.
*  I mean, there is of course no answer because-
*  I wish it was soon.
*  It's too soon.
*  Like we don't, we want them out too.
*  And I wish they didn't take as long as they did, but they do.
*  And look, I mean, if I could go back in time, it would never have been my plan to wait
*  as long as it's taken for it.
*  So you love that world, the Elder Scrolls world?
*  Look, it's part of why I've spent more time there than anything else in my life probably.
*  It's deeply love it.
*  We all do.
*  It's a part of us.
*  And when you aren't doing it for a while, you really do miss it.
*  And when I look at what we're doing, have planned for that game,
*  and that was in a meeting yesterday, it's like, I just want to play all this right now.
*  But we're going to make sure we do it right for everybody.
*  And we do have to approach it.
*  People are playing games for a long time.
*  Skyrim is 11 years old, still probably our most played game.
*  And so we don't see it slowing down.
*  And people will probably be playing it 10 years from now also.
*  So you have to think about, okay, people are going to play the next Elder Scrolls game for
*  decade, two decades.
*  And that does change the way you think about how you architect it from the get-go.
*  What are some elements that changed the way, like, how do you make a game that's playable
*  for 20 years?
*  Well, we're trying to figure that out.
*  But there are some elements I should pause on that.
*  Part of me, of course, asking jokingly, I'm excited for it.
*  But I think Skyrim is an amazing game still.
*  I really enjoy it still.
*  Yeah.
*  And you know what?
*  The content, even if you step away from it for a while, then play what I'll put, say,
*  the vanilla version without mods.
*  If you go and haven't played in a while, there's always a new way to play it.
*  But then if you look at the mods and what creators are doing to it,
*  we think that is just awesome.
*  It's something that we've always supported.
*  We're going to keep supporting.
*  We've hired a large number of modders that are now professionals.
*  We want to support the people who are doing on their own so they can be professionals on their own.
*  How do you create a world that's moddable?
*  You think of designing the game from the start as that enables mods.
*  Yeah, absolutely.
*  So it starts with us.
*  Everything we're doing, a modder, a content creator is going to have to use our tools.
*  Now, we do clean them up for release.
*  Because if you're a developer in-house, you can deal with some kludginess
*  when you're putting stuff together.
*  When you put it out for people, we do clean a lot of it up.
*  And there's still, obviously, a learning curve there.
*  Look, we have people who have been doing it for 20 years with us.
*  What's involved with modding?
*  I'm actually quite newbish at this.
*  And I'm almost afraid to ask because now that you explained to me,
*  I fear I will spend a very large amount of time creating mods.
*  Well, we have an editor you can download on Steam, the creation kit for our games.
*  And then it loads up the world and you could do something really, really small,
*  like change the color of the weather.
*  And it creates a little plug-in file, we call it, a modification to the game.
*  And then you can run your game with that.
*  It's on console now, the mods, not the editing.
*  And it's just been incredible.
*  Our community there has been amazing what they do with the games.
*  So a lot of it is the visuals.
*  A lot of people do visual things because it's the easiest thing to do first,
*  or they'll build a new space.
*  There's some great things with like, I love the Khajiit follower mod for Skyrim.
*  It's awesome.
*  There have been quest lines.
*  Those things just take a really, really long time.
*  And so someone is going to do that, that's almost like, it takes them a long time.
*  It's more than a hobby.
*  And we're always looking at ways that we can make it like,
*  hey, they can turn a career into it because it's just awesome.
*  What about, is there any possibility in doing a mod for the,
*  some of the AI stuff?
*  There is, and I've seen some, but to really move it along,
*  if they're using the tools that we already put out there,
*  so to really move the AI along, you'd have to get in the code,
*  which some people have figured out ways to hack in and do things with script extenders.
*  But for the most part, like really pushing it, it does take us,
*  which is why you see when we have a new game come along,
*  the palette that they have is there's so many more things they can do.
*  Well, I've built bots that play the driving games,
*  but they do that by just taking, reading the screen and doing basic,
*  not basic, it's actually pretty complicated, but computer vision, doing the control.
*  But you basically assimilate in the human player to do that for Skyrim or for one,
*  some of the open world games.
*  That's literally, you have to create AGI to be able to, to play those open.
*  Well, maybe not, maybe you can create a super dumb,
*  like just a two handed sword and just keep swinging until everybody's dead.
*  Look, there's some bot stuff out there that does it.
*  We have some very, very dumb bots that we use to run through the world to test it,
*  that we'll deploy on a whole bunch of servers just to, you know, we do it every day.
*  We run through every space.
*  We're doing Starfield.
*  And then just running, they're all out there.
*  Well, it does it very quickly.
*  It loads up every place, every place in the game and runs around a little bit,
*  and then loads the next place and runs around.
*  We're just testing like, did it crash?
*  What's the memory growth?
*  What's the, get a report, here are all the places where the frame rate wasn't up to snuff.
*  And then we do have one that will play on its own.
*  It's heavily scripted, but it lets us test.
*  You know, every time we make a build, there's a bot that runs through like the first one or two main quests.
*  Like it'll just play it.
*  That way we know, do we break anything?
*  Because you don't want to waste like QA's time, like you guys broke it again within five minutes.
*  So.
*  Yeah.
*  Yeah.
*  So that's for, that's for like a broken stuff.
*  Right.
*  I wonder if you can build a bot that estimates the quality of the experience.
*  Oh my gosh.
*  Okay.
*  Can you do that?
*  No, no, no.
*  But just like the number, like how boring or not boring, the boring meter.
*  How many times you die?
*  How many times you die?
*  Death, is death boring or exciting?
*  That's the question.
*  I mean, I don't, I don't feel like there's a balance to be struck there because you always want to be in the middle of the game.
*  Struck there.
*  Cause you always want to be in fear of death.
*  Again, we always, we have this chart at work we use, which is like, if you think about any game that you've played that you've put down, it's either about a frustration slash confusion or boredom.
*  You gotta put the player right in the middle of that.
*  But I've sometimes put down games from frustration only to return again, stronger.
*  Dark souls.
*  Yeah.
*  Yeah.
*  So I mean, that, that's, I mean, the challenge, that's part of it.
*  It's well, I don't know.
*  Actually Skyrim, I don't, I'm one of those, I mean, I'm sure there's all kinds of humans that you've interacted with about what they enjoy.
*  But to me, I could enjoy Skyrim on every, on any difficulty level.
*  It doesn't all of it.
*  So it depends.
*  The open world nature of it is what's really compelling.
*  Not necessarily the challenge of the particular quest and so on.
*  But I'm not sure if that's the same experience for everybody.
*  Do you play the survival mode?
*  There's a survival mode in Skyrim.
*  It was a creation club thing.
*  It does like some hunger.
*  It does hot and cold.
*  It does some other systems that make it, you know, in our minds, a more believable.
*  It was actually a creation club thing made by an external creator who is now full time with us.
*  So can we actually thinking about Starfield, thinking about Elder Scrolls 6, go through the full life of a video game you've created?
*  So what's it take to take a game from the idea to find the final product?
*  What are the different steps along the way?
*  Great question.
*  Well, usually it starts with, I mean, honestly, lunchtime conversations with a number of people.
*  With a number of us.
*  Hey, we think we want to do this.
*  This is what it's going to be like.
*  I mean, look, with an Elder Scrolls, you know you're going to do it.
*  It's a matter of when.
*  So, okay, what's the tone we're going for?
*  Right.
*  Where's it set?
*  So we usually start with the world.
*  And then we're always overlapping.
*  So while we're making one game, as we're, you know, getting in the throws of it or wrapping it, you know,
*  probably by the midpoint of one game, we've had enough conversations to understand what the next
*  one's going to be.
*  What are the big ticket?
*  Like, where's it set?
*  What's the tone?
*  Is there a big ticket feature or two that make it really unique?
*  And then when we're finishing one game, we start prototyping.
*  Sorry, before that, we start concepting.
*  So we'll do concept art.
*  And for one reason or another, I usually have the beginning of the game worked out.
*  Like, I like to think about, okay, how's the game start?
*  What's the player do first?
*  We do music early, you know, so take Elder Scrolls 6.
*  We forgot where it's set.
*  What's the tone?
*  What are the big features?
*  We discussed the beginning of the game, which we've had for a very long time.
*  Where's it set again?
*  I'm just kidding.
*  Yep.
*  In Tamriel.
*  And.
*  All right, damn it.
*  Well, at least we know we never did down that.
*  That would be epic if it was like a portal into another dimension.
*  Anyway, then I like to do music.
*  So we've already done a take on the music for Elder Scrolls 6.
*  So you can sit there with like the concept art and the music.
*  You can feel it.
*  No, no, the music, we put in the teaser for it.
*  This was 2018.
*  We've taken that further, obviously.
*  And again, we're working on the world.
*  You're then doing concepting and design for the world.
*  And then once we were wrapping up one game, we can really start prototyping the new one.
*  And you're usually building kind of your initial spaces.
*  And so we do like to do like a first playable, a smaller section of the game that we can sort
*  of prove out and show to people, hey, this is how it feels different.
*  This is what it looks like.
*  This is what's unique about it.
*  Then we turn that into a larger chunk when more of the team comes on.
*  When the other game is done.
*  And that's still what we call a VS vertical slice.
*  So you still don't have the full team on it.
*  And it's a larger chunk of the game that you can play.
*  And then once you feel good about that, you're going to bring on the rest of the team.
*  And we're fortunate that the other games we've done are popular enough that we can be doing
*  DLC and content and those kinds of things while we're getting the one going.
*  And then we're at full production where we're sort of at maximum production.
*  We're sort of at maximum size.
*  We just call that production.
*  That's like the full production period.
*  And that depending on the game, you know, can run a year or two years, maybe more.
*  And then you kind of have a finalizing final six months to a year on a game, which is,
*  okay, we've built everything now.
*  And usually it needs a lot of glue where we have a lot of very different elements that maybe aren't
*  clicking together the way you want outside of the regular polish for levels and features.
*  And we're shaving and gluing and sticking things together so that it's not the
*  schizophrenic game experience that things flow from one into another.
*  In terms of story, like on that level.
*  It's really, no, usually the story, the designers have done a really good job.
*  It's more about game features.
*  Or, Hey, I went from this experience to this experience or picking flowers and alchemy
*  feels like a different game than, and then how is another character referencing that?
*  And how is that intersecting with the skill system and the interface?
*  Like the skill system and the interface is the party host.
*  If you think about it, it's like, you know, it's like, you know,
*  the skill system and the interface is the party host.
*  If you think about a game, most games, particularly what I like to do is that's your person that says,
*  welcome, do this, go here, check this out.
*  And the skill system and the way it reacts on the HUD, the interface of the game is sort of
*  leading you to the next thing.
*  And once you get that flow down and the, the,
*  the rate at which the game is giving you activities, then you're in like what we,
*  we describe as a game flow.
*  What does, and it's not till really that last year before that, the game flow was just,
*  it's not, it doesn't even exist in the way that you see it in the final game.
*  And that's what we were working on a lot that last year.
*  So at which point does like the set of skills, the skill tree,
*  the characteristics of the role playing aspect of it, when is that set?
*  The ideas.
*  We usually have it in the beginning, but it's just, we know it won't be done
*  until that last year.
*  We'll have one, but we know it's going to get honed because it's not until you really see,
*  okay, how impactful is that one?
*  How much are you doing it?
*  Like how much are you really, and the main combat ones, they always win.
*  You always know the players will drift toward the combat type skills because every character
*  needs some amount of that.
*  But okay, well, how important is cooking?
*  How important is alchemy?
*  How important is these other type of activities?
*  And then how do you balance them where when you load up the skill menu,
*  it isn't automatically give me plus 10 damage.
*  How do you get the, what about the combat system?
*  That does seem to be an important part of a lot of games.
*  You start in the beginning.
*  Yeah. Every time.
*  Yep.
*  So usually we're making that first playable.
*  It's an area you can go through some amount of dialogue, some amount of combat.
*  How do you get the combat right?
*  What's the secret to a great combat system?
*  Well, first on a control side, helping the player when they don't realize it.
*  There's a lot of tricks you can do with magnetism in terms of the controller and where the attacks
*  go. So it has to feel the minute to minute has to feel really good in your hand.
*  So there's a lot of animation time, right?
*  And changing animation.
*  So they're impactful and they happen at a rate that the player feels like they're really doing it.
*  And then ultimately it's the illusion that the enemies are smart,
*  but they really are there for you to kill them.
*  Right? So they do a lot of things to just let themselves get killed.
*  They're not near as smart, near as smart as we can make them.
*  Because it turns out that is not fun.
*  Right. So there's a balance between, but there's a, that is, I guess, a kind of AI.
*  And it's a very intimate interaction with an AI because it's like, there's a lot of stuff going on.
*  It's not just very kind of shallow, like a dialogue or something like that.
*  It's like, there's a time critical nature of it.
*  A lot of stuff is happening.
*  And if anything feels off, it's going to feel wrong.
*  Yep. All the games do it.
*  It's not unique to what we do in terms of how they handle combat scenarios.
*  And there's some games that just do it extremely well in terms of,
*  even in multiplayer where you're playing bots and most people don't know it.
*  Or how a multiple enemy scenario is really, they don't all shoot you.
*  They trade off.
*  They're going to wait.
*  And I was like, all right, I'll just wait my turn because we don't want to overwhelm them.
*  But he feels like you feel like you're overwhelmed when there's six enemies, but,
*  you know, a good game will, no, they're going to, they're going to take their time.
*  Is there a science to it?
*  Is it, is it art?
*  Is it like, like, how do you?
*  Yes. I mean, it's, it's, it's all of that.
*  So it's a, it's a process where you try different things.
*  You have different ideas.
*  There's a lot of, there's a lot of animation.
*  There's a lot of timing, animation work.
*  HUD work also.
*  How does the reticule change?
*  What are the little sound effects?
*  What about like the, the gamify like that is fun.
*  Again, that goes back to the winning, you know, the winning is fun.
*  Yes.
*  Death is not.
*  Yes. Let the Wookie win.
*  I like how you have to dumb down the AI to make it fun for humans.
*  Because if, if you didn't, it would just be just slaughter nonstop.
*  For all humans.
*  That's good to know.
*  What about things like, you said cooking, like crafting,
*  making potions and poisons and smithing weapons and armor cooking.
*  How do you get that right?
*  What's, what's interesting there?
*  It's such an interesting, like, you know, a lot of games don't have that kind of thing.
*  So what role does that play in, you know,
*  I think we really cracked it in a way I like with Fallout 4 actually,
*  where when we're doing Elder Scrolls, we have like the flowers and things and you have alchemy.
*  And we took this to, okay, if it's post-apocalyptic,
*  what if everything in the world was an alchemical ingredient in some kind of,
*  breaking it down to their components.
*  So when you walk around a world like that, again, we like the simulation.
*  We like, we like the forks and the spoons and the cups and all that.
*  Okay. How can I use those to create?
*  So I love how it works, starts working in Fallout 4 where, okay, all these things I find,
*  there is, they have some value in creating or crafting outside of
*  a cup is worth one gold piece or one cap.
*  By the way, I have to be honest, I haven't played Fallout 4, I played Fallout 3.
*  I thought that was a legendary game.
*  I've been, can you make a case for Fallout 4 that I should,
*  or should I just wait till Fallout 5 and when does that come back?
*  I think you should play Fallout 4.
*  Love to hear your thoughts.
*  All right.
*  It's a different game.
*  Skyrim is too, I mean, it's...
*  We try to make them all different.
*  They all have...
*  They are fundamentally different.
*  They all have their own tone.
*  Yeah, so Fallout 3 and Fallout 4 are intentionally a very different tone.
*  Oh, really? Interesting.
*  Yeah.
*  So what's that world like?
*  What's the post-apocalyptic world of Fallout?
*  If you can just briefly take a stroll into that world tone-wise.
*  Well, there's, look, in entertainment, there's a lot of post-apocalyptic stuff.
*  And what makes Fallout tick is the world that was left behind,
*  the world that blew itself up, this utopian world of nuclear energy and it all goes wrong.
*  So I love the American dream of that,
*  like how they visioned the future in the 50s and that blowing itself up.
*  I think that's like a super interesting place to explore,
*  which is why we always wanted to play in that world.
*  And it does an amazing job of sort of weaving
*  the drama and darkness of a post-apocalyptic world with B-movie humor.
*  It winks at the camera sometimes, often actually, and
*  that when you're in that world, it just has its own unique flow and vibe outside of anything else
*  kind of in that genre.
*  So Elder Scrolls has, or at least Skyrim has some humor.
*  It has a little bit.
*  But Fallout leans into it a little more.
*  A little bit more, a little bit more.
*  Yeah, yeah, it does.
*  It's like ironic humor.
*  It's the duck and cover.
*  It's a get under your desk if the bomb comes and everything will be fine.
*  It's that type of humor.
*  So the funny thing is I do think Fallout 3 is one of the greatest games ever.
*  You've said that, quote, when we started Fallout 3 in 2004, we obviously had big ideas of what we
*  could do with it.
*  And I talked to a lot of people from ex-developers to press folks, to fans.
*  What made it special?
*  What are the key things you'd want out in a new one?
*  The opinions, and I'll put this mildly, varied a lot.
*  But they would all end the same like a stern father pausing for effect, but do not screw it up.
*  How do you not screw up a game?
*  You have not screwed up many games yet.
*  I mean, back to the Fallout one.
*  Yeah.
*  Yeah, that was, look, I remember that we were met with a lot of skepticism in terms of, oh,
*  what are they going to do with this?
*  It was a beloved game.
*  Oh, what are they going to do with this?
*  It was a beloved kind of isometric turn-based role-playing game.
*  Awesome for when it came out.
*  And actually, it was announced.
*  We had finished Morrowind, but not announced Oblivion.
*  But because we'd acquired the rights, we had to announce it.
*  Because I think Interplay was a public company.
*  I don't remember.
*  I just remember we had to announce it.
*  And we're thinking there, well, we're going to piss off all the Elder Scrolls fans because
*  we're announcing a Fallout game.
*  We're probably going to piss off the hardcore Fallout fans because
*  we didn't make the original and clearly we'll probably make a different kind of game.
*  So I do remember there was a lot of concern with all of our fans
*  and fans of Fallout at the time.
*  And so I think it was pretty rewarding for us that that game found the audience and success
*  that it did.
*  It's one of my favorite projects that I've ever worked on.
*  And because it was so fresh for us and we had a very clear like,
*  even before we had the rights, like this is the game we're going to make.
*  Like this is the kind of thing we're going to do.
*  And we had done Morrowind then we were working on Oblivion.
*  And it was kind of a breath of fresh air to do it.
*  And what's kind of remarkable is Fallout 3 comes out just,
*  two and a half years after Oblivion.
*  And we did all this DLC for Oblivion.
*  So we were really, really kind of prolific in how our development, how it was going.
*  So I just remember enjoying making that game so much because it was everything we were doing was new.
*  Which, which as to the world creation,
*  was there some innovation like technically that was happening?
*  The world creation, like it was, you know, obviously a different look.
*  Even though some of us, very few of us had worked on the Terminator things.
*  The VAT system, the skill system, and we loved the original game so much.
*  So you felt this responsibility to bring it back in a big way and reintroduce it
*  in a way that, you know, as much as we could scratch the same itch
*  when you, when you played the original game that had the same tone.
*  Are there some favorite things to you about that world?
*  That just kind of connect you to the human?
*  Fallout 3, I love, again, I usually start with the beginning.
*  I love the beginning.
*  I love the character generation.
*  If you go, if you played it a lot or you're developing it, it starts to feel really long.
*  But the first time you play it or second, I just think it's awesome.
*  And this idea, it's a hard thing to say, okay, we want, we want you to feel
*  like your character on the screen.
*  Even when you play like a Skyrim, you don't know what you were doing before that.
*  But Fallout 3, you, you were born in the vault and you raised in the vault and you lived in the
*  vault, but you experienced a part of that.
*  So it's a very different, when you step out, I think it really,
*  I mean, the visuals are the visuals, but the emotional moment of stepping out of the vault,
*  you feel like you lived your whole life in the vault.
*  And you feel like you have a sense of your past.
*  Right.
*  And I need to find my father.
*  We should, isn't it possible to have that sense with like Elder Scrolls,
*  like a life story, like, like childhood trauma and stuff?
*  Back to the human.
*  I mean, you'd have to like, look, you do some of that stuff, but they go through menus,
*  you know, pick your background.
*  We're doing that in Starfield.
*  Hey, pick your background.
*  What were you doing before this moment?
*  Can you pick your traumas and stuff?
*  That's a mod.
*  If you want to make a mod, you want to make a mod.
*  Yeah, thank you.
*  Go for that.
*  And then also make a mod for like a therapist.
*  But a lot of it, you know, is in your head.
*  So you're going to do that.
*  You're going to pick this background and do these things.
*  And you're sort of like, this is who I was.
*  And we intentionally with Elder Scrolls kind of make it as much of a blank slate.
*  You know, Elder Scrolls is a little bit more of a blank slate game to who you are,
*  which has a lot of positives.
*  And Fallout for us has been more of a, this is, this was your life before.
*  Here's who you were.
*  Go be who you want to be.
*  But this is the background.
*  It's a little more strict.
*  Now, this might reveal something about me.
*  And speaking of childhood trauma, but I feel like there's a lot of,
*  a lot of the meaningful experience of a role-playing game is not just the
*  development of the character throughout the game, but the initial character creation.
*  Like you said, is there something to that process
*  that you found to be powerful?
*  Like the design of that process, because you think so much about that beginning.
*  How much should be controlled?
*  How much should be defined?
*  The interface itself, the visual appearance of the character too.
*  Because I feel like that you're loading in, you start to load in the world
*  that you're about to enter by creating that character, right?
*  Yeah, we think about it a lot.
*  It's a really, really good comment and question.
*  And it's more than, it has to set the whole stage.
*  It has to like peak your interest for the world you're going to enter.
*  And we've done it so many different ways in terms of when you actually go to make
*  your character, when you're making the choice.
*  And one of the things over time that we've wanted to avoid is people starting over.
*  So there's a lot of intentionality around the types of choices you have that can be
*  undone or not undone.
*  Because what you, what game players want to is I'll play it and then I'll make a new
*  character.
*  But sometimes they do that because they realize they made the wrong type of character.
*  And as a designer, you don't want that to happen.
*  So some people, and we get this comment, Elder Scrolls, like, oh, you simplified it.
*  No, no, no, no.
*  We moved those choices into the gameplay so that you don't make this character in
*  the beginning and then eight hours later realize you make a horrible mistake.
*  And so, okay, I'm going to start out like that to me is a really, really bad
*  experience because I'm going to make a terrible mistake.
*  So also like life itself, but yes, go ahead.
*  But like life is okay.
*  So you can then fix it in game.
*  Right.
*  I wish I had learned archery.
*  Well, I'm going to start tomorrow.
*  So you can do that.
*  Like the Skyrim character system, you know, is really designed around that.
*  All you pick is like, what's your race?
*  And that gives you some things, but there's nothing you can't get then on your own.
*  Mostly it sounds weird, but you mostly want that beginning character generation to be visual,
*  which you then can also change in the game and some starting skills that get you off to the type of
*  play that you want.
*  But if you discover you don't like that type of play as you play, you can move your character
*  along.
*  So we have moved away post, you know, oblivion to a classless, meaning you don't have a strict
*  character class, warrior, mage, thief, whatever, um, in our games.
*  And that's, that's continuing for the, are you like thinking of Elder Scrolls six?
*  You're already thinking about that kind of stuff.
*  So you think of early on the, the, the, like you said, the first few experiences in the game,
*  you're already thinking through them.
*  Yep.
*  Yeah.
*  We know what the first few hours are like.
*  We, we know what the character system is basically like.
*  And so tonally, what's the difference to you between oblivion, Skyrim, Morrowind,
*  oblivion, Skyrim, and, uh, Elder Scrolls six.
*  Like I could, to me, I've made stuff blends together, uh, but oblivion, that's when you
*  could make spells and stuff.
*  You could, you could do it in Morrowind as well.
*  Oblivion has some more guard rails on it.
*  Morrowind is where you can really go and Daggerfall.
*  I don't remember if you can make spells in arena.
*  I think you can.
*  Someone will correct me.
*  You definitely can in Daggerfall.
*  It gets crazy.
*  Morrowind, um, you can somewhat.
*  And then we start, we start putting guard rails on it because people started
*  breaking the game in certain ways.
*  Yeah.
*  Why is it about to break the game?
*  Like you always want it to be.
*  Well, there's like one people love in Morrowind where you can make these recall stones
*  and, uh, you could teleport to different areas, which you really need in that game.
*  It breaks so many quests.
*  And so as we, any, any quests, we were then, we would do this, this exercise of designing
*  a quest and then someone would say, and then I recall away.
*  I'm like, okay, the quest is broken.
*  And then one day someone says, can we just get rid of that spell effect?
*  Everyone's like, yes, please.
*  That's what allowed us to make better content.
*  So, uh, the tangent upon a tangent upon a tangent.
*  How do you create a compelling quest?
*  Cause there's all kinds of personalities of humans that play these games.
*  Right.
*  Cause I like the grind.
*  Well, there's, look, there's, there's multiple flavors of a compelling quest.
*  You know, some of them have very good upfront storytelling.
*  You just like the story and the NPC that's giving you this task.
*  And, uh, you'll go through a more handcrafted experience that the designers have done a
*  really, really good job on the space.
*  It has some, some twister surprise in the middle.
*  And then the ending has some, you know, multiple options that the player feels like they had,
*  they got to do something.
*  They made an interesting choice, but the best ones for me are actually were.
*  All of that was far more open-ended.
*  The how I am going to accomplish this task is completely up to me and I'm going to find
*  some ingenious solution.
*  A silly, this sounds very basic.
*  It's going to sound quite cliche and silly.
*  It's like, go find me five Daedric hearts or whatever.
*  Like find me X of something that's hard to get.
*  That's a very simple set.
*  You can give a simple story set up for that.
*  And we're not telling the player where to get those.
*  And they think, now, where could I get those?
*  And I actually find those to be just as rewarding as the really handcrafted, well done,
*  little bit more linear with an interesting choice at the end.
*  If those objects are in the world in some, you know, believable way that there's usually
*  some challenge at getting, getting them.
*  How do you place objects in a world in an interesting way?
*  Because it's a big part.
*  We have a level design.
*  You cannot, people, if they only knew how much we spend on, we have a clutter group,
*  a group of people who clutter.
*  Like we, like clutter is all the stuff around.
*  That's like interior decorators for treasure and stuff and trash.
*  And they go through every space and they clutter it.
*  Our level designers think about it a lot.
*  These also become landmarks for the player when you're walking through a space and,
*  oh, this is the place with this.
*  And there is a logic to making a good level.
*  As they say with, even if you walk by like a little T intersection, that becomes like
*  a decision point in the player's head.
*  Like, oh, I didn't go down that way.
*  But the more you do that, it looks easy on paper.
*  But when you're playing a game, you actually kind of want to limit those
*  because he's trying to keep track of all these decision points.
*  Then they get lost.
*  And yes, we have maps, but anytime the player is going to check a map in a place like that,
*  I feel that it's more of like a backstop for certain players.
*  If they need to check the map, I feel like we've kind of failed.
*  Got it.
*  So there's a momentum to it.
*  Just pulls them in.
*  And you know, look, you played a lot of games, you played a lot of levels where you're just
*  like, I'm a little confused or I don't know.
*  And you play other levels where like, man, I just, I, yeah, it was great.
*  I went through it.
*  It was well balanced.
*  I knew where I was going.
*  And it's not, you don't want to ever be mazy.
*  As long as you know where you're going, as long as you know you made those choices,
*  then it feels fine.
*  But as far as the treasure and all of the loot, it is really an art.
*  We will not do enough clutter and then we will over clutter.
*  And then there's too much stuff everywhere.
*  And then we declutter every single game.
*  I wish we got better at it.
*  It would save us a lot of time.
*  But you're constantly going by feel like this is not as too much.
*  It's not enough.
*  Right, right.
*  Because the other thing is, look, it creates, people want to pick everything up.
*  They want to click everything.
*  So if you have too many things of importance in a room, it's like,
*  it actually makes you feel a little tight as a player.
*  You're like, well, I need, I'm basically an idiot if I don't pick all this stuff up.
*  You probably felt this way.
*  Yeah, yeah, yeah, for sure.
*  And like the moment where you decide that you're just like,
*  I've clicked so many things in this room.
*  I actually am going to leave that ammo canister there.
*  But you feel like a dope.
*  You've probably experienced this.
*  Yes.
*  But also you have a joy from if there's not many items and you found the one and you got it.
*  Right.
*  And you feel good.
*  I got it.
*  And then it's finding like, oh, I stuck my head in this corner and
*  I picked this lock and I opened this locker and, oh,
*  there was this thing I've been waiting for.
*  Yeah.
*  What about like rare and rare items?
*  That's an art, even more so of an art.
*  I will say we have a ways to go there in terms of finding the right drop rate for
*  special items, we call them, your epic, rare, legendary.
*  You look at games, like so many games do it.
*  And there are ones that you just play and love because they have it down.
*  You know, destiny, destiny two is great at it.
*  Diablo, a series I love, you know, sort of famously Diablo three, which I think is great.
*  And they did an update.
*  It mostly just changed the loot drops.
*  And it's like this whole new experience and there's a really real art to it.
*  I think that that we're still learning.
*  We're still learning a lot and have to, we're trying to, you know, get better at it.
*  Because it's one of those things where it drives you through the game.
*  It's fun to get the treasure.
*  Diablo and Skyrim have this interesting quality of being extremely popular.
*  And there's a lore around like rare items.
*  So it's a, it changes the dynamic of like, you could afford to have really rare items.
*  Yes.
*  And then, and then somebody finds it and that becomes like a thing.
*  I mean, as you release a game, there's a, there's a, I mean, a lot of people play
*  and they start sharing stories and so on.
*  It's so interesting because that's part of the game experience is the stories of others.
*  Right.
*  For us, a hundred percent because we've been classically with most of our stuff, single player,
*  that that water cooler shared experience, we would have a thing like where we call them.
*  Did you know moments like we got to have a bunch.
*  So you meet someone, they do.
*  What are you doing?
*  And then they say, did you know if you go here and do this, what did you know?
*  And that to us is where of a lot of our community has, has been sharing their stories.
*  And here's what you can do.
*  Has there ever been a temptation to create, um, not a single player game that's gigantic?
*  That's what we did fall 76.
*  We have elder scrolls online, not, not a game I created, but look, that started as more classic
*  MMO know the folks.
*  They're part of a company who made that game.
*  Um, and it's insanely, insanely popular.
*  It is.
*  Okay.
*  So I should try it out.
*  They do some great storytelling quests.
*  Like the actual mechanics aren't the same as Skyrim, but the world is awesome.
*  They've just done an incredible job.
*  You know, it's about to, uh, be 10 years for that game as well.
*  And they, this is, you know, great community around that.
*  Yeah.
*  That's, uh, I haven't played, uh, cause there's a, there's a mobile, um, fallout game, right?
*  I need to play that.
*  I was thinking of playing Diablo mobile too.
*  I mean, you can debate the monetization, but I would not.
*  It's, I think they did a fun.
*  It's really fun.
*  Follow up.
*  Diablo Diablo.
*  Well, fallout.
*  I definitely recommend that one.
*  Fallout shelter, completely different game.
*  Yeah.
*  Diablo immortal is, uh, I was very, very impressed with that.
*  Had a lot of fun on the mobile.
*  Yep.
*  What's the challenge of designing a game for mobile versus the PC and console?
*  Well, obviously the screen size.
*  Right.
*  Is that what you feel first?
*  What, what, what's the, what's the fundamental change in the, in the philosophy of design?
*  Does it, does it constrain, does it change the tone of the game?
*  Well, we've done a few things and we have a new mobile game that we're working on that
*  we haven't announced yet that I'm in love with.
*  Um, there are a couple of things that you approach on mobile.
*  Now I can give you sort of the classic mobile gaming thing and then what we do.
*  Um, you know, a classic mobile gaming.
*  Is really for short play sessions.
*  Cause for the amount of people you're going to get the, the number that have the amount
*  of time to sit there for a long time and play it like a console game or a PC game is lower.
*  Cause people are playing mobile games on the move or whatever and how it onboards you.
*  Cause obviously most of them are free.
*  So the tutorial, how the tutorial works, how it gets you into the game.
*  Because you haven't bought it, you haven't done this investment of buying it and then
*  saying, no, I'm going to learn it.
*  People don't care.
*  So really understanding how they get into the game.
*  Those two things are really the magic, uh, to mobile gaming.
*  We have found that with our games, you know, particularly fallout shelter,
*  people will sit there for an hour or two.
*  Like they will just sit there and play it like large numbers of people who play it for hours a day.
*  So it's a, there is a more, I don't know, addicting element to the mobile.
*  Cause I guess you can spend more time.
*  If you look at, you know, if you look at kids these days, they can stare at their phone for hours.
*  That's all they do.
*  That's where they watch everything.
*  So it's also like a demographic thing.
*  The younger audience, they would rather sit and stare at their phone
*  than play it on a big screen.
*  I would just love to sort of list out throughout human history, the evolution
*  of sentences that began with, if you look at kids these days,
*  It's true.
*  It's true.
*  The kids, the kids of the kids these days will probably be talking while
*  be doing like virtual reality.
*  Like I love mobile games though.
*  I play a ton of them.
*  I am like the game.
*  My favorite game this year is Marvel snap.
*  This card game from the folks who did Hearthstone.
*  You should really play it if you like, do you like card games?
*  Oh, yeah.
*  Do you like superheroes?
*  No, it's genius.
*  You don't like superheroes?
*  No, I don't like superheroes.
*  I never understood.
*  Listen, this never, this is going.
*  Who doesn't like superheroes?
*  Growing up in the Soviet Union, what I don't understand the, all right.
*  Well, I don't understand.
*  You're wearing a costume.
*  It's silly to me.
*  I can't, so you have to suspend.
*  Like you have to be able to immerse yourself.
*  And for some reason, there's something about costumes.
*  It doesn't get me.
*  But then again, I'm like into elves and dragons.
*  So I don't understand.
*  And I'm fine.
*  I get it.
*  Yeah.
*  But the rest, the rest, at least the American, the Western world disagrees with me.
*  So even Batman, you have like little ears, but that's fine.
*  Well, back to Elder Scrolls Starfield.
*  So one thing I didn't ask you about when you look at the timeline of five, six, seven,
*  eight years, whatever it is to create a game, what's the role of the deadline internally?
*  Not publicly announced.
*  Keeps you honest.
*  Do you try to keep in your own brain a deadline for the team?
*  A deadline?
*  Yeah, all the time.
*  And when you set that deadline early in the development,
*  do you try to set deadline like that's really tough to reach?
*  No, we try to make it like, hey, this is our best guess.
*  If you make it tough to reach, it's sort of, you know, you're going to miss it.
*  It's arbitrary.
*  We really try to keep ourselves honest because it will let you know where you're at.
*  Right.
*  When I first playable, we want to be done with prototyping or designed by this date.
*  We want to have a first playable this day.
*  We want to have this.
*  But look, you know, things happen.
*  Pandemic happens.
*  People go home.
*  It's throws everything off or, you know, what you needed to do because we're not just like
*  making a game and then moving everybody on, you know, what you needed to do.
*  Like Skyrim was so popular.
*  We kept people on that game for longer.
*  So it delayed a little bit.
*  We were doing with Fallout 4 at the time because we can't, you know, hey, we really
*  shouldn't move the people on the Fallout yet because we're doing these things in Skyrim
*  and we should.
*  So it just sort of keeps you honest for where you're at.
*  Does it get super stressful as you get closer?
*  You tried to avoid announcing anything?
*  Is there a temptation to announce?
*  Well, I've done it always, right?
*  I've announced, you know, Starfield were pretty, you know, loud with a release date
*  that we then had to delay.
*  So, um.
*  Was that tough?
*  It was.
*  It was.
*  But it was the right thing to do.
*  And, uh.
*  How do you know it's the right thing?
*  Like when you, when you sat down and looked at it, like this is not ready.
*  It's not an exact science, but you can look at what needs to be done and the amount of
*  time you have.
*  And, you know, we've done it in the past where we can get it done.
*  We believe we can.
*  And so you're fighting that personal belief that you can get something done.
*  But there's a lot of things that go into release date with marketing and publishing.
*  And, you know, we've reached a point where on Starfield, where it was, it was pretty
*  clear to us, even though you want to say you can get it done, that the risk involved with
*  that to the, to the fans of the game, to the team, to the company, we're part of Xbox now
*  to everybody was we should really, uh, we should really move it and give it the time it needs.
*  So you mentioned part of Xbox, uh, Microsoft bought, but that's then, and as an MX for
*  7.5 billion dollars.
*  Well, what's it like joining the Xbox team?
*  You've, you've, um, I think written about it.
*  What's what, what are the, what are the exciting aspects of that?
*  You know, when your company goes through a change like that, no matter what it is, even
*  if it's somebody that you've worked with for a long time, you never know what you're in
*  for, you hope.
*  And I had worked with them, uh, for, since we started doing console stuff with Morrowind
*  was, you know, they came to us, came to me and hey, you should make this game for the
*  Xbox.
*  And so when they were making that console, um, had a great experience with them.
*  And then on the 360 with oblivion.
*  And so I guess the point is we felt that we had a very good relationship with everybody
*  there and we understood what their culture was, but you never really know.
*  And, and I mean this honestly, it's been awesome that the culture inside of Microsoft
*  and Xbox that people see from the outside is the culture inside the way they talk about
*  players, the, um, the way they'll invest in the players, the risks they'll take, the
*  thoughtfulness from Phil Spencer on down has been, you know, feel really, really lucky.
*  And then a game like starfield where it, look, we've had a lot of success with, with the
*  games that you talked about, but we've never been kind of the platform seller, you know,
*  the game for a platform for a period of time.
*  And so, you know, there is a lot of pressure.
*  There's a lot of responsibility there to make sure we deliver for everybody.
*  Is there a chance that starfield is exclusive to Xbox?
*  It is. It is exclusive.
*  It's officially already.
*  Yep. Yes.
*  So you're, I get it.
*  So extra pressure also creating a new world.
*  Yeah, it's new, but keep in mind for us, that exclusivity is not unique, even though we've
*  done PlayStation stuff and I think the PlayStation five is an insane machine.
*  They've done a great job and we've had great success on PlayStation.
*  We were traditionally a PC developers in the beginning.
*  We transitioned to Xbox, became our lead platform, like Morrowind is basically exclusive
*  to Xbox.
*  Oblivion was exclusive to Xbox for a long period of time.
*  Skyrim DLC was so we've done a lot of like our initial stuff is all Xbox.
*  So we get into development and saying we're focused on Xbox and it's not abnormal for
*  us in any way.
*  It's been kind of the norm.
*  It's been kind of the norm.
*  And from a development side, I like the ability to focus.
*  So our ability to focus and say, and have help from them, the top engineers at Xbox
*  to say, we are going to make this look incredible on the new systems is like from my standpoint,
*  it's just awesome.
*  What's the difference in creating the console versus the PC?
*  I also have to admit I've never, is this shameful?
*  Actually, you should recommend to me.
*  I've never played Skyrim or any of the games you've created on Xbox.
*  Really?
*  Yeah.
*  And on console, I played, I mean, I've played very little.
*  Yeah, sure.
*  I mean, look, there's the obvious interface part between mouse and keyboard and then a
*  controller.
*  But when you're looking at hardware, PCs, it's tough, right?
*  Because you're looking at, well, you know, what are their driver versions?
*  What kind of monitor do they have?
*  What is the actual refresh rate of X, Y, and Z?
*  We're used to it.
*  But if anyone will tell you, give me the hardware that I know I'm writing it for,
*  you know this.
*  And the series X is just an incredible machine.
*  And now you know what it is.
*  You know what it is.
*  And now that we're part of Xbox, getting the people who built it to show you how to make
*  it really, really dance is just awesome.
*  Is there a case to be made, did you get people that enjoy, people that do both PC and Xbox,
*  that enjoy Xbox more?
*  Like if they have a choice, they enjoy it?
*  I think that depends on, and look, now that you can kind of cross, you can take your save
*  and go between and all those things.
*  You can?
*  Yeah.
*  If you, depends on if-
*  For which games?
*  So for Skyrim?
*  If you have the Game Pass PC version of it versus Steam.
*  Not via Steam right now.
*  Not via Steam.
*  Got it.
*  And so there's the Game Pass.
*  So I'm like learning about this.
*  So there's a Microsoft game.
*  So this is going to be on Game Pass.
*  And then you can, yeah, if you can take it from PC through Game Pass.
*  But I think it depends on like, for me, like what's my physical mood?
*  Do I want to lean back on a sofa?
*  Exactly.
*  Right?
*  The actual physicality of it is what determines where I want to play.
*  Do I want to be two feet from a thing right now?
*  And sometimes I like that.
*  I am more of a console player just because I sit at my PC at work all day.
*  Like I play a lot of video games.
*  So when I get home and I want to play something else,
*  like I am a sofa, screen, controller person.
*  Let me ask you a ridiculous question.
*  So you've created some of the greatest games ever.
*  I think there's, the question will be what's the best game of all time?
*  All right.
*  All right.
*  Just give me a second.
*  Tetris.
*  All right.
*  Yeah, that's interesting.
*  Have you read the book on Tetris?
*  No.
*  You should read it.
*  Pickly, someone who grew up in Russia.
*  Yeah.
*  I'm sure there's an interesting story.
*  The fact that there's a book about Tetris is fascinating.
*  Is there a book about Mario?
*  I would love to find out more.
*  But I think I would put, personally, I would put Skyrim.
*  I'll take that.
*  Good answer.
*  At number one for me, which is tough.
*  However you put it, because you could also make the case out of the Elder Scrolls series.
*  Like what do you actually value more?
*  If you put Tetris and Super Mario up there, then like the credit goes to Morrowind maybe over Skyrim.
*  I don't know where the biggest leaps are.
*  But overall, I think it's Skyrim.
*  But for you, if you're not allowed to pick any of the games you were involved with,
*  what are some interesting candidates for you?
*  There are just games that
*  inspired the world, impacted the world, shook the world in terms of what video games they're able to do.
*  Well, first, I'm just sort of like hearing you say that you think Skyrim is the best game of all time
*  is quite like, thank you.
*  And it's, you know, incredible thing to hear.
*  And, you know, when I think about, we have a couple of answers.
*  There's ones that are like personal to me.
*  Ultima 7.
*  It's probably not.
*  You can't talk about Ultima.
*  You said that as an inspiration.
*  I never crossed that world.
*  Well, it was.
*  What kind of game is it?
*  It's a role-playing game, you know, circa 1992, 1993, 1994.
*  Ultima Online, first, you know, really visual online world in that way.
*  But for me, that was a virtual fantasy world where I had, you know, you could break bread.
*  You could pick all this stuff up.
*  I mean, anyone who's played Ultima and plays our stuff can see the kind of
*  touchstones and callbacks to that or inspirations.
*  And the other thing that I loved about Ultima was,
*  particularly the period that they were all different, right?
*  That they iterated and there weren't necessarily what I'll call a plus one sequel outside of Ultima
*  7 part two, clearly a plus one sequel, but they each had their own tone.
*  I love like the boxes, you know, something that we get into as well.
*  I love this idea that a game also is this tangible thing.
*  Oh, when you buy it.
*  The cardboard boxes and the way they were designed and Ultima 7 is black and Ultima 8
*  is the fiery gate and the paintings on them.
*  And I just, you know, if you look.
*  Break your heart a little bit that that culture is a big gone.
*  A little bit, a little bit.
*  And that's also why I like, you know, this goes to video gaming or any other digital
*  things where digital ownership has great value to people.
*  So I like looking at my collections of games, even digitally.
*  I want to see nice, you know, in the same way you want to see nice album art.
*  I want to see nice cover art for our games.
*  And we spend a lot of time in them so that you take a look at Elder Scrolls and Morrowind
*  Oblivion and Skyrim.
*  We want those boxes to look good next to each other.
*  Going back to the video games.
*  I always mentioned Tetris because I think it's.
*  You know, obviously I love virtual worlds and those kind of things, but for the time
*  and what an interactive like video games were the simplest form.
*  I sort of think you can put Tetris in front of just about anybody.
*  And they'll enjoy it.
*  It's got some moment of challenge and it's just so elegant.
*  It's like to me the like this very pure game that only works because it's a video game.
*  And I think mobile games figured out some of the magic of Tetris, the simple.
*  Some of them have, yeah.
*  Yeah.
*  And but that just did a long, long time ago.
*  Right.
*  You can really create that immersive experience without.
*  But for me, you know, the ultimate civilization.
*  Yeah.
*  As far as, you know, a grand strategy game.
*  I mentioned in terms of bringing games into the mainstream in a way that captured people
*  that nothing before it had Super Mario, Donkey Kong, everything Nintendo.
*  I probably the best game makers in the world still.
*  They know who they are.
*  They know what they want to do.
*  Always in awe of what they create.
*  I got to ask you about the game.
*  I haven't played, but people put up their.
*  Have you got any chance to play a lot of it?
*  Yes.
*  Yes.
*  It's fantastic.
*  It's fantastic.
*  What do you think about?
*  I mean, it's a very different experience.
*  I played other Zeldas than the open walls you've created, but it is also an open world.
*  It is at it's my favorite Zelda because obviously like open world stuff and.
*  The the one thing that they do really, really well is they don't constrain you.
*  They don't force you to do anything.
*  They don't force you to do anything.
*  They don't force you to do anything.
*  One thing that they do really, really well is they don't constrain you.
*  Some people, you know, even some of the things we do constrain you a little bit more.
*  Zelda says, here's the whole thing.
*  And you are constrained by the actual player abilities you haven't earned yet,
*  not some arbitrary barriers.
*  And so I think they just did a phenomenal job.
*  It's a magical game.
*  It really feels open.
*  It's because it truly is.
*  Yes.
*  What about I mean, I just like asking about some open world.
*  A very different one is the world of either Grand Theft Auto or Red Dead Redemption.
*  Both love.
*  I would put GTA 3, Grand Theft Auto 3 up there with the landmark kind of usher in the open world.
*  When that comes out on the PlayStation 2, even though there was GTA 1 and 2,
*  this was an all new thing with the mobster storytelling.
*  Is that the first 3D version?
*  It was.
*  Then Vice City is kind of a fast follow, which could be my favorite one.
*  I loved all the Grand Theft Autos.
*  I think they're really phenomenally well made games.
*  Same with Red Dead.
*  I think Red Dead Redemption 1 could be my favorite story.
*  Like, I highly recommend finishing that game.
*  So you like both the story, you like the grittiness of that?
*  Because they have a bit of the, I guess if you like the fallout, there's the humor.
*  I don't know what it is.
*  It's the lighthearted humor of it, but also the brutality of human nature is in there too.
*  And also some of the fun they create with the music when you drive and stuff like that.
*  They create a world.
*  There's a tone.
*  They do.
*  There's a very strong tone.
*  There is a very strong tone.
*  The satire on the world is just so well done.
*  The satire is good.
*  The gameplay is great.
*  I think they've just done a phenomenal job.
*  Is there any others that pop to mind?
*  Portal.
*  Portal.
*  Yeah.
*  That's another weird creation.
*  I could just sit here and list games forever.
*  For a while.
*  I'm enjoying this.
*  Hearthstone is a game I love.
*  I love all types of sports.
*  College football.
*  NCAA football was my favorite.
*  I would say this is a great role-playing game.
*  Oh, you would actually keep getting role-playing.
*  It's a role-playing game because I have all these characters.
*  I have like 60 characters and they're all leveling up and then I have to play them.
*  And then the college one, because I like college football, they'd graduate.
*  So you lose your players and then they stop making the series.
*  I know the folks at EA and they will say, I have bugged them.
*  When is this going to end?
*  They're doing it.
*  So it's finally coming back.
*  Nice.
*  What would you say is the greatest sports game of all time?
*  Well, it's NCAA football.
*  I have to pick the year.
*  Versus Madden?
*  Oh yeah.
*  You have more teams.
*  You have the college fight songs.
*  There's more pageantry and the players turn over.
*  They're only there for four seasons.
*  So you have to...
*  It's more dynamic.
*  So you like variety versus...
*  So what was the last one?
*  2014 maybe it was.
*  And you don't like FIFA and...
*  Look, FIFA is incredible.
*  Look, I'm a college football fan.
*  They give you that fantasy.
*  If you like European football slash soccer, FIFA is incredible.
*  I love that game too.
*  Have you been paying attention to the game design of that world, of those worlds?
*  Yeah.
*  And the thing people I think with those kinds of games, it is like...
*  Or racing games, Forza put up there.
*  I love Forza.
*  Play them all.
*  When you have to recreate something that's real in the real world, say it's cars or sports games,
*  everybody knows how it should work.
*  That's a really difficult task when people know how it should work.
*  Then you're going to balance it for single player, the multiplayer parts of it.
*  They get very, very competitive.
*  And in many respects, you're forced to put out a new version every year.
*  And I say forced in quotes because they count them as big updates.
*  But it's a much more difficult development process than I think people understand.
*  And how hard those teams work and know a lot of people who do it.
*  And I think they just do.
*  I've enjoyed them all.
*  I buy Madden every year.
*  Yeah, every single year.
*  Yeah, they do refresh it.
*  There's a feeling of freshness.
*  I don't know what that is.
*  Yeah, look, there have been years where it feels like less was done and more was done,
*  but I enjoy it every year.
*  Yeah.
*  What does a perfectly productive day in the life of Todd Howard look like?
*  So maybe not perfectly, but just like a perfectly average productive day.
*  What are your morning person, evening person?
*  Is it chaos?
*  Is it pretty regular?
*  I'm in a good flow right now.
*  I'm still doing a lot of stuff.
*  So there's things I'm like executive producing and then Starfield I'm directing.
*  So I sort of view that as that's an everyday thing.
*  Fortunately, I get to do a lot of stuff from look at the TV show we're making and
*  this Indiana Jones game that's being developed, the machine game.
*  So we have to look at that.
*  But the best really day or where I feel it's fulfilling is
*  get to play some of a game, the game we'll say Starfield, get to play some of Starfield,
*  look at the problem set of what it is doing and then get in a room with
*  the other developers that I work closely with and we solve that problem together.
*  So that's the most rewarding thing when you can say, okay, what do we want this to do?
*  What's the real player experience we want?
*  What are all the pieces in front of us?
*  Or you know the actual tangible pieces as opposed to the beginning.
*  The pie in the sky part is always fun, but it's like anything is possible.
*  That's fun, but it's not rewarding in the same way because you haven't solved something.
*  Whereas these are the elements you have to play with.
*  How do we make this all work together?
*  And you come out of it at the end of the day like now that feels great.
*  So brainstorming about specific big picture, both big picture and very specific detail
*  of a game that's not working, something's not working, you want to fix it, that kind of stuff.
*  Because you feel like okay you've made tangible progress on the actual build of the game.
*  Or something you played in the beginning of the day didn't feel great,
*  you've figured out a solution with a group of people.
*  Like it's always with a group.
*  And then the next day you're like yeah that worked out.
*  Who's on the team?
*  Is it designers, engineers, artists, voiceover folks?
*  So internal to the studio it's a lot of programming, a lot of art,
*  you have design which breaks into some quest design, writing, systems design,
*  who are like doing all the treasure and the loot and the skill systems.
*  And then level design is making the spaces like those that you'll play through.
*  Production is a big part of it, the producers who organize everything.
*  I can't remember if I mentioned art, a lot of artists.
*  QA staff as well, they're hugely valuable in saying
*  hey we broke your game in these magical ways, what are you going to do about it?
*  Is the loot design team still hiring?
*  And how do I apply?
*  That seems like the most fun job.
*  Always.
*  I mean all of this seems like a super fun job.
*  You know what, it's the best.
*  Then you have audio and by far is the greatest job you could possibly have.
*  If you're into like technology, it's great.
*  If you're into storytelling, creativity and art, it's great.
*  And it's really the gaming, you know, the combination of that.
*  And like I mentioned to you offline, I think of video games,
*  to me it's brought thousands of hours of happiness.
*  And so when you're designing the game, whatever you're doing,
*  you have a part to play in a thing that's going to bring
*  like millions, hundreds of millions of hours of happiness to people.
*  And you know, it is.
*  And I'm going to play you saying that back to our team.
*  Because people forget your head's down.
*  You're trying to solve these problems and then you do forget how many people it touches.
*  Like even tiny decisions, you make tiny little things you create.
*  Yeah, it's weird.
*  I wish there was a way to like, I would notice things in a video game and it's like, huh,
*  okay, like it feels good, but you don't get that signal.
*  The creator doesn't get that signal.
*  I wish they did.
*  I guess you could get that signal by, you know, why is Lux stuck in this room,
*  like digging through the loop?
*  We do get, we do now get a lot of good data on what the players are doing.
*  Enjoying and not that kind of thing?
*  Well, we know where they've been and where they've died and how long they play in certain sections.
*  And we can sort of tell outside of people just telling us on forums or calling or other things,
*  we can tell for some data where people are dropping off or having a,
*  you know, we can tell if there's a key frustration point.
*  Do you ever think about making people feel like human feelings when they play?
*  Like designing, like make them feel fear or excitement, anger, longing, loneliness?
*  With all the above.
*  Yeah, of course.
*  The big one I like to say is the video games give you is pride
*  outside of other, you know, if you watch movies or things like that, like, yeah,
*  but you never think like, look what I did.
*  And that feeling of like accomplishment and pride in what you did or you overcame,
*  you talked about going back to a game that like, those are real feelings of like accomplishment
*  that I felt in games that I've played.
*  That I've played.
*  And when we get to see a player feel that, it's really, really special.
*  The other one is there is a, you know, there is an escape or to be someone else that's more
*  powerful in our games that you are in real life that gives you a confidence or a perspective.
*  We're doing one next week, but we've done a number of make a wish visits, kids who could
*  wish for anything and they want to come and I want to see the next game and meet the creators and see
*  how you do it.
*  And they come with their family and it is like the greatest thing that we do.
*  And it reminds you of like how important it is.
*  And the other really awesome thing is that you can do it in a way that you can't do it
*  that you can see like the family change by the end of the day.
*  Like they don't, they didn't even realize what it meant to their child or what went into it.
*  And it's just that to me is like been involved with that foundation for a number of years and
*  it's been really good, you know, reminder of how lucky we are.
*  And in general for young people, that sense of accomplishment is hard to find.
*  I mean, yeah, where they don't, not everybody has it in the outlets that
*  real life provides.
*  Well, that's the thing.
*  I mean, the world is cruel to when you're young, nobody takes you seriously.
*  You don't get like, that's why you, everybody always wants to grow up and get all the
*  scripts possible.
*  It's the hardest.
*  It's hard.
*  And then video games allow you, I mean, to build that sense of confidence, a sense of
*  pride in something.
*  That's why when people talk down to video games, like it's a culture and so on, it's
*  not, it misses out on that really deeply meaningful thing, especially with like single player.
*  There's some darker aspects to multiplayer that people create communities and you know,
*  it can, it can go off the rails a bit, but the actual experience of the game,
*  especially one where you stick with for a while, that's really beautiful.
*  Do you have advice for those same young folks given that your life is an interesting one,
*  given what kind of degree you got and being a legendary game designer, you have advice
*  for young folks in high school, maybe college, how to have a career or a life they can be
*  proud of.
*  Well, you have to find something that you love so much that it's never going to feel like
*  it's never going to feel like a job.
*  And don't do it for money.
*  Don't do it for find something you love and
*  the rest of it will come.
*  It won't be a straight path and do not ever underestimate yourself.
*  It's going to take hard work, but the worst thing that young people do is think they can't
*  accomplish something or they underestimate themselves.
*  And maybe those first few times through where they do fail, if they love it enough,
*  they're going to be resilient and push past that.
*  Anyone who's had success or gotten somewhere, it's been, they've had those times, right?
*  And they've stayed resilient because they love it so much that this is what they want to do.
*  When you do it for other reasons, I just don't think it's going to work out the same.
*  Did you have low points in your life, dark points or your mind went to a dark place,
*  whether it's struggling to get a job at Bethesda Softworks or maybe with a Red Guard flop or
*  where you kind of started to doubt yourself or any of that?
*  Well, I think what's weird looking back, I was so, I was always so like in love with doing this
*  that I didn't view them as like dark per se.
*  Looking back, I was like, oh, that was, I just wanted to,
*  okay, let me find a way to make this work.
*  Even when it's hard and it's failing and all that kind of stuff, you just kind of like,
*  it's a problem before you to solve.
*  When I started Bethesda, I don't know, my father had moved nearby to the office.
*  I was moving and I slept on a sofa. I didn't care. I don't need a bedroom.
*  I'll sleep on the sofa and work there. That's all I want to do.
*  When the company almost went out of business, it was, well, I hope it doesn't.
*  I feel somewhat responsible, but hey, that's a learning lesson. Let's go.
*  I was pretty resilient to it all.
*  Fall of 76, like really bad launch.
*  And okay, what did we do wrong? What can we learn? Let's go at it.
*  Now it's a success.
*  But those kind of ups and downs for the length of developments that we have,
*  people don't see them, but we have them all the time.
*  And so it's that sort of belief that with the team having done it time and time again to know that
*  now we're going to make it as good as we possibly can.
*  And whatever we're experiencing now, when we solve it and we get it out and
*  we see the millions of people who love it, it's all worth it.
*  And you're getting into new spaces. First of all, new worlds with Starfield, but also new.
*  I saw the TV show you're working on on Fallout with Amazon.
*  What's that like worlds that you created in the digital realm going on the screen?
*  I can remember 10 years ago after Fallout 3 was a hit, movie producers coming and,
*  hey, we think this will make a great movie.
*  And taking a lot of meetings and I think most people would jump at that, like, sweet.
*  And I sort of paused and like, I don't know, what is this going to do?
*  I felt like they're going to synthesize. I met great people, like well-known creatives.
*  It's going to get synthesized into this two hour. I don't know. I'm not seeing the great thing here
*  yet. So I think the advent of television in terms of what it's become nowadays with big budget
*  TV series, it kind of came up again and met with people and Jonathan Nolan and Lisa Joy
*  who do Westworld. And I always love the work he did writing Interstellar and the Dark Knight
*  movies. I just love it.
*  Jonathan Nolan is involved with this?
*  Yeah, he's the EP and he's directed the first.
*  Westworld is incredible. This is awesome.
*  And he's the EP. He's directed the first few episodes. And when I connected with him,
*  Jonah was like, hey, you're the person I want to do this. So I met with people, kept saying,
*  like, you know, just let me see if he wants to do it. And to my joy, he was like, oh yeah,
*  fall three is one of my, yeah, sign me up. It was like, no, how do we get this done?
*  And at that time he was sort of, he was at HBO and it was, you know, we were trying to figure out,
*  it was put a little pause on it. And, you know, got to visit the sets,
*  reading scripts and things like that. It's all new to me. But I, they're doing such an incredible
*  job. Like, I think if you like this world, you are going to be just blown away.
*  So keep in mind, I've never made a TV show. You know, there's all the best, you know,
*  no one ever does it wanting it to not be great, but they've just done their attention to detail
*  and obsessive, just obsessive with what's on the screen and the storytelling and how it looks,
*  the whole, the whole thing. Yeah. I think obsession is really a
*  prerequisite for greatness. What they did, HBO did with Chernobyl, like the attention to detail.
*  And he's doing The Last of Us now, that show runner.
*  If you really care and you really put a lot of effort into the details,
*  you can grace the picture. I was stunned. They, I mean, I don't want to spoil it,
*  but when people see it, I think it'll just be like, wow. It's the, the other thing we're approaching
*  it is very different where when it was, people would say, want to make a movie. They wanted to,
*  you know, tell the story of Fallout 3 or then tell the story of Fallout 4. And for this, it was,
*  hey, let's do something that exists in the world of Fallout. It's not retelling a game story.
*  It's basically, you know, an area of the map and like, let's tell a story here that fits in
*  the world that we have built. Doesn't, you know, break any of the rules, can reference things in
*  the games, but isn't a retelling of the games that exists in the same world, but is its own unique
*  thing. So it adds to it while also people who don't, haven't played the games, who can't
*  experience like how crazy cool Fallout is, can watch the series. And so.
*  Are there some similarities or interesting differences between the creation of a game
*  and a TV show that you noticed from the sort of story perspective? Well, for them, you know,
*  it's much more character driven. Like you can do all these things with the world and stuff that
*  we already have. It's the main characters, who they are, what their motivations are,
*  that really is the engine. Right. There's no finding the right actors to do those. Yeah.
*  Cause you're not, there's no interaction. There's no, you don't get to enter that world. They have
*  to do the work for you. The NPCs are on the show. Yeah. I can't wait to see how it turns out. You
*  also mentioned Indiana Jones. That's a weird, that's a different one. How do you work with like a,
*  with a famous protagonist, like when the character is known, how do you work with that?
*  Well, it's different. It's different. Like Indiana Jones is different where like
*  the name he, it is the, like it's Indiana Jones, not a world, it's him, right? You can talk about
*  the world of Indiana Jones, but at the end of the day, it's about this character. And Raiders,
*  still my favorite movie of all time. No debate. It's the best movie ever. Best movie ever. Ever.
*  On a tangent, what do you love about it? Well, you know, I saw it obviously when I was younger
*  and I believed it. I believe this happened. And when they found the arc, I literally, I could not
*  believe that they found it. So, and I have found over my life, it's still really watchable every
*  time. I enjoy it every single time. Love the character, love the story. The opening is the
*  greatest movie opening ever. And I just love everything. I love everything about it. What was
*  the opening? Is this when? What? It's the temple and then the ball rolls and tries to crush it.
*  Oh, that's the opening. That's the opening of Raiders. Yeah, he steals the idol.
*  I think you're deeply offended. What's the opening of Raiders?
*  Um, so I've always wanted to, it's one of those things like what's on your bucket list,
*  like, oh, I want to make an Indiana Jones game. And I had pitched Lucas, I met some people there
*  and pitched them back in 09, this Indiana Jones game concept. And they wanted to publish, kind of
*  the deal fell apart. They wanted to publish it and we were a publisher and so we didn't do it.
*  And I didn't really have the team to do it. I just was going to figure that out after we agreed to a
*  deal. And well, you know, we made Skyrim so it worked out. And then, you know, fast forward,
*  10 years plus and, you know, Lucas now part of Disney and they're doing a lot more of licensing
*  and working with people. And so I knew some folks there and said, Oh, I have this idea
*  that I pitched a long time ago and they loved it. And again, the internal team that I had
*  not only didn't have the time, they probably weren't as good a fit as Machine Games,
*  who's done the Wolfenstein series, who is the perfect fit for this game with storytelling and
*  how they record it. And they are, it's awesome. They're just doing an incredible job with that
*  game. People are going to be, if you like Indiana Jones, it is a definite love letter
*  to Indiana Jones and everything with it. Can you say if it's a little, if it's more on the
*  action adventure side, like the actual experience of the game?
*  I could go back. I would just say it is a mashup. It is a unique, it isn't one thing intentionally.
*  So it does a lot of different things that, you know, we've myself and Yerrick and the
*  folks at Machine Games have wanted to do in a game. So it's a unique thing.
*  Before I forget, who do I, how many humans do I have to kill? I mean dragons do I have to kill
*  to get myself somehow into Elder Scrolls 6? It's a mod. If anyone wants to create mods of me,
*  and is that possible? Yeah, it's possible. While maintaining realism somehow. You don't want a
*  person in a suit and tie. It doesn't make sense. You can put you in Fallout. You can wear that.
*  Yeah, exactly. Please put me, so Fallout, there's also a culture of...
*  You do a mod where you replace the mysterious stranger.
*  There you go. That's a to do task. Top mod right there.
*  And you will have my deep gratitude and more dear stranger for doing so.
*  What's the programming language for mods? Is it mostly...
*  They use our internal scripting language that's built into the tool.
*  Okay. I'm almost afraid to explore that world because it will never, never, never turn back.
*  How long... You've created so many incredible games. What does the future hold? Is there...
*  Sort of going through this process, do you still have the energy, the passion, the drive to keep
*  creating? I do. I cannot imagine doing anything else. I'd like to do it as long as possible.
*  I will say though, as I've done it, soon it'll be 30 years at Bethesda. I've learned that to
*  appreciate the developments a little bit more, that the time it takes, I should prioritize
*  all of us enjoying the development process more than I did in the past. It was like,
*  just wanted to... The end of this all that mattered. And the more you do it, you realize,
*  no, I'm spending the majority of my life in Tamriel and the Wasteland and Fallout.
*  The moments that we're all doing this together, we need to enjoy it. It's a lot of work finishing
*  Starfield, but hey, we gotta enjoy this. This is incredible. We don't get that many shots.
*  So the actual process of creating the struggles along the way of stuff not working,
*  like you said, at this point, Starfield probably creating some of the glue
*  of how stuff feels and going back again and again and again to try to make the beginning better,
*  all that kind of stuff. And I would say it for anybody's vocation, whatever you're doing,
*  whatever people do, you're gonna have harder times. And sometimes people, you have to maybe
*  recalibrate yourself to like, okay, how can we make this more enjoyable for all of us, no matter
*  what you're doing and rewarding? So if life is a video game, which it most likely is, what do you
*  think is the meaning of life from having created so many games where the character has to try to
*  figure out? I mean, there's bigger questions than just solving the quest. You're asking
*  the big questions of why am I here? I feel like that's good practice for answering
*  the same question for this video game we're in. What do you think is the meaning of life, Todd Howard?
*  That was a very...
*  I can say what motivates me.
*  That's a good start.
*  Having a curiosity, you know, the ability to not assume a lot and be curious about the world around
*  you. It's more, it's, you know, not the same as just wanting to learn everything, but what makes
*  other humans tick? How do they feel? How do they love? It might be cliche to say the meaning of life
*  is to love, right? So that curiosity is just, is about noticing the world. Noticing the world
*  around you. You know, look, there's so much anecdotes. Someone says everybody has two lives
*  and the second one starts when you realize there's only one.
*  And I think I usually preach to my children, everything else, like have a curiosity
*  to the world around you and you'll have the most fulfilling days.
*  Are you able to be inside the worlds that you've created and be able to notice them? Like really,
*  like really enjoy them? It takes time. So like Skyrim had its 10th anniversary. So when I went
*  back into it, I think I got to see it for what it is. My younger son got really into it, you know,
*  a few years back on the Switch. That's what we noticed. People age up into it, right? So
*  one of the reasons it's so popular is, you know, people come into, you know, they're now becoming,
*  you know, teenagers and oh, okay, I'll finally play Skyrim. And, you know, he got obsessed with it.
*  And he wasn't usually, I say, hey, check out my games. And he's like, ah, shut up, dad. We're
*  playing some other stuff. And he got like obsessed with Skyrim. Like we're having like deep Elder
*  Scrolls lore conversations at dinner. And, you know, I saw it through his eyes and that was pretty
*  special. And then the mods he was downloading and the YouTubers he was following talking about
*  stuff. So the people who like the Elder Scrolls people don't realize how much of that I have
*  watched with my son. And then I kind of, when the 10th anniversary came out, like, oh, I'm gonna
*  check out a build. I have to check out the build out, but I hadn't played it in so long. And it was
*  like, it does. It has this flow. We're like, oh my God, I just played for four hours. I need to turn
*  off. Yeah. I mean, there's something about enjoying video games with the people you love too,
*  or the water cooler discussion and with kids. So I actually, I would love to have kids and hopefully
*  soon in the future. So I guess the thing I need your advice on is how do I time in such a way when
*  they're old enough, right at the age they're old enough. Like I want to know when to have them so
*  that when they're old enough, that's exactly when Elder Scrolls 6 comes out. Can you give me a hint
*  when I should have kids? All right. Nevermind. You are a genius at how to ask that question.
*  The number of times. Yeah. You told the anecdote that your son asked you the same question,
*  but of course it's all for good fun. Take as much time as is needed. Skyrim is still an incredible
*  game and has an impact on millions of people as do all of your games. Thank you for everything
*  you've done for the world. Thank you. It's a huge honor that you would talk with me.
*  This has been an honor and it has to be said, I have a huge team of people I've worked with for
*  some of them for 20 years and it's really all of us together.
*  Keep doing a great job. Guys and gals, I can't wait to see what you create next. It really,
*  really does have an impact on silly kids like me and millions of silly kids like me. So I really
*  appreciate everything. Thank you. Thanks, Tom. Thanks for listening to this conversation with
*  Todd Howard. To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description.
*  And now let me leave you with some words from Tolkien. So come snow after fire and even dragons.
*  Have their end. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
