---
Date Generated: April 09, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 10972s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence', 'artificial intelligence podcast', 'islam', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex podcast', 'mit ai', 'omar suleiman', 'prayer', 'prophets', 'quran', 'southern methodist university', 'yaqeen institute']
Video Views: 2029885
Video Rating: None
---

# Omar Suleiman: Islam | Lex Fridman Podcast #352
**Lex Fridman:** [January 17, 2023](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BOKCNUqbpH0)
*  So the BBC reached out and said, we want to interview you. They said, we've got this idea.
*  We want to take you to a park and have you meet one of the protesters
*  who's been wielding his gun outside your mosque and talk to him. It was really interesting because
*  they'd interviewed him before meeting me and the things that he was able to utter
*  before meeting me and before meeting Syrian refugees was just awful. I mean, the most
*  dehumanizing rhetoric that you can imagine. But then at the park, he meets me, talks to me.
*  He meets a Syrian refugee family, one of the girls whose leg had been blown off in an airstrike.
*  And he said, I feel like an idiot. I mean, he expressed all sorts of regret and was teary-eyed
*  that he could dehumanize people the way that he was. And so my whole thing was and is,
*  come inside the mosque, put your gun down, disarm yourself and learn. And you'll be surprised what
*  you'll walk away with. And only took one meeting with him to completely shift his worldview at the
*  time, which was made up of heroes and villains, the Muslims, unfortunately, being the villains
*  that had to be wiped off the face of the earth so that the earth could continue.
*  The following is a conversation with Imam Dr. Omar Suleiman. He's a Muslim scholar,
*  civil rights leader, founder and president of the Yakin Institute for Islamic Research,
*  and he's a professor of Islamic studies at Southern Methodist University. He's one of the
*  most influential Muslims in the world and is a fearless, kind-hearted human being
*  who I'm now proud to call a friend. As a side note, allow me to say a few words about Israel
*  and Palestine. While this conversation with Omar Suleiman was mostly exploring the history and
*  beauty of Islam and the Muslim community, we did delve briefly into the topic of Israel and Palestine.
*  This topic is an extremely challenging one and an extremely important one. It has deep roots
*  and implications in US politics, in global geopolitics, in military and religious conflicts,
*  wars and atrocities, and basic struggle of all human beings to survive, to protect their loved
*  ones, and to flourish as individuals and as communities. I did not want to cover this topic
*  in a solely scholarly fashion. Much like with the war in Ukraine, it is not simply a story of
*  history, politics, religion, and national identity. It is also a deeply human story.
*  To cover this topic in the way that my gut and my heart sets to do it, I have to talk to everyone,
*  to leaders and people on all sides, Muslim and Jewish, Israeli and Palestinian, from refugees
*  to soldiers, from scholars to extremists. I'm not sure if that's possible or wise,
*  but like Forrest Gump said, I'm not a smart man, and maybe you know how the rest of that goes.
*  I just like to follow my heart to whatever place it leads. I ask the Muslim and the Jewish
*  communities for your patience and support as I explore this topic. I will make many mistakes
*  and I'll be listening to all voices so I can learn and do better. I've become distinctly aware
*  that my approach of talking to people from all walks of life with empathy and compassion,
*  but with backbone, can create enemies on all sides. I don't quite yet understand why this is,
*  but I'm learning to accept it is the reality of the world. Hopefully, in the end, whatever happens,
*  whatever silly thing I do, has a chance of adding a bit of love to the world.
*  Thanks for going along with me on this journey. This is the Lex Friedman podcast. To support it,
*  please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, dear friends, here's Omar Salman.
*  As-salamu alaykum, Omar. We've been trying to do this a long time. The world tried to prevent it
*  through the funny ways that the world does, but here we are. I'm a huge fan of yours. It's a huge
*  honor to talk to you. I appreciate it. Thank you for making the sacrifice and coming down,
*  or coming up, I guess, to Dallas. I appreciate it. It's a short flight, but a long journey.
*  Let's start with the biggest question. Who is God according to Islam?
*  God is the most compassionate, the most merciful, the creator of the heavens and the earth.
*  He is one God. He begets not, nor is He begotten. He is unique. He is omnipotent. He is beyond the
*  limitations of man. He is beyond the constructs of our imagination, but He is ever accessible
*  through sincere supplication. When you call upon Him alone, one God, He is closer to you than your
*  jugular vein, the Quran tells us. He's known by many names and attributes, but His essence is one.
*  He's one God. No human likeness, no human imperfection can be attributed to Him. No partners,
*  no image of Him can be constructed, and that is God.
*  God represents He is a feeling of closeness that is accessible to every human being?
*  Well, God's not a feeling. God is known by names and attributes. We call upon God, but
*  there is certainly a feeling of closeness when you access Him. So, I think the beauty of Islam is that
*  as perfect as God is described, He's also so accessible to the imperfect.
*  The idea of sincere supplication and connection to Him, we worship Him alone. We call upon Him
*  alone. There's no clergy. There's no barrier between God and us, and that encourages a sincere
*  devotion and commitment to Him alone. And so, He is certainly described supreme, and God speaks to
*  us through the Quran, and we speak to Him through sincere supplication. And His attributes are the
*  furthest from us in terms of their perfection, but He is ever close to us through our supplication,
*  through our prayers, and through our connection to Him. To open the door to that connection,
*  to have a connection with God, how difficult is that process? How difficult was it for you?
*  How difficult is it for the people, for the many, many, many Muslims that you've interacted with?
*  Well, I think that there are different layers of difficulty, right? There is the personal
*  difficulty submitting yourself to God. Islam requires a complete submission to Him, and
*  one of the things that happens is that if we project some of our bad experiences with authority
*  onto our relationship with God, then we immediately perceive Him in a certain way
*  that might not allow us to gain a closeness to Him, because maybe we didn't have the best
*  relationship with our parents growing up. Maybe we didn't have the best relationship with authority
*  figures in our lives. And so this idea of an ultimate authority to whom you submit yourself
*  can be very difficult. Malcolm X, who was one of the most prominent converts to Islam in American
*  history, talked about the difficulty of prostration for the very first time. Putting your head on the
*  ground, putting your face on the ground, and praying to God is a very humbling thing. Submitting
*  all of your affairs to Him is very humbling. And ultimately, you have to relinquish control,
*  and you can't relinquish control without trust, so you have to learn to trust God.
*  To trust God, you have to know Him, and to know Him is to love Him. And so, for me personally,
*  growing up, going through certain difficulties, having a sick parent who struggled in her life
*  with cancer and with strokes, dealing with racism in South Louisiana growing up, it was important for
*  me to learn about God through my difficulties, for example, rather than let those difficulties
*  turn me away from Him. Many times, people put a barrier between them and God because they can't
*  make sense of the things that are happening in their own lives. And so, they project anger
*  towards God, and at the same time, deny their own belief in Him, and do away with this natural
*  disposition that every one of us has to believe in Him. So, there are intellectual barriers,
*  certainly. There are experiential barriers. But I think that one of the beautiful things about
*  Islam is clarity. There is an explanation for His existence. There is an explanation for our
*  existence. There is an explanation for the existence of difficulties and trial, an explanation for
*  the existence of desires and distractions. And it all comes together so beautifully and coherently
*  in Islam. And so, I think that for many of us, we want to be our own gods. And ultimately,
*  we create and fashion gods in ways that allow us to still be the ultimate determiners of our own
*  fates, of our own story. And that's very unfulfilling when you fail at your own plan.
*  But when you realize that there is one who is all-knowing, that there is one who is all-wise,
*  you actually find peace in submitting yourself to Him. And so, submitting your will to Him,
*  submitting your desires, submitting your own fate to Him becomes actually an experience of liberation
*  because you trust the one that you're submitting to. You trust His knowledge over yours.
*  You trust His wisdom over yours. And that gives you a lot of peace. And then you have direct
*  access to Him. You pray to Him. You call upon Him. You supplicate. And everything in your life
*  suddenly has meaning. In our faith, everything is about intention. And there is an intentionality,
*  even behind the most seemingly most mundane actions. A morsel of food in the mouth of
*  your spouse, your family is looked at as a great charity. The way that you enter into a place and
*  exit out of a place, what foot you step in, what foot you step out with, there's an intentionality.
*  There's a word of remembrance that's spoken. There's a word of praise before and after you
*  engage in any action. There are things that you say before you eat, before you sleep,
*  there is meaning even to your sleep. One of the great companions of the Prophet Muhammad,
*  peace and blessings be upon him, he said that, I seek the reward for my sleep just as I seek
*  the reward for my prayer because you sleep to refresh yourself so that you can once again do
*  great things. And the intentionality behind that allows even the sleep to be rewardable.
*  You eat to nourish yourself so that you can do great things. You seek to be in a position of
*  independence and of being sustained so that you can sustain others. So the Prophet, peace be upon
*  him, says, for example, that the upper hand is better than the lower hand. The upper hand is the
*  giving hand. The lower hand is the receiving hand. So to seek a position where you can help other
*  people, everything becomes intentional. And there's no such thing as something that is meaningless
*  and without purpose. So every pursuit is ultimately a pursuit of God. And when you pursue God sincerely,
*  then he rewards you not just with paradise in the afterlife, but he rewards you with a great sense
*  of serenity and self-satisfaction here. You mentioned part of the struggle growing up
*  was having a parent, your mom, who was sick. What do you remember about your mom? What are some happy,
*  pleasant memories? So my parents were, well, my father, thank God, is still alive.
*  My mother was a pious woman, a beautiful woman, a righteous woman, a woman who was known for treating
*  everyone with a great deal of love and respect. She was a poet. She used to write poetry about
*  oppressed peoples around the world. From her homeland in Palestine to the genocide in Bosnia,
*  she followed every conflict before social media and poured her heart into it. She was a woman of
*  great charity. So when I think back to my mom growing up, she was known for her smile. My mom
*  was always smiling. And in fact, every picture of her, she's smiling. And at her funeral, people
*  talked about her smile, that she would smile at everyone. And that was kind of her thing. So if
*  you were left out of a gathering, she was smiling at you and she'd kind of welcome you in.
*  I remember my mom to be content. She was a woman of prayer and a woman of contentment.
*  I used to see her in her prayer clothes all the time. In fact, when I think back to her growing up,
*  I think of her more in her prayer clothes than in her normal clothes because that's how often she
*  was engaged in prayer. And I think of her making sure that everyone was included in a conversation.
*  So she was very interesting in that she had several strokes. And each one of those strokes
*  impaired one of her senses to some extent. So she was partially deaf because of one stroke.
*  And she'd be sitting in a gathering and she'd be pretty quiet with a big smile on her face,
*  very serene. And she would tell me, you know, alhamdulillah, which means thank God, all praise
*  be to God, that I can't hear because I can tell when people are gossiping, when people are saying
*  negative things around me about other people, because she says even the look on people's faces
*  changes. So it was really interesting because she was that spiritually rooted and deep that she said
*  like you could see on the looks on people's faces when they started to speak ill about other people
*  that their faces would change, that their demeanor would change. And she said, I would actually praise
*  the Lord that I couldn't engage in those conversations and that I wasn't sinful for hearing them.
*  And what she would do is what people said at her funeral, which was really beautiful to me and was
*  very comforting to me. And I took it as a life mission that if you were new to a place or if you
*  were kind of in the corner and not known to other people in the community and you felt left out,
*  she was the one that literally would look around the room and she'd see who was standing in the
*  corner and who was new to the community or new to whatever place. And she'd go and try to include
*  that person in the gathering. So even when she had impaired speech and impaired hearing
*  with her smile and with her warmth, she was able to welcome people wherever that was. And so the
*  amount of people that came to her funeral and the stories that I continue to hear until this day,
*  15 years later, after her passing away, of people that said, you know, no one ever treated me the
*  way your mother treated me. And she connected that to God. So that was actually part of my
*  faith journey. When I think of great people, when I think of people of faith, she's the first person
*  that comes to my mind because despite her challenges, she was always the greatest person
*  that you would meet. Anyone that met her and that knew her would say, I've never met anyone that
*  kind. That was her reputation. And she was deeply empathetic. She would shed tears over people that
*  she had no connection to. This is again, before social media, before the heavy exposure that we
*  have to people in conflict zones, she had to engage every single human being in her life
*  in a deep and profound way because she had a profound connection to God. And she believed
*  that that was her calling and none of her challenges made her bitter. In fact, they only
*  made her more connected to God and they only made her a better person until the last breath that she
*  took. Yeah. I mean, yes, absolutely. But I feel like everything I do is an extension of her.
*  So you try to carry what she stood for.
*  Absolutely.
*  As part of yourself.
*  The prophet Muhammad peace be upon him said that when a person passes away,
*  there are only three things that continue to benefit them, that continue to extend them.
*  A continuous charity or a piece of knowledge that continues to benefit people
*  or a righteous child that prays for them. And I want to be that child that prays for her,
*  but also does charity in her name, extends her charity, extends what she taught me
*  by being the person that she was to everyone around me. And there's sometimes where I don't
*  feel like getting out of bed. Sometimes where I don't feel like doing for myself, but I actually
*  feel like doing for her. So everything in my life that I try to do, I try to make it an extension of
*  her. And that's been my calling. And I believe I'll meet her again. I believe I'll be with her
*  again. I believe that everything I do that is good will be of benefit to her. And I believe that it
*  would make her proud. And so as much as I miss her, as much as I am fueled to do for her. And so
*  I continue that. And that's kind of become part of my life. It's been my life story as a child.
*  And as an adult, it's been sort of the centerpiece of my life to do things that extend her.
*  And ultimately in the process, hopefully benefit me because I believe that she's
*  a woman who I pray is destined for paradise. And I want to do the things that would get me there too.
*  What did you learn about death, about life from losing her?
*  Well, I feel like the facade of the material world was made evident to me at a very young age.
*  Most children grow up and their parents want to protect them from everything. And I felt that
*  too. My mother wanted to downplay her own tragedy so that me and my brother could live a fruitful
*  and fulfilling life. My father wanted to protect us from the hardship of her life so that we could
*  live fulfilling lives. He'd often be the only father on a field trip, even though he was a
*  distinguished professor. He was a busy man. He was a very busy man, but he tried to show up at
*  a field trip and tried to make our lives as normal as possible. But in the process,
*  we always understood that there was more to life than what other children were seeing it as. And
*  now I know that as an adult, there's more to life than what other adults see it as. The material
*  world disappointed early on so that we could see beyond it. And I often tell people that
*  there are many that grow up in tragedy, orphan children, refugees, that grow up and do incredible
*  things because they immediately see past the facade. They see through all of the material
*  promises of this world, the deception of it. And that you can choose to be bitter as a result of
*  that, or you can choose to be better. And I think that for me, I had to consciously make that decision
*  that I was going to live a life of prayer. I was going to live a life of charity. I was going to
*  live a life of commitment. And in that process, invest in something that's greater. Invest in
*  something that doesn't disappoint. And so I believe in God. I believe in the hereafter.
*  And I believe that God will not let any trial or effort in this life go to waste without it being
*  repaid in the hereafter. And so I work towards that. And so life and death, I understood existence
*  to be transcendent early on. That if I believed that there was nothing to life except for life,
*  I would be a very bitter person. But because I know that there is more to it than this,
*  I'm able to exist in it without being depressed by it.
*  R. Existence is transcendence. What happens after we die? After
*  the material instantiation fades away?
*  A. So the Quran tells us that God brought us from the darkness of the womb into this life.
*  You were nothing but a dirty drop of fluid. And you became this fully proportioned human
*  being from the darkness of the womb. You come into this life. You experience it. And then you
*  go to the darkness of the grave only to be resurrected once again. And that we are
*  souls with bodies, not bodies with souls. And there's a huge difference between those two things.
*  This is the vehicle that contains us here. This is the material world that we encounter here.
*  But we are not this. And this is not our entire existence. And so the soul continues.
*  This is a life in which we seek to worship Him and seek to live in accordance with the purpose
*  that He has set out for us. And after we pass away, our soul continues onwards, either to reward or
*  to punishment or to a mixture of both. But it's a realm of accountability. And hopefully it's a
*  realm of reward should we exist in a way that He wants us to exist.
*  A. So you said that you can look to God for wisdom to make sense of the world.
*  There's a lot of stuff to us humans that's difficult to make sense of.
*  A. Like you losing your mother. There's a lot of cruelty in the world. There's a lot of suffering
*  in the world. What wisdom have you been able to find from God about why there is suffering in the
*  world, why there's cruelty? B. You know, there's a saying that I wanted to ask God about why He
*  allows hunger and war and poverty. But I was afraid He might ask me the same question.
*  God has certainly given us enough food. There's enough food in the world for everyone to have a
*  3,200 calorie diet a day. God has certainly given us enough guidance for us to not inflict on each
*  other the cruelty that we inflict. When we look to the world around us, first and foremost, we have
*  to have a sense of accountability. We are accountable for our own actions. We don't blame God
*  for the evil of man. That's one. But at the same time, we understand that God and His wisdom
*  allows for certain outcomes that we cannot encompass with our own. And that to isolate
*  these incidents and to try to make sense of them is no different than a baby in the womb,
*  that doesn't understand the world that it's coming into and trying to explain to that baby
*  that hasn't yet developed its own senses and its own perception of this world what is happening to
*  it. Right? You know, I often think of the example of a child and, you know, having been at this point
*  now through the experience of parenthood, I'm still learning. I'm just going into having a teenager
*  with three kids and being a softie for my kids, you know, when you have to tell your child
*  that they can't have something that they really, really want. And that child thinks you hate them
*  at some point, you know, because why are you stopping me from putting this toy in my mouth
*  and choking myself? They don't get it, right? But at the same time, you prevent them out of love.
*  They're not in a position to understand that you're preventing them out of love.
*  And to isolate these incidents with God and to say, the wisdom, what's the wisdom? You're
*  trying to make sense of a pixel when you can't see the bigger picture. Your mind is not at a place
*  where you can make sense of the bigger picture. You haven't seen the bigger picture. And so,
*  for him to even explain to us every incident would completely defeat the purpose.
*  Of putting your trust in him. So, we believe in a God that is all-encompassing in his knowledge
*  and wisdom that gives us, and Islam is very specific by the way that there is what God
*  tells us to do and there's what God allows to happen. So, what God tells us to do in terms of
*  the roadmap towards good and then what God allows to happen in his divine wisdom that no outcome
*  can escape him. But at the same time, we are accountable for our own actions and our own deeds.
*  So, when you come to someone and say, you know, why did God allow this to happen to this person?
*  I can't rationalize that for you because my understanding is relegated to the immediate
*  experience in front of me. But if I know God and if I learn about God, then I don't have to make
*  sense of the plan. But I can tell you that I trust the planner. And I think that that's where
*  peace is found. You know, a lot of times you look for the light at the end of the tunnel. What's the
*  light at the end of the tunnel? In Islam, there's emphasis on God and the hereafter because to try
*  to make sense of divine decree and why certain things happen in this world without the existence
*  of a God or without the existence of a hereafter will always fail you. So, the existence of a God
*  that is all-knowing what we don't know, I know what you don't know, that understands what we
*  don't understand, the existence of a God who is not subject to our constrictions, and the existence
*  of a hereafter where all things find recourse, where there's divine recourse, allows for this
*  world to be situated within the existence of something greater and not treated in isolation.
*  So, when you're trying to treat an incident of this world in isolation, you're going to fail.
*  And when you try to treat existence in this world and of this world in isolation, you're also going
*  to fail. And so, the emphasis is the belief in God, a God that is not limited like you are,
*  and a belief in the hereafter that is not limited like this life. And so, everything continues
*  onwards and there is divine recourse for everything, each and everything. The prophet
*  Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him, mentions that on the day of judgment, a person who lived the
*  most difficult of lives will be dipped into paradise one time and will be told, have you ever
*  seen any sadness, any hardship? Now, when you think about the most difficult life, some of the
*  commentators in Islam, they said that this is perhaps referring to the prophet Job, Ayub,
*  peace be upon him, because Job lived obviously a life of great difficulty, but that a person who
*  lived a very hard life would be dipped into paradise one time. And just with a dip, be asked,
*  have you ever seen any hardship? Have you ever seen any misery? And that person would say,
*  what is sadness? What is hardship? What is misery? Now, if you don't believe in the hereafter,
*  if you don't believe in anything beyond this life, then the recourse has to happen in this life.
*  And because we see so many people pass through this life without recourse of cruelty, without
*  recourse of suffering, then we're forced to try to make sense of it. And if you are someone who
*  believes that this entire world came into existence through randomness, that we're just
*  an existence of random atoms that collide with each other and that all of this comes together out
*  of nothing, then how can you put your trust in anything that is greater? So you asked me as a
*  child of a parent who suffered, I believe that every moment that my mother suffered,
*  that she will be rewarded, that she will be elevated, that all of that made her or contributed
*  to the beautiful person that she was and will contribute to the beautiful reward that she
*  receives. And the recourse is certain to me as a believer in that. So the right approach to making
*  sense of the world, especially making sense of suffering and cruelty is that of humility
*  that we as humans cannot possibly understand fully. Absolutely. In fact, in the Quran,
*  it's very interesting. When God creates Adam, the angels say to God, are you going to create
*  a race or a species that will spill blood and cause corruption? And God says to the angels
*  in response to that question, I know that which you don't know. So even the angels have to humble
*  themselves for a moment. The angels who adore God, who love God, who worship him, who obey him
*  unconditionally, they are told by God, I know that which you don't know. And what we extract from
*  that, what many of the early interpretations extract from that is that God knows that there
*  are human beings that will come out of this enterprise of humanity that make the entire
*  existence of it worth it. And so just as, yes, there will be criminals and corrupt ones,
*  there will be prophets and beautiful people that come out of this and sages and saints that come
*  out of this that show that a human being who unlike an angel who has no choice but to worship
*  God, an angel has no sense of will, no sense of choice. An angel is created to worship and has
*  no desires. A human being who has the choice of desire and worship, the choice of righteousness
*  and wickedness, that there are human beings who will choose worship and righteousness,
*  that will choose charity over cruelty, that will choose service and choose dedication and devotion
*  over death and destruction, that there are human beings that will in fact ascend the angels in
*  rank because they will live lives where they choose that capacity, that part of themselves,
*  and they lean into that and worship God lovingly and obey him. You see, some of the sages in Islam,
*  scholars, they describe this as saying that the human being has the capacity to be anywhere from
*  an animal to an angel or even worse, to be a devil to an angel, not in the sense that we ever
*  actually become angels or become animals, but that an animal for the most part seeks its desires
*  over everything, doesn't really think about many of the things that we are supposed to calculate
*  as human beings, doesn't think about which territory it's infringing upon or how much of
*  its appetite it should fulfill. It simply exists to fulfill its appetite and that many human beings
*  simply exist to fulfill their appetite and they choose that over worship or reason or anything
*  that is greater. They literally take their selves as gods in that sense and their selves have no
*  limitation on appetite, so they just keep filling that appetite and filling that appetite and filling
*  that appetite. Whereas a human being can also go to the extent of choosing something greater
*  and disciplining their desires, disciplining their selves because they're seeking a greater reward.
*  We know many people that achieve great things in the worldly sense because they choose to study
*  over sleep, for example. They choose to exert themselves towards their careers, towards their
*  education because they believe that ultimately the outcome of those pursuits are more rewarding
*  than the immediate fulfillment of their desires. So as believers, we choose that love of God and
*  we choose that outcome that we seek and we discipline ourselves to where we can even ascend
*  past the angels in rank. Now, of course, I said we can go as low as an animal or as low as a devil
*  and we have tyrants, past and present and future as well, that can become satanic in their nature
*  because they allow their desires to take such control over them that they not only worship them
*  but that every other existing being around them simply becomes a piece of their own puzzle in
*  pursuit of their own lordship and their own satisfaction. They will kill, they will discard,
*  not because, and I always say this, it's not that tyrants necessarily like killing people,
*  it's that people's lives pose somewhat of an indifference to them. They're indifferent to
*  people's existence and so you become either an object for or against me and so they're willing
*  to discard. Children discard people, discard the rights of others because they ultimately have
*  chosen that the greatest pursuit of themselves is the maximum position of power and a place to where
*  they can fulfill what they want to of themselves without any limits and everyone else becomes
*  either a threat or an opportunity in that regard. So we can be devils, we can be angelic-like,
*  we could be animals, we're somewhere on that spectrum.
*  And every moment contains a set of choices you can make.
*  Absolutely. Every single moment contains a set of choices and that's where the intentionality comes
*  in. So the Prophet Muhammad says that, peace be upon him, that I saw a person strolling in paradise
*  because he removed something harmful from the road. He tells us about a woman that lived a life in
*  prostitution but that repented to God when she was thirsty one day and she saw a dog that was
*  also thirsty and she said that I was thirsty and God gave me water so I'm going to choose to give
*  water to that thirsty dog and God enters her into paradise as a result of that. Sometimes the small
*  moments with a small sincere deed can have a huge impact on a person's trajectory. So every moment
*  is a moment of choices and when we choose belief, righteousness, a pursuit of something greater,
*  then we find ways to turn things that are otherwise mundane into miraculous acts,
*  right? Where we can choose God over ourselves and in the process choose a better fate for ourselves.
*  How difficult is the process of knowing, understanding what is the righteous action
*  of knowing what it means to be a good man or a good woman?
*  Well, the truth has consequences. So don't seek out the truth unless you're willing to
*  abide by what you find. So a lot of people want to mold their journey in accordance with
*  a predetermined pursuit that they already have. And so when they approach religion,
*  they approach it like another product. There was an article that was actually written by a
*  rabbi, I've spoken about this in several sermons. It was called the allure of narcissistic
*  spirituality. The allure of narcissistic spirituality where he talks about how religion
*  becomes just another product of your own self-adoration and worship to where you only
*  approach religion to the extent that it gives you more happiness in the worldly sense. You only
*  approach of it what is therapeutic. So it becomes just as secular in its nature as any other practice
*  of meditation or whatever it may be or some other product. And he kind of mentions how he took that
*  from a person that is praying in a temple and a guy walks into the temple and bumps into him,
*  then he curses the guy out. So he didn't see his behavior towards that person as
*  part of his trajectory of worship. He just saw his being godly as the worship that he was engaged in.
*  The truth has consequences. The truth has circumstances that are required of you,
*  actions that are required of you that may be somewhat inconvenient. So you have to be willing
*  to engage in a sincere pursuit of truth and look for truth for what it is and not simply look for
*  comfort and convenience. And when you engage in that journey of wanting to know, you have to engage
*  it thoroughly and sincerely and try your best to remove any bias. I think that's what makes the
*  religion of Islam such a phenomenon for people that with all the Islamophobia and the bigotry
*  towards it, it's still the fastest growing religion in the United States and the fastest
*  growing religion in the world. And no, that's not all birth rate. Yeah, we have a lot of kids,
*  but many people, you met someone just before we started this interview, many people in fact,
*  in a post-9-11 world saw what they saw of Islam in the media and they actually went and checked
*  out copies of the Quran and started to read about the religion and in their sincere pursuit of truth
*  ended up embracing a religion that they believed was the greatest source of destruction in the
*  world. And now it's the greatest source of peace for them in their own existence, in their own
*  lives. And so you have to be willing to engage in a sincere pursuit of wanting to know and then be
*  willing to engage in sincere commitment after you know, otherwise the heart rusts. And so there's a
*  process in the Quran talks about this of making the heart like fertile soil towards truth.
*  So you have a sincere pursuit, but then at some point, if you come to know and then you ignore
*  what you come to know, then the heart rusts and it becomes harder to recognize it the second time
*  around and the third time around. And so when people come to me and they say, you know,
*  I'm looking for something, I'm looking for God, I'm looking for my purpose. The first thing I
*  tell them as I say, listen, what you need to do is if you're really looking for God and you believe
*  in God and there are often people that say I believe in God, but I don't know where to go with
*  this, right? I know that there's something greater and in Islam, we call that the fitra, a natural
*  disposition towards the belief in the existence of God. But where do I go from here? You know,
*  what do I do now? And I say, the first thing you need to do is you need to sincerely say, oh God,
*  guide me to the truth. Call upon God sincerely, say I'm calling upon you alone and I'm asking you
*  to guide me to the truth. Show me what it is. Right? And that's the heart function.
*  Then you need to actually investigate and try to suspend bias, right? Investigate the world's
*  religions, investigate the claims to truth, investigate, use, you know, rational inquiry
*  to the extent that the heart becomes satisfied and suspend bias and you'll be surprised. And so for
*  a lot of people, they come to me and they say, you know, this about Islam, I'm like, look, I'm,
*  if you're just going to talk to me about what you've seen of Islam in the media,
*  if you were serious about it, you know, if you're serious about it, then you're not simply
*  going to be satisfied with the highly edited images and distorted facts that come towards you
*  about this religion, right? What are you looking for? Right? Are you looking for a scapegoat?
*  Islam poses a threat to many people, right? Are you looking for a scapegoat? Are you looking for
*  the big, bad, scary foreign enemy? Or are you looking at a religion that one fourth of the
*  world adheres to? And if one fourth of us were bad, the world would not exist. Right? So are
*  you looking towards this religion that one fourth of the world adheres to? Are you going to read
*  about the Prophet Muhammad peace be upon him? Are you going to read the Quran yourself? Are you going
*  to investigate for yourself what it is that this faith has to offer and find in it a great sense of
*  wisdom, a great sense of beauty, a great sense of truth. And I think that for a lot of people,
*  you know, they find that Islam has such a beautiful combination of the intellectual
*  proofs as well as the spiritual experiences that often combine what people seek in the
*  Western and the Eastern religion. So I had an interesting two weeks, two weeks in a row.
*  This was August, two weeks in a row, I had someone who converted to Islam
*  that went from being, that started off as a Methodist, went from being a Methodist to being
*  a Buddhist to being a Muslim. So two weeks in a row, I had a Methodist turned Buddhist turned Muslim.
*  Great journey.
*  Yeah, I called my Methodist friends. I have a lot of Methodist pastors in the city that I work with
*  and I said, what's going on here, man? Sending people onto this interesting journey of Buddhism
*  and then Islam. But both of them had a very similar story, which is that they had sought
*  in Buddhism, for example, the, you know, some of the meditative practices that are found,
*  that really Western religion, which has been dominated by capitalism and
*  dominated by very material things and can be very unfulfilling. They found that in some of
*  the Eastern philosophies and the meditative practices. And then they came to Islam and it
*  combines, you know, their belief in sort of the Abrahamic way. It merged their belief in one God
*  and the prophets like Abraham and Moses and Jesus, peace be upon them all, with a deep tradition
*  of meditative practices, of consciousness, of connection to God on a regular basis.
*  And they found that to be very fulfilling, both intellectually and spiritually. And so I was like,
*  that's interesting, you know, two people in two weeks that went through that journey. So
*  I think Islam is very wholesome, comprehensive when people actually approach it with humility
*  and appreciate what it has to offer.
*  LW As you mentioned, in the minds of some Americans, after 9-11, the religion of Islam
*  was associated with maybe you could say evil in the world, maybe you can say terrorism. How can
*  you respond to this association? How does it make you feel, first of all, as a devout Muslim yourself?
*  LW How can you overcome it personally? How can you overcome it as a community and as a religious
*  leader? LW It's interesting because 9-11 now, we're talking over 21 years ago. LW You know,
*  there's people born after 9-11. You get to talk to them all the time. LW Yeah, so when I'm talking
*  to young Muslims, I'm talking about post-9-11, post-9-11, they're like, I was born in 2005,
*  what are you talking about post-9-11? I'm like, well, I remember being a teenager. I remember
*  being in high school when this happened, right? So a lot of us that experienced 9-11 as high schoolers
*  or as college students and remember distinctly what it was like to be a Muslim pre-9-11 and post-9-11,
*  we can relate to that experience and we could identify that juncture very clearly and talk
*  about it and speak to the change in the perceptions of Islam that happened here in the United States
*  and around the world. But a lot of young people are born into that reality and are experiencing
*  the aftermath of it. And unfortunately, I have to deal with the bigotry that has
*  not just taken greater shape in media constructions of Islam, but also policies, right? A lot of the
*  civil liberties of the Muslim community were taken away from us. You read about the Patriot Act,
*  you read about the securitization of the Muslim community and some of the unfair practices that
*  have been engaged by the Bush administration, the Obama administration, the Trump administration,
*  and continue into the Biden administration, international Islamophobia. And so,
*  the hatred of Muslims and the bigotry that is wielded against Muslims on the basis of this idea
*  that we are a barbaric people, not ascribed to a religion of hate and violence,
*  has had immediate consequences for us no matter where we are in terms of our age and
*  in terms of our experience. We have dealt with that in different ways. Now,
*  the association of Islam to terrorism is a lazy association. It's one that ignores
*  both the history of violence as well as its everyday occurrence.
*  We're good for how many mass shootings a year? When's the last time you heard of a Muslim
*  carrying out a mass shooting in America? How many of those mass shootings, if you were to
*  scrub the social media? What, 400, 500 mass shootings a year? If you were to scrub the
*  social media of some of those that carried out those shootings, we're good for one or two idiots
*  a year. It's unfortunate that you're going to have people that carry out despicable acts of violence.
*  But when we as Muslims hear someone in the media say terrorism has been ruled out as a possibility
*  while the blood is still on the floor of that Walmart, we already know that the police chief
*  just said that that wasn't a Muslim. Don't worry. That wasn't an Al-Qaeda guy or an ISIS guy.
*  It was one of our own. It's become frankly ridiculous because the association of violence
*  with Islam is one that is used to actually carry out acts of violence against Muslims worldwide.
*  It justifies bad policy towards Muslims worldwide and in the United States. It's just factually so
*  lazy. There was a study just about how the media gives more attention to acts of violence done by
*  Muslims and immediately stamps it with Islam, up to 300% more than it will with another act of
*  violence carried out in the name of anything else. So you don't hear about the acts of violence that
*  are carried out by others. You don't hear about the religion of the perpetrators. You don't
*  associate terrorism with actions frankly of state terrorism. When governments launch chemical attacks
*  or drone weddings and do so while explicitly dehumanizing the people, just because they do so
*  with the government apparatus doesn't make it any less terroristic than if it's a lone person that
*  goes out and commits an act of violence trying to achieve a political goal. So the association is
*  lazy historically speaking. The crusades, I grew up in Louisiana. I saw KU Klux Klan rallies my
*  whole life and people said, well, that's a thing of the past. Well, guess what? We see many
*  semblances, many acts that are carried out with the same vitriol that was generated by the KU Klux Klan.
*  We have people standing in front of our mosques that belong to right-wing hate militias carrying
*  AR-15s talking about wanting to inflict harm on Muslims. I have been to Christchurch, New Zealand
*  and buried the victims of a white supremacist terrorist who was inspired by the political
*  rhetoric here in the United States in his own words, in his manifesto, to go and kill
*  50 innocent people in Christchurch, New Zealand, one of the most peaceful cities in the world.
*  And by the way, Lex, I mean, it's really interesting like with Christchurch,
*  you know, the man wanted, and I won't even say his name, but his next target after the two mosques,
*  had he not been stopped, was to go to a Muslim daycare. So what drives someone to dehumanize
*  people to that extent that he was willing to go to a daycare and murder a bunch of kids because he
*  saw them as a demographic threat to civilization? So Muslims are terrorized because they are falsely
*  depicted as terrorists. Muslims suffer domestically and globally because of this
*  false association. It's a lazy association. And when someone comes around and says, well,
*  fine, not all Muslims are terrorists, but all terrorists are Muslims, I say that.
*  You clearly don't read statistics. Whether we're talking about the 20th century,
*  and I'm a student of history and I believe you are as well, all the isms, World War I, World War II,
*  had nothing to do with religion, certainly had nothing to do with Islam, fascism, Soviet atheism,
*  right? Many of these systems where people were murdered in the millions, Nazism, the Holocaust,
*  Rwanda, Cambodia, I can go on and on, the Rohingya today, the greatest atrocity towards the Uyghurs.
*  Where does Islam fit in all of this? People do horrible things. They stamp it with religion at
*  times. But the only group of people that seem to suffer after an act of violence is committed
*  are Muslims because any act of violence that is committed by a Muslim will immediately
*  be blamed on Islam and 2 billion people will have to carry the burden of the act of a single
*  perpetrator. And just to reiterate, in case the numbers are not known, you mentioned Christ
*  Church. Those are two mosque shootings with 51 people killed and 48 were injured in New Zealand.
*  So it's hate manifesting itself and then actual human suffering and destruction.
*  Absolutely. Is there similarities between
*  anti-Semitism and anti-Muslim hate? So is there something deeper to say about hate in general
*  here that is beyond just particularly hate towards Muslims? Absolutely. Look, in Pittsburgh,
*  the synagogue shooting, the perpetrator particularly targeted that synagogue because-
*  Tree of Life Synagogue. Tree of Life Synagogue.
*  11 killed, 6 wounded in 2018. Because he believed that they were
*  taking in Syrian refugees or supporting Syrian Muslim refugees. You think about that. The San
*  Diego synagogue shooting that took place shortly after. He went to a mosque and then he went to a
*  synagogue. Look, the idea of scapegoating minority populations and attributing to them
*  a disproportionate sense of power and an nefarious element where they can't be trusted,
*  and unless we wipe them out, then they're going to wipe us out, underlies many of the bigotries
*  that exist. Look, after Trump announced his Muslim ban, there was a shooting in Canada,
*  an attack in Canada on a mosque in Quebec where 6 people were killed. The shooter explicitly said
*  that the reason why he went to that mosque in Quebec and shot dead 6 Muslim worshippers was
*  because he was afraid that because of the ban on Syrian refugees in the United States, they would
*  come to Canada and he didn't want them to feel welcomed in Canada. So there is a connection.
*  I think it's when you are able to dehumanize large groups of people and attribute an nefarious
*  element to them, then unfortunately in a world that's becoming more and more polarized where
*  people are able to construct their entire worldviews based on an algorithm that their
*  social media caters to, you're going to have some of these attacks happen and there's going
*  to be an unfortunate connection between them. So what I tell people is that I think with all
*  of these people that shoot up synagogues and shoot up mosques, and even before that actually,
*  the Charleston, South Carolina shooting at an AME church, when he went there,
*  he actually said that before he murdered 9 worshippers in that church, he was taken aback
*  by how nice they were to him. He sat there for 2 hours before he turned a gun on many people who
*  were over the age of 80 years old and murdered them in cold blood. So this is what I talk about
*  when I say that as human beings, we have the propensity, unfortunately, to become worse than
*  devils or we can choose to be angelic when we choose worship and righteousness over ourselves.
*  So that's a spiritual crisis as well and a crisis of meaning and emptiness where I think
*  people are willing to inflict great pain on others when they can't make sense of their pain
*  in their own lives. I'd like to try to figure out together with you sort of a way out to try to
*  decrease the amount of hate in the world, but maybe it's useful to talk about the BBC documentary
*  that it's kind of interesting that people should check out. It's called United States of Hate,
*  Muslims Under Attack and you appear in that. You have conversations with people who are
*  anti-Muslim and I believe most of it takes place here in Dallas. Can you just tell me about this
*  little documentary about that time? What it was like to interact? What was the group in the
*  documentary and what was it like to interact with them? In the very beginning of the rise of,
*  at that time actually, Ted Cruz, Donald Trump, when Islamophobia was at the centre of many of
*  the presidential candidates' campaigns at the time. So this must have been 2015.
*  Yes, 2015. The mayor of Irving at the time, Beth Van Dyne, who is now a congresswoman,
*  had put out the idea that Muslims were operating a Sharia court in Irving, Texas.
*  And suddenly there was a hysteria because again, there's the idea that Muslims are here to dominate.
*  Muslims are here to overthrow everything that you have in the United States. There was hysteria here
*  and it was unfortunate because what it unleashed, especially with the national discourse at the
*  time, again, the presidential campaign, Donald Trump says, I think Islam hates us. When he uses
*  those words, I think Islam hates us. When Ted Cruz suggests that Muslim neighbourhoods could
*  be patrolled or should be patrolled. And then you have the Irving mayor saying that one of the most
*  populated cities with Muslims in America, they're operating under an alternative legal system.
*  Funny enough, the year before that she'd come to the mosque and she praised the diversity of Irving
*  and she was talking about how welcome she felt in the mosque. And the next thing we know,
*  you have these crazy white supremacist groups, openly white supremacists that affiliate themselves
*  with the Klan and others protesting regularly in front of our mosques with their AR-15s
*  and telling people to go back home. And I'm like, I'm from New Orleans. I'm not planning to move
*  back to New Orleans. I'm home. We're home. We're good. We're staying put. And we refuse to be
*  intimidated. But then when the Syrian refugee crisis is unfolding as well, Dallas has been
*  one of the more popular destinations, if you will. I'm not talking about it like a vacation
*  destination, but where a lot of refugees have come to just because of the infrastructure that
*  we have set up here to receive refugees. And so that hysteria was an unfortunate, perfect combustion
*  of the national discourse with the local discourse with the incoming refugees. And we would do all
*  sorts of welcome refugee events and we do that. And we don't only do that for Muslim refugees,
*  by the way. There are refugees from other parts of the world as well. But we would host events
*  at our mosques to welcome refugees, to help integrate them into the community, to do things
*  for them. So you have these armed protests happening, right? And it's horrible because
*  I think about the trauma to the children that are hearing about Tree of Life and hearing about some
*  of these other incidents that are unfolding. And really one of the first communities that was
*  targeted was the Sikh community in Madison. That was one of the first shootings. And then the AME
*  church, Charleston. And then you just had tons of places of worship being targeted, right? So they're
*  seeing this unfold and they're seeing these guns in front of their mosques. And the result
*  to many is, well, I just don't want to get shot. I don't want to go to the mosque. I don't want
*  to have this happen to me. So when BBC reached out and said, we want to do a documentary about this,
*  unfortunately, Dallas was the only place in America where you had regular
*  armed groups in front of our mosques. It was happening around the country infrequently,
*  but here it was happening every week. So the BBC reached out and said, we want to interview you.
*  They said, we've got this idea. We want to put you, we want to take you to a park and have you meet
*  one of the protesters who've been wielding his gun outside your mosque and talk to him. And it was
*  really interesting because they'd interviewed him before meeting me and the things that he was able
*  to utter before meeting me and before meeting Syrian refugees was just awful. I mean, the most
*  dehumanizing rhetoric that you can imagine. But then at the park, he meets me, talks to me. He
*  meets a Syrian refugee family, one of the girls whose leg had been blown off in an airstrike.
*  And he said, I feel like an idiot. I mean, he expressed all sorts of regret and was teary-eyed
*  that he could dehumanize people the way that he was. And so my whole thing was and is,
*  come inside the mosque, put your gun down, disarm yourself and learn. And you'll be surprised what
*  you'll walk away with. And only took one meeting with him to completely shift his worldview at the
*  time, which was made up of heroes and villains, the Muslims, unfortunately, being the villains
*  that had to be wiped off the face of the earth so that the earth could continue.
*  So that was an interesting documentary and it was an interesting social experiment.
*  What's it feel like to have all these people that hate you and others in the community, people you
*  love with guns, threatening violence, basically that don't want you here in this country on this earth?
*  It's not nice. It's not great. I mean, it's definitely a challenge. But look, there are
*  challenges that we face as Muslims being in the United States, being in a hostile climate. There
*  are different types of challenges. And I think what we've had to do as a Muslim community
*  is see beyond both the guns and the roses and think about who we are as Muslims.
*  And think about who we are first, because frankly, Islamophobia exists in different
*  forms and from different sides. And we try to use this as an opportunity to instill in our
*  young people, not just the sense of belonging, but a sense of purpose.
*  Do not be intimidated. And in fact, show them the best of your Islam, live your life, because at
*  the end of the day, the goal that is sought through intimidation is silence. And so we have
*  to carry ourselves as proud American Muslims. We don't have to impress anyone. And we don't need
*  to relinquish an iota of our faith to coexist with anyone. We are satisfied with who we are.
*  We don't see a contradiction between our place of residence and our religion, our nationality,
*  our religion. We don't see that as a problem. So that's something for them to work out,
*  not for you to work out. That's what I would tell young Muslims that continue to live your faith
*  fully and demonstrate the beauty of it. And do not let the ugliness of the world consume you.
*  But for those young Muslims, what would you say how they should feel towards the people that hate
*  them? The natural human, there's a desire still to have anger, to have resentment, to have hate
*  back at the people that hate you. The Quran says, respond to that which is evil, with that which is
*  better. And you will find that sometimes your enemy will become your close friend. So respond
*  with that which is better. It doesn't mean be passive. Sometimes there needs to be a
*  demonstration of strength. Sometimes there needs to be a demonstration of ignoring people altogether.
*  But ultimately, you can't let the way people treat you shape who you're going to be in the world.
*  And so that's why I say we have to look beyond the guns and the roses. We have to look beyond
*  the hostility of our enemies and the temporary and opportunistic embrace of some of those who
*  claim to be our allies and be us and treat the world and treat the people of this world in
*  accordance with your standards, not with theirs. So don't teach them, you know, or don't let them
*  teach you bad character. You teach them good character. So live your life and live your faith
*  beautifully and let people see the beauty of it through your being. And do not let their ugliness
*  consume you. But at the same time, sometimes you've got to give people room to express
*  frustration, to say that this is unacceptable, to have demonstrations of strength.
*  And I think that those things don't have to all contradict each other.
*  What do you think about these kinds of protests are not allowed in many parts of the world?
*  What do you think about one of the most to you directly, personally painful manifestations
*  of the First Amendment, of the people's right to freedom of speech and to protest, to say hateful
*  things? You've been at the receiving end of the worst of it. What do you feel about this
*  particular freedom that's at the core of the founding of this country?
*  Look, I think that you have to take it away from the text and look at it within reality. Let's be
*  real. Would Muslims be able to protest in front of churches with guns on a weekly basis in this
*  country? I don't think so. So that's deep. Pragmatically speaking, there's a hypocrisy to
*  what's allowed and not. Major hypocrisy. Major hypocrisy. See, free speech is an ideal that is
*  weaponized against the Muslim community and against other communities in such a hypocritical
*  way. You take, for example, some countries in Europe. Let's move away from this and look at
*  the hypocrisy of a place like France where the caricaturing and the portrayal of the Prophet
*  Muhammad, peace be upon him, in derogatory ways will be used as the hallmark of free speech.
*  But Muslims that will caricature Macron or challenge some of the values of France,
*  the supposed enshrined values of France, will end up in prison and end up deported.
*  And so here in the United States, there's a great hypocrisy. I don't think that
*  places of worship should have armed protesters in front of them. I think that that poses a security
*  risk. I think that it's not okay. And I think that free speech is weaponized against the
*  Muslim community and often is held up as this great value, but really to attain very lowly things
*  and is often to our detriment. Yeah. Just even watching that documentary,
*  it's hard to put into words, but somehow that does not capture what maybe the founders intended.
*  What I would see is the great ideal of the freedom of speech.
*  I don't know what the solution to that is. I think taking it outside of words, maybe
*  that requires a community, a cultural pressure to be better.
*  It's not about the law. It's more about just the cultural pressure. What isn't, isn't okay.
*  Because there's something deeply wrong about that kind of hate. Yeah, because it was dehumanizing
*  other people that are here in America. They're Americans. Yeah. I mean, we have to interrogate
*  the foundations of our country when our country is in such turmoil.
*  The foundations of our country when our country is in such turmoil and such chaos.
*  No country in the world has the mass shootings that we have. No country in the world has
*  some of the polarization that we have. We have to interrogate that and say what it is that we're
*  doing wrong that's leading to that. And I think again, that it's reaching a point where it's
*  unsustainable. If we don't do better and try to solve some of the rifts right now
*  that exist in our society, then we're going to end up in a place where we may not be able to
*  climb out of this. What do you think about, you mentioned the Muslim ban, what do you think about
*  executive order 13769, title of protecting the nation from foreign terrorist entry into the
*  United States, often referred to as the Muslim ban or the Trump travel ban. It was an executive
*  order by President Trump that was in effect from January 27, 2017 for just a few months until March
*  6, 2017. What was this executive order and what was its effect on your life and on the life of
*  the Muslim community and just the life of Americans? Well, it was disgraceful. It was a
*  tactic that was used at the time, very similar to the whole build a wall rhetoric to play to a
*  particular political sloganeering and carrying out those types of acts against the Muslim community.
*  You're not going to face much opposition typically in any meaningful way that would be politically
*  costly. When he rolled it out at the time, there were people in flight on their way to the United
*  States that were held in airports around the country, children, elderly people that were held
*  in these small rooms and treated awfully before being put back on a plane and sent to where they
*  were. There were families that had medical needs that were never able to come together.
*  He specifically targeted Muslim countries to play to that idea of a complete ban of Muslims,
*  which he knew was not feasible at the time. Now, personally, Dallas had the largest amount,
*  the largest number of detainees in the airport. We have one of the largest airports in America
*  and we took to the airport and we stayed there for a few days, stayed overnight. It was one of the
*  New York Times pictures of the year when we did our prayer because when we had to do our prayer,
*  it wasn't just Muslims that came to the airport. It was many people that came to the airport of
*  different faiths that were outraged by what they had seen. When we do our prayer, there was a
*  protest chant that, you pray, we stay. The airport had to make room for us because
*  there were like a thousand people that needed to have our five daily prayers.
*  We would do our prayers in the airport. We waited. We continued until the detainees were freed,
*  at least temporarily. Unfortunately, some elements of that legislation remained and it was an ongoing
*  struggle. Look, what I'll say is that those are some of the more obvious manifestations of anti-Muslim
*  bigotry. Again, there's hypocrisy on all sides of the political aisle here in the United States.
*  There is Islamophobia of different flavors. I think even the term Islamophobia can become
*  contentious because there are people that attack us in different ways and that might not be as
*  overtly bigoted, but nonetheless are infringing on our rights to be full American Muslims.
*  Muslims find themselves in a very strange political place where you've got one side
*  that seemingly wants to annihilate you and another side that only accepts you
*  if you're willing to assimilate, but no one really allows you to be a full-on American Muslim.
*  Muslims find themselves in a very strange place right now with all of the political sides, with
*  the political parties. Where do Muslims sit politically? Are they politically engaged
*  in the function of the United States? Where do they find themselves politically as a community?
*  Muslims find themselves in an awkward place politically. That's the best way to put it.
*  We are a religious community and so we don't find ourselves welcomed by the left, which has a
*  hostility towards religion in most left spaces and most liberal spaces. In general, because
*  religion has many conservative elements. Right. The Muslim community is in its nature conservative
*  for what that's worth. It's a conservative community. It's a community that has certain
*  orthodoxies and practices that would make it disagreeable in its nature and its practice to
*  many on the left and many on the right just see us as a group of foreigners and a threat in that
*  regard. We find ourselves in this awkward place. There's also the presence of the pro-Israel
*  dominance of both parties. The foreign policy of both parties is detrimental to Muslims globally.
*  The securitization of the Muslim community and the name of countering violent extremism.
*  Unfortunately, the Muslim community has had both Republican and Democratic administrations just run
*  over its rights. We find ourselves in this awkward space. We are a religious community that's also
*  a minority. The racialization of the Muslim community robs us of who we are and how we get
*  to engage them with different platforms and different peoples around us. We find ourselves
*  in a very awkward place. Is there in general a lack of representation in places of power
*  and politics? I don't think representation is everything. I think that representation
*  can actually be detrimental sometimes because you can have people that represent you,
*  but that don't actually represent your priorities as a community, as a faith community.
*  We don't want to be tokenized as a community. We want to be engaged and engage fully as Muslims
*  and be respected as American Muslims. I wrote something at the time actually of Muslim Ban.
*  I wrote an article for CNN called, I am not your American Muslim. I am not your American Muslim.
*  Because we are not a tool of liberals against conservatives, nor are we simply to be made out
*  to be your villain or your victim. We're a people of faith. We're people that have values. We're
*  people that want to see our places of worship thrive. We're people that have something to offer
*  to this country, to the people around us of good. But ultimately, we want to engage
*  and be engaged with on the basis of who we actually are, not who you need us to be right now.
*  That's been the problem that we've had. It's not a lack of representation,
*  as much as a lack of authentic engagement. You mentioned daily prayer. If I may, looking at the
*  time, this might be time. If it's okay, I would love it if you allowed me to follow along, at
*  least in movement as you pray. Sure, absolutely. Thank you for allowing me to join you in that.
*  Can you maybe describe what does the prayer represent? What is the actual
*  practice of prayer like? What is the process like?
*  Sure. Prayer is the central pillar, if you will, of Islam. It is the life of the believer
*  encapsulated into a very specific act of devotion that's done at least five times a day. There are
*  different types of prayer. There's prayer. There's supplication. The five daily prayers are called
*  salah, which is the obligatory prayers. Beyond that, there are voluntary prayers that are done
*  throughout the day as well. You can pray before and after the obligatory prayers.
*  Then there are other times of the day that you can pray also. The best voluntary prayer is at night,
*  in the middle of the night, because it's the time that you're closest to God, sincere,
*  away from the eyes of people, just in the still of the night. You'd pray in a similar way with
*  the standing and the bowing and the prostration, reciting the Quran. Then you have supplication
*  and words of remembrance that you are to do throughout the day between all of that.
*  People say, do you pray five times a day? I say at least five times a day.
*  What are the words of supplication? Do they come from the Quran or do they come from your
*  own heart? Where do they come from? Basically, you say Allahu Akbar,
*  which means I'm going to kill you, right? Or so they say, right?
*  God is greater. You start off with that, an expression of God's greatness. Then you recite
*  the opening chapter of the Quran, which is known as Al-Fatiha. It's the first chapter of the Quran.
*  In the name of God, the most compassionate, the most merciful. All praises be to God,
*  the Lord of all the worlds, most compassionate, most merciful, master of the day of judgment.
*  You alone we worship and from you alone we seek help. Guide us to the straight path,
*  the path of those who have earned your favour, not those who have earned your wrath, nor those
*  who have gone astray. That's a translation of the first chapter, the opening chapter of the Quran,
*  which is known as Al-Fatiha. We recite that in every one of the units of prayer.
*  Then after that, we recite something else from the Quran, so some other portion of the Quran.
*  Then we say Allahu Akbar once again. God is greater. We go into bowing. In bowing,
*  we say Subhan Rabb-ul-Azim, which means glory be to God the Almighty. Glory be to God the Almighty.
*  And then you come back up and you say, God has heard the one who has praised him.
*  And then the response is Rabbana wa lakal hamd, and to you, O Lord, belongs all praise.
*  And then we go into prostration. And prostration is at the heart of the prayer.
*  And it is the most beautiful portion of the prayer and it is the most beloved position
*  for a servant of God and that which is most pleasing to God. It's when you say at that point,
*  Subhan Rabb-ul-Azim, all glory be to God the Most High. All glory be to God the Most High.
*  So while you put yourself in the lowest position, you acknowledge God being the Most High. And the
*  Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said that the closest that a person is to God is when
*  they are in prostration. That is the time that your supplications are most precious and beloved.
*  That is the time that you can cry your heart out. That is the time that you really feel a sense of
*  great closeness and devotion to God. And as I was telling you earlier, it's a time that your mind
*  is under your heart for a change, right? The only position, physical position, that your mind is
*  actually under your heart. And you really have a chance to pour your emotions out and to connect
*  deeply to God. It's the prayer of all of the prophets. Jesus, peace be upon him, is described
*  even biblically as falling on his face in prayer. And so it really is, I think, the most intimate
*  moment that you get with God and the deepest part of the prayer. The word Masjid, which is mosque
*  in Arabic means place of sujood, place of prostration. So think of the rest of prayer as
*  an introduction to that particular part of the prayer where you really immerse yourself. Not
*  that you shouldn't be immersed in your prayer throughout, but when you're in sujood, when you're
*  in prostration, that's where you're really closest and most connected to God. So we do that.
*  And so some prayers are two units. Well, the first prayer of the day, which is before sunrise,
*  the earliest prayer is two units. The second prayer, which is around noon, is four units.
*  And then afternoon, another four units. And then the sunset prayer is three units. And then the
*  evening prayer is four units. So each prayer has a different number of units to it and some voluntary
*  prayers that surround it. When you come back up, you express also a form of greeting towards God
*  and channeling your prayers and your blessings towards God. You reiterate the Shahada, which is
*  the first pillar of Islam. I testify that there's only one God and that Muhammad is his servant and
*  messenger. And then you read what's called Salah Ibrahimiyah, which is the Abrahamic prayer.
*  So you send peace and blessings upon Muhammad and his family and Abraham and his family.
*  Abraham, peace be upon him, is really at the core of this religion. And so
*  at the end of the prayer, you send peace and blessings and prayers upon, again, both Muhammad
*  and his family and Abraham and his family. And then you have another chance to make some of your own
*  personal prayers. And then you say, As-salamu alaykum wa rahmatullah, peace be on to you and
*  the mercy of God to your right, peace be on to you and the mercy of God to your left. And that
*  means everything and everyone to your right, everyone and everything to your left. So you
*  imagine a congregation when you're in worship, you're sending that to the angels and the human
*  beings next to you, your fellow worshipers next to you. And you'll even say you'll seek forgiveness
*  from God afterwards. There are supplications that surround the prayer. And you will say,
*  Allahumma anta as-salam wa minkas-salam, that, oh Allah, oh God, you are peace and from you is
*  peace and to you belongs all glory and all praise. Almost to say that you received something in this
*  prayer, that you receive a great sense of inner peace and now you're spreading that. So as it
*  really comes into you, then you can give to the world around you what you generate in your own
*  heart. And in prayer, you generate a great sense of tranquility, a great sense of peace.
*  The Quran says, Verily, in the remembrance of God do hearts find contentment.
*  And prayer is an exercise in the remembrance of God. That is, again, obligatory five times a day,
*  no matter where you are. Anywhere in the world, anywhere you find yourself in your life,
*  in different life circumstances, anywhere. So outside of the coffee shop in the grass,
*  outside of the coffee shop. As it did a few days ago. So anywhere at all. And that means
*  airports included. Given the context of our previous conversation of
*  hatred towards people of Muslim faith, that means you probably through the practice of prayer,
*  it attracts people that hate. I've attracted curiosity. I've attracted hate. I've had people
*  walk up to me like, hey man, you okay? You know, in the airport. So everything. So most probably
*  is conversations of curiosity and the opportunity to actually talk about the values that you're
*  upset. And I try to make it a point to tell people if I'm about to pray in front of them. So like,
*  you know, in the airport, let's say, for example, I'll go to the corner next to a gate.
*  And if there are people sitting there like, hey, I'm about to engage in a prayer. I hope you don't
*  mind. They'll really appreciate the courtesy most of the time. But no, I mean, when those five times
*  come in and they're kind of windows, right? We have to pray. And that means at work, that means
*  at school, that means when you're traveling, although there are some concessions that allow
*  you to combine prayers at certain times when you're traveling, for example. But even then,
*  you're going to have to pray. And I think that what that does to bring you back to God,
*  no matter what you're doing, it's actually, you know, you think of it this way, you're in a meeting,
*  you're engaged in something, you're really stressed out. And you also have the ablution
*  before the prayer where you wash up, wash your face, wash your limbs, and engage in prayer.
*  What it does for you in anchoring you in something more meaningful when you are in the turmoil of a
*  lot of times what's not so meaningful is incredible. And so it's a gift from God.
*  And it is an obligation. It's something that we have to do as Muslims. But if you actually learn
*  its essence, then it can feel more like a joy than it is an obligation. And then you're called to at
*  night, especially again, the night prayer is a big part of who we are as Muslims. Waking up in the
*  last part of the night, the Prophet Muhammad peace be upon him said that the best prayer and the best
*  fasting was of that of David peace be upon him. So we think of David, the Prophet David, he's a
*  Prophet in Islam as well. I'm sure you'll ask me about the whole concept of prophethood. You're
*  hearing Abraham and David and others, right? So David peace be upon him, he said that David used
*  to fast every other day and he used to pray the last third of the night. He'd stand up and pray in
*  the last third of the night. So fasting is a big part of who we are. And praying in the last third
*  of the night, meaning before that early morning prayer, waking up if you can at 4 a.m., 4.30 a.m.,
*  5 a.m. and praying even for a few minutes. There's something in the serenity of the night
*  that can unlock in you a sense of inner joy and peace that nothing else in the world can give you.
*  And again, that pulls you away from all the turmoil of day-to-day life.
*  If it's little things or if it's big things, it just pulls you out of it to remember what is
*  more important in life. So when we think about access, in the last third of the night,
*  we're taught that God says, is there anyone seeking forgiveness that I may forgive them?
*  Is there anyone seeking refuge that I may grant it to them? Is there anyone asking for anything
*  that I may give it to them? So whatever you're calling upon him with at that time,
*  he's responding to you in a way that befits him. And so it's closeness as well. And you would think
*  that you sleep less, so you're probably more cranky, but the happiest people in the world
*  are the people that stand up in that last third of the night and pray.
*  I mean, there's a deeply meditative, contemplative aspect to it that I think
*  probably strengthens your sleep of anything else once you return to it.
*  There you go. See, people underestimate that. There's a great sage in Islam, he was asked,
*  he said, how come the people who pray at night are the most beautiful of people and they're
*  fresh in the day? It doesn't make sense. And he said, because they secluded themselves with
*  the most merciful and he dressed them in his light. And so there's a beauty that it generates.
*  And that's why we're to aspire to that really as believers, that's kind of your highest thing.
*  Don't just pray the five prayers. If you can pray at night, pray at night and connect at that time.
*  Well, a good friend of mine, Andrew Huberman, who's a neuroscientist from Stanford, he has an
*  amazing podcast called Huberman Lab, but he's also a scholar of sleep,
*  among many other things. And so I would love him to, he probably knows the science on this too.
*  There's probably good science that actually studies practicing Muslims to see what
*  the benefits to sleep. I would love to actually see what that says.
*  We have amazing, I don't want to cut you off, we have amazing hygiene because of how much we
*  have to wash up for prayer. And it's great for our limbs as well, right? And that's one of the
*  added benefits, right? It's good for us. Worship that we do is not torturous. It's actually good
*  for us. However, the core objective of worship has to remain that it's something you do out of
*  worship and something you do out of a sense of obligation and gratitude to God, not because of
*  those things. Like I'm not going to fast because it's good for my health, but I know it's good for
*  my health to fast. But it's pretty cool when you walk into, I'll share this with you. There was a
*  man, he was a scholar from Turkey, an Islamic scholar from Turkey, and he had visited us in
*  Dallas and he was 108 years old and he could still pray, bowing and prostrating, I mean,
*  his limbs. And you think about that, like someone at that age still being able to do that. So I'm
*  sure it's good for your limbs, it's good for your health, good for your gut, good for your sleep,
*  good for your mind. I think the mind one is the really one we've been talking about. And that's
*  really the big one. And in the small day-to-day psychological sense and in the big philosophical
*  sense of what it means to be a human being. We should also mention that during the prayer,
*  as you've explained, you should face Mecca. So what is Mecca and what's the experience of
*  visiting Mecca like? So Mecca is the home that Abraham, peace be upon him,
*  built along with his son Ishmael, peace be upon him. And it gives the Muslims a unified
*  direction of prayer. It's sort of at the center geographically of who we are. And when we pray
*  towards it, it's not that that's the only place that you can supplicate, turn towards,
*  but it gives us a unified sense of direction. It gives us a unified sense of prayer.
*  So Mecca is our qiblah, it's our place of direction when we are alive and when we are dead.
*  So actually we pray facing towards it. When we die, we are also faced towards it in our graves.
*  And it kind of gives us that unifying spirit. So this is the Valley of Mecca also in the Bible
*  spoken about, the Valley of Mecca, where other biblical scholars would also mention Mount Perun.
*  And it is the place that Adam, in the Quran, Adam, peace be upon him, first had a place
*  constructed there as a place of worship from the angels towards God. And then when Abraham
*  settles Hagar and Ishmael in Mecca, they build this house of worship. And that is where the
*  gushing springs of Zemzum are mentioned, where God sends an angel to give a miracle to Hagar and Ishmael
*  that they can sustain themselves from as they're not left in the desert. So Ishmael being the
*  firstborn son of Abraham is given a place and there's a story and a history that's going to
*  unfold from that place of Mecca. And then Isaac is born, peace be upon him, 13 years later.
*  And there's a story and a history that comes from that. But ultimately,
*  Mecca is the center. Mecca is where we turn towards for prayer. Mecca is where we perform
*  the pilgrimage, the Hajj pilgrimage. Once in our lives, at least if we can, physically and financially,
*  if we find ourselves capable, we at least perform the Hajj pilgrimage once in our lifetimes. But
*  there are other pilgrimages throughout the year you can go. At any time of the day, any time of
*  the year, you will find people that will be performing the pilgrimage, an iteration of the
*  pilgrimage in Mecca. And it's an incredible practice. It really is a place where you feel
*  like you're no longer in this world. I mean, it's incredible. So we all go there donning what's known
*  as the Ihram garb. So the men will wear just these white garments which are resembling or
*  they resemble the garments that we will be buried in. And whether you're a king or a
*  prince or a peasant, in classical terms, whoever you are, whatever distinction you have,
*  you're all the same and the women will wear a simple garment as well. So you go there,
*  you relinquish all of the pretensions and concerns and superficial barriers and distinctions
*  that exist in this life. And we do what's called tawaf, circle around the Kaaba,
*  symbolically putting God at the center of our lives. We do seven rounds between Safa and Marwa,
*  the two mountains, where Hagar, when she once ran between those two mountains with her baby Ishmael
*  looking for water, trusting God, was provided for. We too go between the two mountains of Safa and
*  Marwa to express that trust in God and to follow in that way. And these are ultimately, these are
*  the rituals that Abraham himself engaged in in our tradition and the Prophet Muhammad, peace be upon
*  him, engaged in. And so we engage in the exact same rituals and there are divine wisdoms to them
*  that we may not even be able to unpack and reflect upon. But it really is in that place where
*  you find the most beautiful global expression of Islam. You see people from all over the world,
*  people that don't speak the same languages, people from all sorts of backgrounds, and they're all
*  doing the exact same thing. And in a matter of seconds, when the call of prayer comes,
*  in a matter of seconds, two, three million people get arranged in perfect rows for prayer, right?
*  And it just, it looks like this perfect optical vision of just beauty when you see people in
*  unison standing, bowing, prostrating, and you don't know who the person next to you is.
*  And that's where, you know, Malcolm X, you read about the history of Malcolm X, when he went to
*  Hajj, that's where his entire worldview shifts. Not just his previous baggage, but
*  the dream that he then had, the possibilities that he saw for people to be able to overcome
*  some of the false distinctions that we have, race and class, and to see God as one and to come together.
*  And worship him alone and also seeing each other, equal participants in that worship.
*  LW If you can just linger on it a little bit,
*  I think you've mentioned that Malcolm X has been in part misunderstood. What are some aspects of
*  him that are misunderstood? AC Well, I think reading his autobiography is
*  extremely important for anyone that wants to understand him, right? So you read him
*  in his own words, Malcolm lived the tragedy of being a young, disenfranchised,
*  black man in America who went through all of the difficulties that were posed in 1950s America
*  towards him. I mean, he went through the system and it was awful for him. And he had to pull
*  himself out of that and make himself into an incredible orator and incredible leader
*  that suddenly had a pretty empowering vision and a calm and nonetheless courageous, but a calm
*  presence to him and was able to bring together people, especially uplift black people in America
*  to believe in themselves. Young men in America, in prisons in particular, will read the autobiography
*  of Malcolm X and see hope for themselves to come out of the darkness of the dark,
*  you know, being in prison, not just by the bars in front of them, but also by what they thought to be
*  their own worth prior to that moment. And so Malcolm climbs out of that and he goes through
*  multiple phases. So Malcolm dies as an Orthodox Muslim who does not believe in the superiority
*  of one race over the other, finds great tranquility in the practice of the Hajj,
*  great clarity. And I think you read his letters from Mecca and he talks about his change,
*  his transformation in particular, and it was a process. It's a process for him,
*  but he inspires the likes of Muhammad Ali to become the person that he becomes and inspires many other
*  people till today to really see themselves and see the world differently in light of that
*  understanding of monotheism. So he was deeply a man of faith and throughout his life, the nature
*  of that faith has changed as he grew, as he interacted with, I would say, a cruel society
*  that he was living through. You mentioned he inspired Muhammad Ali, who I don't think is an
*  overstatement to say is probably the most, quite possibly the most famous American Muslim from
*  America, because you maybe make a few comments as an athlete yourself. What impact did Islam have on
*  Muhammad Ali's life and what, and vice versa, what impact did he have as a leader, as a religious
*  figure on the Muslim community? I think Muhammad Ali, his quotes on Islam are precious because he
*  talks about how he sought the wealth of this world and he found it in Islam. He found a greater
*  meaning and he attributes everything that he became to his faith. His sense of strength and
*  commitment, the willingness to take a stand for the truth when it was extremely unpopular
*  on the basis of his faith and on the basis of his integrity. I think that he inspired people with
*  his confidence and his coherence. He was incredibly eloquent, poetic, and just unwavering.
*  Seemed unbreakable. As relentless as he was in the ring, he was even more so outside of the ring.
*  The man could not be broken and everything was stacked up against him, but he perseveres. He
*  does so then through Parkinson's and chooses to live a life of giving, a life of service,
*  a life of using his platform to bring up issues of importance and to champion the rights of others.
*  He wasn't satisfied at any point in his life with simply being a boxing great, a boxing champion.
*  He uses it for so much more. He goes down as one of the most famous Americans period of the 20th
*  century, one of the most transformative Americans period of the 20th century,
*  not just American Muslims. A lot of people that loved him when he died would not have loved him
*  if they were around in the 1960s and the 1970s. They said they loved him when he couldn't speak
*  anymore. Many of those who celebrated him at the time of his death would have been his greatest
*  opponents at the peak of his career and when he was taking the stands that he was taking.
*  Yeah, he was fearless and part of this, his faith was helping him take the fearless stance.
*  But throughout all of it, given the strength, I think he's also a symbol of compassion.
*  Through all the fun kind of, yeah, the poetic nature of who he was and the fearless nature
*  of who he was, there's always like a deep love for the sport and for humanity.
*  Absolutely. And that's the thing, right? It was so obvious that despite everything that had happened
*  to him, he never loses himself, neither to the fame nor to the fear. He always stays himself.
*  He's authentic. And I went to his funeral and it was one of the most beautiful things I'd ever
*  seen because everyone in Louisville, Kentucky had a story with Muhammad Ali, right? The guy that he
*  saves from committing suicide, the school kids, the hotel shuttle driver, the gas station worker,
*  everyone has a story of Muhammad Ali in Louisville, Kentucky. And when he passes away,
*  everybody comes out and stands in front of their homes and they take the casket and they drive
*  around the streets of Louisville. And he had this dream, I'm very close to some of his children,
*  incredible people, by the way, just incredible human beings. And he had this dream that he shared
*  with them that he was jogging around the streets of Louisville, Kentucky and everyone had come out
*  to wave to him. And so he's running around jogging and waving to everybody in the streets of Louisville,
*  Kentucky. Then he gets to the cemetery and he says he flies into the heavens. So his dream,
*  and he had this dream years ago. I mean, if you look at his funeral, it's such a beautiful,
*  you can't make it up. It's such a beautiful moment where it seems to come to reality because
*  everybody in Louisville just comes out and just waves by to his casket. And then when he gets to
*  the cemetery, the gates close and he goes off to be with his Lord. And we pray that it's a good
*  place for him. So Muhammad Ali is probably one of the great 20th century representatives of Islam.
*  For me personally, at least, hopefully I'm not showing my bias, one of the great modern representatives
*  is Kabib, who's a great fighter and a great human being. So you've gotten a chance to meet him.
*  I should also say you're friends, you're good friends with a lot of really interesting
*  Muslim people. I mean, it's such a widespread religion. There's just so much variety of
*  people that are practicing Muslims. So what does Kabib represent? What do you like about
*  him as a Muslim? What do you like about him as a person, as representative of their religion?
*  I think, first of all, he is a great person, humble person. He's shown, and now Islam as well,
*  kind of following in that. They're really showing the beauty of faith in their lives,
*  their culture, their values, everything from the way that he carried himself in a principled way.
*  Every Muslim kid grew up in a public school cafeteria before Islamic schools were a thing
*  in the United States, not eating pork, for example, and kind of being the odd person out.
*  So when you got a fighter in the UFC scene and doesn't drink alcohol, kind of maintains a very
*  consistent, principled attachment to his religion, it really is inspiring.
*  Growing up, we had Hakim El-Adhwan in the 1990s, basketball who was fasting in the NBA.
*  I think Habib is that for a lot of people, a lot of young people today, and people in general.
*  I think beyond that, the values, how he honored his father and how he honors his mother and how
*  he continues to put family first, that's a beautiful part of Islam. That's a beautiful
*  part of our value system. We have a lot of emphasis on family. Family is central to Islam.
*  His honoring of his father was so beautiful, and again, what he's willing to do for his mother,
*  it's just so beautiful. I think that we saw it frankly, even with Morocco and the World Cup.
*  AC There was a lot of Islamophobia in this recent World Cup episode. A lot of the criticism of
*  Qatar, while no government is beyond reproach, certainly no government is beyond reproach,
*  but had very obvious, blatant Islamophobic undertones. And then with Morocco rising,
*  being the first African Muslim Arab team to get that far in the World Cup, what did you see?
*  Beyond the consistent honoring of Palestine, you also saw the honoring of the mothers. Every single
*  time the game would end, they go into a prostration of gratitude. So just like we
*  prostrate in prayer, a prostration of gratitude. And then they go and they kiss their mother's
*  foreheads, dance with their mothers on the field, hug their moms and honor their moms.
*  That's Islam for you. Khabib, after his fight, what does he do? He prostrates. He points up to
*  the heavens. It's God. And then he prostrates. The whole Moroccan team beautifully prostrates,
*  even when they lost. They prostrated out of gratitude. They honored their mothers.
*  So I think sometimes athletes are able to demonstrate some of these beautiful values
*  of Islam in a way that the world can maybe see them in a different light.
*  AC The values of humility and the values of love,
*  love broadly, but love for family. Khabib And look how everyone around Khabib talks about him.
*  Right? No one ever says he's a jerk. No one ever says he's mistreated them. They've all got stories,
*  right? And that's what a beautiful Muslim does. A beautiful human being. You treat the people in
*  such a way that all these stories come out later of how good you were to everyone that came into
*  contact with you. And Khabib was that person. He is that person. He does a great job of treating
*  people with a lot of respect. Obviously, no one is perfect, right? I mean, imperfections are for
*  everybody. But I definitely think that he did a beautiful job representing his faith in those
*  moments. You know, beyond punching people in the face, that's kind of a different subject.
*  Smashing faces. Not the smashing faces part, the prostration part and the humility.
*  Khabib I tell you, man, he's not humble in the ring, right? He would maul his opponents, right?
*  Khabib I mean, as a practitioner, as a fan of the sport, of all grappling sports for me,
*  there's also a beauty to the art of grappling and the fighting sports. But yes,
*  I think his, again, humility, his honor outside the cage is exemplary. And the money, the fame,
*  the power hasn't changed a man.
*  Smashing faces No, not at all. And that's actually, I think,
*  the most beautiful part. When I met him, I found him to be as humble as he is on screen. And that's
*  always very endearing. And all of the stories of the people that have been around him for a much
*  longer time, very humble man. I pray for him. Honestly, I pray for Islam. I pray for that family
*  that God keeps them grounded and protected and together. And that they maintain that beautiful
*  spirit. Because even if you just watch the lead up to the last fight with Islam, just the way they
*  carry themselves, their day to day, they never relinquish their prayers. They never relinquish
*  their family ties, the things that make them who they are to be better fighters, because they don't
*  see that they have to let go of those things. In fact, they attribute all of their worldly success
*  to that faith. And so, beautiful examples. And I think that it's good for young Muslims to see
*  themselves in that. And it's good for other people to see Islam through that as well.
*  Smashing faces When you mention the prophets,
*  you often say, peace and blessings be upon them.
*  Smashing faces Yes.
*  Smashing faces What does that phrase mean? Why do you say it? Is it to celebrate the people?
*  Is it a constant reminder that these are figures that should be celebrated?
*  Smashing faces Absolutely. So, it's part of our tradition that when we say the name of a prophet,
*  at least the first time in the conversation, we say, peace be upon him. And then afterwards,
*  it's still praiseworthy to say, peace be upon him. So, if you're reading an Islamic article
*  and you see in parentheses, PBUH, peace be upon him. When I was in high school, I often tell the
*  story, I wrote an article about Jesus, peace be upon him, and Islam and Christianity. And my
*  teacher comes up to me and she says, you can't do that. I said, what? And she slams the paper on
*  the desk. She says, you can't say Jesus. I said, no, no, PBUH, peace be upon him. So, that's what
*  it means and something that we reserve for the prophets of God and we honor them with.
*  Smashing faces So, who is Muhammad?
*  Smashing faces So, the prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him, is the descendant of Abraham, peace be
*  upon him, through Ishmael. God promises Hagar and Ishmael that he will make of him a great nation.
*  And so, there are prophets that are descended from Isaac and then from the brothers of Isaac
*  comes the prophet Muhammad. And he is the final prophet of a long line of prophets.
*  And we do not distinguish between the prophets in regards to their role. And so, Islam has a very
*  accessible theology. It's something that resonates with a professor at an Ivy League University and
*  a person who may be even illiterate. This idea of one God that sent many prophets and all of the
*  prophets out a singular message, worship one God and respond to the messages of that one God
*  through his messengers. So, Adam through Muhammad, you have many of the prophets that are mentioned
*  in the Old Testament. Moses, peace be upon him, being the most spoken about prophet in the Quran.
*  In fact, Abraham, Jesus, peace be upon him, many of these prophets that are familiar to people,
*  all of them are considered prophets in Islam. The prophet Muhammad,
*  peace be upon him, being the last of them. He comes at a time where there was still a lot
*  of confusion about what the world had just encountered in Christ, in Jesus Christ, peace
*  be upon him. So, you got to think about it this way, that this is still, he's born in the 6th century.
*  There is still great debate about who Jesus was. The Council of Nicaea happens in the 4th century
*  where you kind of have a standardizing of Western Christianity, but then you have Eastern
*  Christians that are still maintaining very different theologies and very different conceptions
*  of Christ. There is no Arabic Bible at the time and he kind of brings together
*  the message and the mission of all of those prophets and it fits perfectly into a singular
*  string of thought where you don't have to reject Jesus, peace be upon him, but Islam also is
*  staunchly opposed to the idea of a trinity, the idea of a begotten son of God, that all the
*  conceptions of the Messiah, and there were many claimants of the Messiah prior to Christ,
*  peace be upon him. None of them included an idea of a trinity or of him actually being a part of
*  God himself, a begotten son of God, but rather a great and mighty prophet that would restore
*  glory on earth. So, he really captures theologically, or rather we would say God captures
*  through him theologically a coherence and a unifying message of all of the prophets
*  that there's only one God and that that God has sent messages and scriptures to ultimately guide
*  people back towards him and that all of the prophets are equal in the sight of God, there's
*  no distinction between them, and that we are to live our lives in accordance with the message
*  as best manifested by the messenger. And so, the prophets are exemplary human beings,
*  and this is where we kind of sometimes maybe have a difference. Someone will say, well,
*  Noah did this and David did this. As Muslims, we don't hold many of the stories that have been
*  attributed to these prophets to be true. We don't believe that the prophets are capable of major
*  sins. We believe they're exemplary human beings and that they kind of give us a manifestation of
*  the scriptures that they were sent with of how to live noble lives. And the most documented human
*  being in history is the prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him. We know everything about him, his family
*  life, his day to day, the way he would greet you, the way he'd look at you, everything about his
*  physical appearance. It's documented in immaculate detail and Muslims have a standard that they then
*  seek to live up to with how to treat your family, how to be in your community, how to be in your
*  worship, how to be in your social interactions, how to carry yourself with your neighbors.
*  It's a full, complete guidebook through his example where we have the Quran, which is the
*  word of God, and then you have the biography of the prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him, which is
*  a living manifestation of that word that has been documented for us to live by until the end of time.
*  .
*  So Muhammad, if I may, peace be upon him, is really the, like you said, the manifestation,
*  the thing to be, the example of a good man.
*  Yes, example of a good human being.
*  Is the Quran the word of God?
*  So the Quran, and this is what distinguishes the Quran in many ways from other scriptures.
*  So as Muslims, we do believe that God has sent divine revelation prior. We believe that the
*  original scriptures prior to the multiple versions and the changes and revisions throughout history,
*  the original scriptures that were given to the prophets, whether it was the Torah to Moses
*  or the gospels, were all original divine revelations, but they've been changed over
*  time. The Quran is the word of God with a promise that he will guard it for all of time.
*  And it's probably one of the greatest miracles because in 1400 years, we have the Quran preserved
*  through oral transmission and through written transmission. And there are almost two billion
*  Muslims in the world and they all recite this book the exact same way. And there's only one version
*  of it. And so when I'm reciting the Quran, if I say, ooh, or E or ah, differently, an Ethiopian
*  Muslim, a Chinese Muslim, a Yemeni Muslim can correct me. An eight-year-old kid in any one of
*  those countries can correct me because they will know that this is not how it's memorized. And so
*  it was memorized from the start, committed to memory in the time of the prophet Muhammad,
*  peace be upon him, and preserved in writing and passed down and memorized by millions and millions
*  of people around the world. And it's 600 pages and you can't go to a city in America, a city in the
*  United States of America and not find at least one person or a group of people that memorize it,
*  that have committed it to memory. And so there's an emphasis on committing it to memory as well as
*  understanding it and applying it and practicing it as much as we can.
*  R. What are some maybe deep or insightful differences between the Quran, the Torah,
*  and the Bible?
*  J. Well, like I said, so you've got the original revelations of those scriptures,
*  but there are so many versions of those scriptures and there are times throughout history where
*  there have been changes just from an objective perspective, right?
*  What is the original scripture that was given to Moses, peace be upon him, and what was initially
*  communicated to Jesus, peace be upon him, those things have changed over time. However, there's
*  still some truth that remains even in those scriptures. And so there are still things that
*  line up, especially with the Old Testament and Islam, there are still many things that line up
*  between the two, the Bible as well, the New Testament. Now, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John,
*  it's different because these are not original scriptures. These are testimonies that were
*  obviously collected around the entire phenomenon of the coming of Christ, but the authors themselves,
*  the biographies, the documentation, even of those original testimonies and gospels, what made
*  the cut in terms of being included within the gospels and what didn't, because there are many
*  gospels at the time in that sense, is different from what we believe was scripture communicated
*  to Jesus, peace be upon him. The Quran is different in several ways, but it confirms
*  what came before it, but it's the documented and preserved word of God to be recited throughout
*  time. So it confirms much of what came before it and it resides amongst us and within us
*  for the rest of time. And through it, we honor those revelations that came through the prophets
*  of old, because the essence, the core of what came through those revelations is preserved in
*  the Quran and with us. And I tell people this all the time that the prophet Muhammad, peace be upon
*  him, introduced Jesus, peace be upon him, and even Moses, peace be upon him, to much of the world.
*  There are Muslims around the world that are named Isa, that are named Jesus. There are Muslims around
*  the world that are named Ibrahim, Abraham, Muslims around the world named Musa. And they learned of
*  these figures through the revelation that came to the prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him, Noah,
*  Maryam, one of the most popular names in Islam, Mary, peace be upon her. A whole chapter in the
*  Quran named after Maryam, which is actually what I was reciting in the prayer was the chapter of
*  Maryam, the chapter of the story of Mary, peace be upon her. So the Quran contains the stories,
*  it contains legislation and law, but primarily it was revealed over 23 years. So it actually
*  was coming in accordance with some of the events that were unfolding in the life of the prophet
*  Muhammad, peace be upon him. The first 13 years of that was primarily belief in God, belief in the
*  hereafter and things that surrounded the core creed of Islam. And then legislation, law, stories
*  of the prophets came down in accordance with the unfolding events, as well as prophesying some of
*  the things that were to come and speaking about some of the things that had just happened. And it
*  is completed in the lifetime of the prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him, memorized in that
*  peace be upon it, memorized and then communicated to generation after generation after generation
*  so that we have it in its pristine fashion.
*  Now billions of people, just all across the world, all the different cultures, all
*  memorizing the same words. One of the pillars, or maybe I should say one of the central practices
*  is the month of Ramadan. What is the importance of this month? What is the process of it entail?
*  So Islam has, I think it would be good to maybe lay this out for people,
*  the articles of faith in the pillars of Islam. So the articles of faith, there are six articles
*  of faith and this kind of lays the foundation for the creed of Islam. So belief in God,
*  belief in the angels, belief in the messages, belief in the messengers, okay? Belief in the
*  day of judgment and belief in divine decree. So these are the six articles of faith. Belief in God,
*  belief in the angels, belief in the messages being the scriptures, belief in the messengers
*  being the prophets, belief in the day of judgment and belief in divine decree.
*  That's what you have to believe to be a Muslim. You have to believe in those six things, right?
*  And then you go to the pillars of faith. The five pillars of faith are sort of, or they make up the
*  structure of those articles of faith, the practice of the Muslim. So to be a Muslim,
*  you testify that there's only one God worthy of worship and unconditional obedience, and then you
*  testify that Muhammad is the final messenger of God. That's the first pillar. It's the actual
*  testimony entering into Islam. Then it's the five daily prayers. Practicing the five daily prayers,
*  at least as a bare minimum obligation. The mandatory charity, which is called the zakat,
*  that Muslims have to give at least 2.5% of their retained earnings to specific categories of charity.
*  Then it is the fasting of the month of Ramadan, the mandatory fasting of the month of Ramadan.
*  And then it's the Hajj, if you can do so, the pilgrimage, if you can do so once in your
*  lifetime. So those are the five pillars of Islam. So Ramadan is a month in which Muslims engage in
*  this incredible spiritual bootcamp. Now, fasting can mean different things to different people.
*  When we fast, we fast from before sunrise to sunset for an entire month, and there's no
*  food or water, period. And no intimacy as well. So you would abstain from intimacy with your
*  spouse as well in that time. No food or water, no bread, no nothing. You don't eat or drink,
*  even if you live in Texas, where you get these long hot days in the summer. And of course,
*  Islam is on a lunar calendar, so it moves every year, about 10 days earlier. During that time,
*  you restrict the intake to the body so that you can focus on the intake of the soul.
*  So instead of being focused on consumption, constant consumption, you are consuming words
*  of remembrance, words of prayer. You're to be hyper conscious of not doing anything that would
*  spiritually validate your fast, just as you would physically. So just like you won't eat or drink,
*  you certainly won't engage in sin, though you shouldn't engage in sins throughout the year.
*  You're not going to speak words of evil, you're not going to gossip or slander.
*  You try to fast with your eyes, not look at things that are not praiseworthy. So you try to engage
*  in a wholesome act of disciplining yourself with the consciousness of God, but then channel that
*  into engaging the soul instead, exercising the soul instead. And what you'll find with Muslims
*  and this act of God-consciousness, where they reduce the consumption, is they become far more
*  grateful for the blessings of God, because throughout our lives, we just take sips of water,
*  we eat what we can, we snack. When you're abstaining from that, you become so much
*  more grateful for that sip of water, so much more grateful for that bite of food,
*  so much more aware of the one who provided those blessings to you, so much more aware of those that
*  don't have the same access to those blessings that you have. So you also develop a sense of empathy
*  for the poor that don't have access to those blessings on a regular basis that can't help but
*  fast. And on top of that, again, spiritually, you are engaged in extra reading. At that time,
*  people are listening to more lectures, people are engaged in extra acts of devotion, extra acts of
*  charity. Muslims are most charitable in the month of Ramadan. So you just feel great. And it's hard
*  to explain to someone that doesn't do it, because it sounds like torture to people, right? What in
*  the world are you doing at four o'clock on a hot Texas day, not eating or drinking? You're probably
*  dehydrated and cranky, have a caffeine headache, and you probably can't wait for this month to be
*  over. But in reality, you talk to Muslims, their favorite time of the year is Ramadan.
*  You feel amazing. You feel absolutely incredible, because you taste a different type of consumption.
*  You feed your soul for a change. And in that process, you connect with God in a way
*  that you simply could not without the distractions of the day to day throughout the year.
*  Now, it's good that it's one month of the year, because it's honestly physically taxing, right? So
*  it gives you a chance to experience it for that one month. But then you're encouraged to fast
*  a few days of the year as well outside of the month of Ramadan to keep that connection.
*  What are the hardest parts that maybe for people outside of the Muslim faith,
*  um, yeah, would be curious about?
*  Well, I think the hardest part is physically. Is it physical or is it the spiritual?
*  So as Ramadan goes on, your acts of worship increase. So in the last 10 nights of Ramadan,
*  there is an intense period of prayer throughout the night. So every night in Ramadan, we have
*  something called the Tarawih prayers. The Tarawih prayers are about an hour, hour and a half of
*  prayer outside of the five daily prayers. So the mosques are packed every night in Ramadan.
*  The last 10 nights of Ramadan, people will engage in prayer throughout the entire night.
*  So the only sleep that you're probably getting is actually a couple of hours in the morning before
*  you go to work. So it's everything sort of put together the disruption of schedule, the disruption
*  of diet, the physically exerting yourself. But the way you feel
*  is unmatched. I mean, you feel so fulfilled through that deprivation. And it's actually the
*  point, you know, it all ties back together when you talk about even tests and trials, that God
*  does not deprive us of anything except that he gives us something greater in return. And you do
*  not deprive yourself of anything for the sake of God, except that he gives you something greater
*  in return. And so fasting is an exercise and patience that unlocks an infinite sense of
*  gratitude and a greater connection to God. So many people predict that Islam will surpass
*  Christianity as the largest religion by the end of the century, by the number of its adherents
*  and practitioners. What responsibility does that play some people like you, who is a religious
*  leader, who is somebody who teaches, who grows, who cares for the community, for the Muslim community,
*  but actually for all people? Well, I think what that means is that we have a responsibility to
*  teach and live our faith in the most beautiful of ways that its values and ideals are not just
*  expressed by you, but experienced by everyone around you. And so what I often teach my community
*  is that look at the Muslims in the area, what are your neighbors experiencing of you? What are
*  people experiencing of you? And there are statistics to Muslims being the most charitable communities
*  in America. We're a community of great service, a community of volunteer, a community that greatly
*  enriches the world around us. I think that oftentimes people forget the history of Muslims
*  being at the forefront of contributing in the areas of medicine and science and all sorts of
*  ways, education, really changing the world through their commitment to faith. But on a deeply personal
*  level, it's important for us to be representatives of the Prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him, in a
*  way that makes Islamophobia impossible. I tell people this, that it's very hard. You mentioned
*  the United States of Hate, the documentary, and the one man, the protester who met me and sort of
*  changed his worldview. It's very hard for people to believe what they hear about Islam if they see
*  you live it. Now that does not excuse bigotry, that doesn't excuse the prejudice against Muslims.
*  But it's important for us to sort of take it as a responsibility as Muslims to channel our faith in
*  the most beautiful of ways. God describes faith in the Quran, in the chapter of Abraham, peace be
*  upon him, as a tree with firm foundations. The firm foundation being the testimony of faith,
*  the oneness of God, so the tree of monotheism with firm foundations, and then branches high in the
*  sky providing shade to everything and everyone around you and producing fruit at all times.
*  The tree of faith of a Muslim is not seasonal, so you should be producing with your faith at all
*  times good works and things that people can actually experience. And I think that Muslims
*  have historically contributed to the world around them. And I think that Muslims today are still
*  contributing to the world around them, but I think that we can never do enough of holding
*  ourselves accountable to the message that we hold dear to our hearts and trying to be the best
*  representatives of that message and of that messenger to the world around us.
*  R. So not only are you a religious leader in the Muslim community, but you have a lot of friends
*  who are from different religions. You have a lot of Jewish friends, as we've talked about a lot
*  offline, and we'll probably hopefully get a chance to talk to as well here. But on that topic, let me
*  bring up another tragic event that was just a little bit less than a year ago in this very
*  community here in Dallas. There was a synagogue hostage crisis. Can you describe what happened
*  and what was your experience like through it and afterwards? And what were the bad things you saw
*  and what are the good things you saw in the community?
*  K. The Colleyville synagogue situation, it's kind of surreal that we're coming up on a year of that.
*  But I'll actually tell you exactly what happened that morning. I was out with the family
*  and that morning, I kid you not, that very morning I was telling my kids the story of Muhammad Ali
*  talking that man out of committing suicide off the roof and I showed them the YouTube video.
*  My wife pulled it up on her phone. Kids were sitting in the back seat. We talked about that
*  video and talked about that importance of helping people. We also went to visit a loved one in the
*  cemetery that day and we went to breakfast. So we're out as a family that day, right? And there's a
*  lot of meaning that's sort of coming together for us and a lot of discussion, deep discussion
*  we're having as a family. And then some of our community groups, we get this message that
*  there is a synagogue that's been taken hostage, a rabbi and his congregation taken as hostages.
*  And go to this Facebook link and it was the feed of the synagogue and you could hear the gunman
*  shouting. And it became apparent very early on that it was a man that was claiming to be Muslim,
*  that was holding them hostage. Now all these synagogue massacres, all these places of worship
*  were not attacked by Muslims, right? This is a different type of situation. But
*  my first instinct was like all that happened this morning was not random.
*  So I told my wife and I told my kids, I'm going to go down there to Colleyville.
*  She was very supportive. Obviously there was a moment of shock.
*  And like kids were like, wait, what? And I said, look, remember what we talked about this morning?
*  We can't be indifferent to the stuff. We still go back and revisit that day.
*  It's crazy how it was all falling into place. It's not an accident, right?
*  So I dropped them off at home and I started to drive to Colleyville.
*  I called the Irving Police Department and I asked them to call the Colleyville Police Department
*  so that they could kind of know that I'm coming down there. I called
*  they could kind of know that I'm coming down there. I called some of the faith leaders in
*  the community to see if they could put me in touch with those on the ground so that I wouldn't get
*  shot when I showed up there. And eventually I had to wait outside until I got clearance to come
*  through and to just offer whatever support I could, pastoral support, support with trying to
*  free the hostages of the synagogue at the time. It was operating out of a church right across the
*  street from the synagogue. A day long just wondering what was going to happen, looking at
*  the family of the rabbi at the time, wondering what was going to happen.
*  And trying to just be as supportive as I possibly could at that time. Thankfully, they all got out
*  in the evening. And I think that looking back on that day,
*  like my wife actually asked me, she said, would you have done it differently? And I said, no,
*  I really wouldn't because I think that things happen sometimes. You've got to act on your good
*  instincts sometimes. When you talk about being calculated, I think sometimes we're calculated
*  when we shouldn't be. And that's when that good instinct comes in, where you're called to do
*  something else. What did it feel like to be a Muslim in a situation like that? Were you a
*  human being? Were you a religious practitioner? See, I can't separate anything about myself
*  in that situation. So when I had to pray, I had to pray to help people out, to give people words
*  of comfort, to try to appeal to the senses of whoever I could at the time. I didn't see myself
*  as a guy trying to show a particular part of Islam there. I just saw myself as someone that
*  was trying to help a family get their husband and father back. And so it was more of just like that
*  part of me was there. You can kind of see yourself, right? This is the irony of it.
*  When Christ Church in New Zealand happened, that was kind of our worst nightmare as Texas Muslims
*  because we've had armed groups in front of our mosques threatening to do what that man did in
*  Christ Church. And so when you see a wife and kids wondering if they're going to get their dad back,
*  you kind of see yourself there. And so I just saw myself in that situation. What would I want
*  people to be doing for me in that moment? What would I want people to be telling my family in
*  that moment? So that's really where I went to, and that's really where I dug into. And I prayed a
*  lot that day. A lot, a lot for the right words, for the right actions, what I could do to just help.
*  What are the lessons now a year later that you take away from that day?
*  There's so many lessons. Just don't be indifferent. Don't be indifferent to the suffering
*  around you or even that's distant from you because it's somehow related to you. So just don't be
*  indifferent. So you're proud that you stepped up and you went there and then
*  Yeah, look, I don't think I did much. I'm being really honest. This is not me trying to be humble.
*  I don't think I did much. I think I did what I was called to do. I wish that it never happens
*  as a whole, but I'm glad that the relationships that have been built over time came into being
*  in that day. We could call upon people that we knew, call upon each other, and as a community,
*  really come together. Dallas has been through a lot, a lot of pain, but we've come together
*  through a lot of pain as well. So it's kind of one of those things where we're united in our pain.
*  When you suffer together, you build certain bonds together. So Dallas has been through a lot as a
*  community, but we've come together through a lot as a community. Yeah, the thing about violence and
*  war, it destroys, it causes so much suffering, but it also sort of brings out some of the best
*  aspects of human nature and unites people. It's an interesting way how our human civilization
*  functions. Well, that's the beauty that you don't just want to see, but you also want to be.
*  We're living in a climate where there's a lot of that, right? So how do you actually
*  get through that and actually not allow yourself to succumb to that
*  and be another voice in that polarization?
*  It seems that throughout history and still in the world today, religion has been a source of
*  some of the, of a lot of polarization, a lot of conflict, even war. Why do you think that is?
*  Listen, I think at the essence of it is always some sort of political instability
*  that leaves behind a brutalized population and vulnerabilities that can be exploited.
*  As I said, in the 20th century, with the bloodiest century that we've had to date,
*  where does religion fall on any of that? Where does religion fall in the isms? Where does religion
*  fall in the world wars? Where does religion fall in much of that? Even when we talk about things
*  like the crusades, remove the Islamic framing, the crusades, the crusades, were they really about
*  religion? The Mongols and the destruction of the Mongols. Was it about religion?
*  Myanmar and the Rohingya today, is it about Buddhism? So I think that these are essentially
*  political issues, political causes where you have people that rise up and that use
*  religion to disguise things that are far, far, far from religion. And if you want to manipulate
*  a religious scripture, you could turn any book, any scripture into a violent scripture if you
*  have a violent aim. So I think that that's where you find people manipulating versus
*  manipulating religion to justify sick ideologies that are based and thrive in political instability.
*  So these are fundamentally political geopolitical conflicts, not religious conflicts.
*  Absolutely. Look, when you talk about a group like ISIS, Islam has been in Iraq for a very,
*  very long time. Iraq has been bombed by now five consecutive presidents or four. It's been bombed
*  into the stone ages. There is no political infrastructure. It's devastation and destruction
*  and desperation as a result of that. Many of the old Saddam loyalists and Saddam's regime was a
*  secularist regime, are now heads of ISIS. It just moved into that. When you create that type of
*  chaos, you generate an environment where groups like ISIS are bound to rise out of. And so Islam
*  did not cause this. People didn't wake up in Iraq one day and say, hey, let's create a group called
*  ISIS because Islam tells us to. Iraq was bombed into this place. And we have to not just free
*  religion from the responsibility, from having to bear the responsibility of much of the hatred
*  and violence, but we have to interrogate the political instability that was caused, where we
*  justified as Americans. These are our taxpayer dollars, where we justified with what was done
*  in Iraq. Do we even know what was done in Iraq and Afghanistan? These drones that drop using our tax
*  dollars under democratic and republican regimes and kill thousands of innocent people in weddings
*  in Yemen and Somalia. Are these justified? When you think about dehumanization,
*  can the average American name a single victim of the Iraq war?
*  Is there a picture that comes to your mind? Is there a person? Absolutely not, because that's
*  the dehumanization. Now I often talk about Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., his progression as a
*  faith leader in America, as a political leader in America. Dr. King was deeply unpopular when he
*  took his stand on Vietnam. And he mentions how first he had to see Vietnam through the lens of
*  the soldiers, because many of the soldiers that were lost American soldiers. That was a crime that
*  they were sent to fight a war that they should not have been sent to fight. And there was an
*  injustice that was done towards them. He said, but things really changed when he started to see it
*  from the other side of the bullet. When he started to see the world through Vietnam,
*  through the Vietnamese child. And that's where he resorted to breaking the silence.
*  That's where he changed his tune, because we dehumanize our victims so much that they're not
*  even relevant to our discourse until they become able villains to our story. And then now they're
*  attacking us because they hate us. Now they're blowing us up because they hate us. Their religion
*  tells them to do this to us. What have we allowed to be done to them using our tax dollars in our
*  name? So I think that we have to interrogate the political chaos that was caused. Not just
*  free religion from the groups that were created, but what was done to those countries and what
*  continues to be done in many of these places. Yeah, when the pride that people had about America,
*  where everybody came together after 9-11 and there was all the American flags,
*  that was beautiful to see. But then you have to transfer that. And I wish all of us Americans
*  could go and see the daughters that would lose their parents, the parents that would lose their
*  daughters and sons because bombs dropped, the thousands, the tens of thousands of civilians that
*  died in Afghanistan and in Iraq because of the decisions made in the name of politics. If we just
*  met those families and if we empathize with them and just put ourselves in their place,
*  it's impossible not to feel hate for America, for everybody. I visited Ukraine and spoke to a lot
*  of Ukrainians and they said, there's loved ones that are Russians before the war, but now all they
*  have is hate. And if you ask many of them, will they ever forgive? Not the regime, not the soldiers,
*  will they ever forgive Russians? Many of them say never. And that never feels like it's a generational
*  never. I mean, look, you think about this, if your grandparents were wiped out in a drone attack,
*  your parents, your brothers, your sisters, all of your loved ones, and you're missing a leg and an eye,
*  and the world does not take you into consideration, you'll never be seen or considered
*  in the halls of Congress or discussed. What are you going to grow up with?
*  But the thing is, is that we should not be speaking about this only from the standpoint of,
*  oh shoot, they're going to grow up and hate us. We should be thinking about what was done to them
*  and hate that, despise that, that it's ugly. You see, when people carry out a terrorist attack,
*  they're not considering the lives of the civilians in these places. So those that
*  perpetrate the 9-11 attacks are not seeing the thousands of people that they killed,
*  the human beings, the lives, many of whom were Muslim, by the way, actually know.
*  One of them was a very active Muslim in Islamic circle of North America. I mean,
*  they didn't see those stories, right? When you drop a bomb on this many people,
*  when you drone people and you say, oops, collateral damage, we were looking for one person,
*  killed 40 people, and there's no count, no names, nothing that can be recalled in the American
*  memory. That's a problem, a fundamental issue with how we treat the rest of the world.
*  So I'm an American. I think that I'm responsible to the extent that I have to critique these
*  policies. And I have to try to challenge America to deal with the world differently.
*  And when I go overseas, when I'm around Muslims in the Muslim world, right? In the Middle East,
*  in the Muslim world, I'm speaking as a Palestinian American Muslim who grew up in South Louisiana.
*  I've got a complex background here, right? A lot of experiences here that I'm grateful for
*  because they all contribute to who I am and what I know and what I've been... I think they're all
*  enriching. I wouldn't relinquish the Palestinian part. I wouldn't relinquish the American part,
*  and I certainly wouldn't relinquish the Muslim part. But it's helping people consider
*  what they're not seeing. And when you can dehumanize entire groups of people
*  to where you can reduce them to chalk casualty counts and not be able to recall a single story,
*  then you have to take a step back and ask yourself, what are we becoming?
*  What are we becoming? Not a single victim of Afghanistan or Iraq. Millions of people,
*  not a single person, can the average American conjure in their head.
*  If you apply this to a very difficult topic of Israel and Palestine...
*  Speaking of which, right?
*  You have been critical of the policies of the state of Israel, but as we've mentioned,
*  very supportive of Jewish people. You have a lot of friends, rabbis, and
*  Jews in general here in Dallas and across the world. What is the difference to you in that part
*  of the world between politics and religion? In this case, Zionism and Judaism, both terms broadly
*  defined. Both terms broadly defined. I say that because those terms,
*  there's technical definitions and there's how they're popularly used. And so you have to be
*  just like we said with Islamophobia, these terms, they become politicized.
*  So just generally speaking, I think Zionism has to do with politics and Judaism has to do with
*  religion. It's a great complexity to a lot of people like, wait a minute.
*  You got to take a step back and wonder why there are so many Zionist anti-Semites in America.
*  And there are so many anti-Zionists who are far from being anti-Semites, anti-Zionism that are
*  opposed to the ideology, that are opposed to the implications of it. Look, I think that it's
*  fundamentally secular when you think about it. There is an ethno-supremacism. I am the child of
*  Palestinians that were forcibly displaced from their land. I've never been able to go to where
*  my parents, my grandparents are from. I've never been able to see that land. I've never been able
*  to access that. I have cousins that I'll never be, well, I shouldn't say never,
*  inshallah, God willing, I will meet them. But that I've only been able to speak through a phone,
*  FaceTime, Zoom. I think that it's important for us to separate criticism of Israel's policies
*  from anti-Semitism. In fact, it's an injustice. It cheapens anti-Semitism when you throw every
*  person who is opposed to Zionism or opposed to Israel's policies in the bucket of being
*  anti-Semites. It's wrong. It cheapens it. It doesn't do justice to it. And I think it's important for
*  us to have a meaningful conversation about America's support for Israel.
*  Listen, there are terms that are important here. So I'm going to throw out these big terms,
*  apartheid, occupation, ethnic cleansing. These are terms that are legal terms.
*  There are objective thresholds here for apartheid, occupation, ethnic cleansing.
*  The threshold of apartheid has been crossed according to multiple, the most respectable human
*  rights organizations in the world. These are the organizations that you will champion and that you
*  will use in every single other conflict to justify your own policies. But that threshold
*  of apartheid has been passed according to Human Rights Watch, according to Amnesty International,
*  according to the Harvard Law Review. The threshold of apartheid has been crossed.
*  There's a legal terminology there. Two sets of laws for two separate people. You have a displaced
*  people that are forcibly being removed, that are being treated differently, that are stateless,
*  that are undergoing daily humiliation, that live behind an apartheid wall, that live under a
*  different set of policies, that are routinely bombarded, that have lost their ability to free
*  movements, that have lost their ability to access to basic necessities of human life.
*  There are legal definitions here. I don't see how any objective human being can read those reports
*  on apartheid and the threshold crossed for apartheid and walk away from that and say that
*  this is just Jews and Muslims that don't like each other. There's a legal definition here. Occupation.
*  When Israel was created in 1948, you will find many Jews who are opposed to Zionism,
*  and I think this is important, to talk to Jews who are opposed to Zionism. They are many
*  that will say that we were told that it was a land without a people, for a people without a land.
*  The problem with that was there were people there, our ancestors, 750,000 Palestinians expelled in
*  the Nakba, and many Palestinians that have been removed and harassed and that are treated in
*  horrific ways. The occupation is expanding. It is an illegal occupation. The settlements are still
*  expanding. The United States enables that occupation with its funding, with its unconditional support,
*  unwavering support of Israel. It does so in a way that completely undermines any of its claims
*  to being a beacon of freedom in the world. Because it is in plain sight now that the world can see
*  what is happening in Sheikh Jarrah, what is happening in Jerusalem, what is happening with
*  these expanding settlements, everything that flies in the face of any claim to wanting a peaceful
*  solution. The children in Gaza, when I talk about dehumanization, the children that were on the face
*  of the New York Times, which is historically one of the most anti-Palestinian newspapers in America,
*  the faces of the children of Gaza. America and many parts of the world are now seeing it.
*  We have been saying for a very long time, this is apartheid. This is an occupation. This is an
*  injustice. The world needs to check it, hold it accountable. South Africa, which experienced
*  apartheid, Nelson Mandela, Desmond Tutu, all of those that fought apartheid in South Africa,
*  said that Palestinians are living under apartheid and that the same strategies that check the
*  apartheid in South Africa need to be used to hold Israel accountable for apartheid with the
*  Palestinians. It's impossible for us as Palestinians to simply say that we should give up on this cause
*  because all the odds are stacked against us. But when you have videos coming out of the Israeli
*  Army spewing skunk water, sewage water on worshippers leaving Al-Aqsa,
*  far-right leaders now taking the government and the so-called only democracy in the Middle East
*  prohibiting a Palestinian flag being raised anywhere around. American reporter,
*  Sreena Abu Akla, Palestinian-American Christian reporter, one of the most prominent journalists
*  in the Middle East, shot in the face, plain sight. All the American government could say was,
*  if it turns out that it's indeed Israel, that Israel is responsible for the death of an American
*  journalist, then we will hold them accountable. Nothing, not a peep. It was a shame to see that
*  happen and it just solidified to us that whether it's a democratic president or a republican
*  president, unfortunately, the support for Israel is enabling it to continue to wipe out the
*  Palestinian population from its historic lands. And so, we see that happening and I'll say this
*  as well. People ask me about the Abraham Accords. They say, you are talking about peace between
*  communities of faith and protecting communities of faith. Why are you opposed to the Abraham
*  Accords? I think that the name of Abraham should not be used. And I wrote an article called,
*  Why I Oppose the Abraham Accords. The name of Abraham should not be used to justify arms deals
*  that only further disenfranchise the abused population of the Palestinians.
*  Where you have, quote unquote, Muslim regimes making peace with Israel and that's being used
*  against the Palestinian people who are only further disenfranchised from having a voice in
*  their own fate for the sake of American arms deals and security and economic benefits.
*  It's despicable. It's repulsive. Talk to the people. Speak to people on the ground there.
*  See what's happening with your own two eyes and think about the injustice where
*  our taxpayer dollars are being used to suppress the people and what legally meets the definition
*  by every objective standard of apartheid, of occupation, of ethnic cleansing. And it's
*  ongoing and it's happening in real time and it's becoming more blatant with a regime now that's
*  unapologetic of even expressing what the policies have already done. And that is the removal of a
*  people, forcible removal of a people because the government knows that the United States support
*  is unconditional. Do you have hope that Jews, Muslims, and Christians in this land will
*  live in peace one day together, have a basic respect for each other's humanity?
*  Look, this isn't a religious conflict. I think that's fundamentally one of the problems.
*  So even the question is not the correct question.
*  It's not the correct question. This is not a religious conflict. Yes, religion is invoked.
*  Yes, there are religious elements, but there are many Jews that are opposed to what is happening
*  right now towards the Palestinians, many. And I would recommend a serious discussion with even
*  people whose perspectives have grown, Peter Beinert being an example, Rabbi Simone Zimmerman
*  started, if not now. Beta Slim, an Israeli human rights organization that also classed it as
*  apartheid recently. There are many Jews that are opposed to what is happening right now.
*  Palestinians are also not exclusively a Muslim population. Sherina Baraklil was Christian.
*  There are many Palestinian Christians that are also being denied entry into their historic
*  churches and that are completely bewildered or absolutely lost in regards to why
*  American evangelicals have this ironclad support for the occupation and have ignored the
*  plight of Palestinian Christians. Of course, I believe Muslims, Christians, and Jews can coexist.
*  Of course, I have hope because I have to have hope as a person of faith.
*  But as much hope as I have, I think there's a great sense of urgency for people to open their eyes,
*  learn what's actually happening on the ground, read the reports,
*  stop letting these commentators and these companies that are able to generate propaganda
*  own the narrative. There are objective standards here. There are objective measures of oppression
*  that need to be considered here. What's happening to Gaza is one of the greatest atrocities of our
*  time. Learn about it. I'd tell people to just watch the Vice documentaries, for example, the
*  mini documentaries. I'd send them to you as well, Inside the Battle for Jerusalem.
*  Think about it. A guy from Long Island, New York can fly to Israel, fly into Tel Aviv,
*  and walk into a home that's been occupied by families for generations and throw the people
*  out under the full protection of the military there and spit on them, historic homes.
*  And when people come up to me and say, we're opposed to Islamophobia,
*  but they support that, I tell you, you're not opposed to Islamophobia. How can you be
*  opposed to Islamophobia when you traffic in the same framings and dehumanization
*  that enables the viciousness towards Muslims here and Palestinians over there that they do not
*  deserve to be treated like equal human beings, like full human beings, and that based on
*  historic claims, a guy can fly from New York into a historic neighborhood in Jerusalem and kick out
*  generational families with military guns next to them. What does that sound like? How is that
*  normal? And so I think that if people take the time to read, people take the time to investigate,
*  then they come to this conclusion themselves that this is unacceptable.
*  And that you can't put, and this is one of the problems with the framing of Israel-Palestine,
*  is that you're equating occupier and occupied. You're equating the two sides of the conflict.
*  And it's not a conflict, it's an occupation. There is such a disparity of power here
*  that you cannot equate the two sides. Malcolm X would say, you clip the bird's wing and
*  then blame it for not flying as high as you do. You can't do that to a people and just equate them
*  with their occupier. It's an atrocity. It requires us to challenge it. And I'm hopeful
*  at the current movement of Muslims, Christians, and Jews, and people of all faiths,
*  that are saying enough is enough, that thresholds have been crossed here,
*  that this is an atrocity that cannot continue.
*  You know, this is very personal to me because this is happening now.
*  What I anticipate, and this is what America did, this is what Nelson Mandela actually predicted
*  with the United States. What I anticipate is that 10 years from now, 20 years from now,
*  every American will say, how could we have supported this? And this was terrible.
*  And we'll pay symbolic homage to the Palestinian cause.
*  But there are people now that are clinging on for dear life, access to their places of worship,
*  access to their generational homes. Right now, there are children that are in detention,
*  and there's a bill in Congress to just stop. Wherever you stand on this issue, child detainment,
*  child detention should be a red line. Congresswoman Betty McCollum has put this bill on the floor,
*  on the floor of Congress. She can't even get that passed. Right? Just to at least censure
*  child detainment by the IDF. So people need to look into this deeper. They need to
*  consider the human element of this and consider the urgency of it as well. With this new regime,
*  it's only going to, unfortunately, get much worse in the immediate term. And so we have to do
*  something about it. If I may ask you for some advice for a reason that I'll explain maybe in
*  a little bit, or maybe I should just explain now, which is I think because you've talked about
*  Islamophobia, because you've been at the center of so many catastrophic events, because you sort
*  of jump into the fire to try to help people, you've been attacked a lot. Just in general,
*  you've been under stress. It's just you're not immune to stress. So a part of me wants to ask
*  just how psychologically difficult it's been and where you draw strength. And would you advise
*  if the opportunity is there for a person like me, for a silly kid in a suit, to go to that part of
*  the world and take seriously conversations? I would divide it into two categories. There's leaders
*  and there's people. The leaders are sort of these political entities that have their interest,
*  but they also have power and they want to hold on to power. And then people are just regular people
*  that have families that just want to have basic rights and freedoms and continue to love their
*  families, to pursue different jobs and careers and lives that they can flourish and so on. Those are
*  very kind of different dynamics at play. And if given the opportunity to speak to leaders for me,
*  would you advise I do it or not? And when I say leaders, I mean leaders that would make the case,
*  the pro-Zionist case and the anti-Zionist case. And in both cases, I would make it a very challenging
*  conversation for both of them. Unlike today, our conversation today, you're an inspiring,
*  incredible person. I'm a huge fan of yours. You spread so much love to the Muslim community here,
*  to the Jewish community, just everybody loves you. But- Not everybody.
*  Yes, that's true. Not everybody. That's true. But a lot of people love you. Yes. But this was kind of
*  inspiring and a positive conversation. It wasn't very challenging. Although we did touch challenging
*  topics and you did exceptionally well there. But I would do very challenging conversation with those
*  leaders in that part of the world. Is that a bad idea? All right. Well, let me tell you from now,
*  first and foremost, the first part, because I don't want to lose the first part of your
*  conversation. Is it psychologically stressful? Very, very. But when you're
*  a person of faith and you believe that good work will always be rewarded and that doing the right
*  thing will always be rewarded eventually, you're able to weather that storm quite a bit.
*  So your wife told you- Well, that's the second thing.
*  How you feel was okay, right? That's the second thing I was going to mention is honestly a
*  supportive family. My dad's 80 man and he's been through a lot. He was born in 1943, five years
*  before Israel was even created. He was born in Palestine. He's suffered displacement. He has
*  been around the world and somehow built himself up to be a distinguished professor of chemistry,
*  an author, an inventor, grew up taking on some of the most difficult challenges and was just always
*  a man of principle. I always admired my dad being a man of principle and he just tells me, man,
*  stay the course, stay the course. Don't be afraid. Don't back down. I have a supportive family. I have
*  a supportive wife. I've got supportive kids. So I have amazing people around me that keep me grounded
*  for sure and ultimately obviously faith. And also I'll say this slander doesn't stand.
*  What do you mean by that? When people slander you and it kind of comes with the territory of a public
*  figure, it's not going to stand throughout time because eventually any sincere person will find
*  the truth and the only people that will regurgitate that will continue to do so. So when I get portrayed
*  as an anti-Semite because of my strong takes on Israel and challenging Israel and I will continue
*  to do so, it takes just people in Daesh. Like we know him. What are you talking about? So slander
*  doesn't stand, at least with the people that are important to you. It might reside on the internet.
*  It might have great rankings and social media bots that give attraction. But it's psychologically
*  difficult to you to have that. Yes, it is difficult. It's very difficult and it's hurtful,
*  especially when it comes from quarters that you would hope that it doesn't come from.
*  But you take a step back, you re-evaluate, you lean into your faith and you lean on the people
*  that are closest to you and then you keep going. You learn the lessons. Could I be doing something
*  better? Could I be doing something different? Could I be saying something better? Could I be
*  saying something different? Are the noble causes that I want to achieve? Am I doing justice by
*  those causes? How do I grow out of this? You become wiser through these things as well.
*  The second part of your question though about what you should do, if you're going to talk to
*  people, talk to people from a place of inquiry. I would say talk to people more so than leaders
*  and especially some of those who have been erased from the media commentary. Benjamin Netanyahu gets
*  a lot of airtime here in the United States. He's well-spoken. He speaks perfect English. He's an
*  American as well. I would challenge him on some of the things that he has said and done. He has an
*  ongoing corruption case. I think he's a fascist. I think that he's a person who has done much evil.
*  I think that he has a lot of blood on his hands and I think that one day he will be prosecuted
*  for that. But I'd say talk to people on the ground and people that have been erased. Talk
*  to the families that are being displaced. I don't care about the political leadership. I'd much
*  rather you talk to the people on the ground in East Jerusalem that have been displaced,
*  the families. Talk to Palestinian Christians. Talk to the sister of Shireen Abou Akla,
*  Lena Abou Akla, who was extremely disappointed and let down when Joe Biden went to the region
*  and did not take her calls, did not meet her, which was an absolutely disgraceful move.
*  He should have met with her. She's the sister of an American journalist who was murdered in cold
*  blood. Talk to Lena Abou Akla. Talk to Mitri Rahet. Mitri, an interesting person, for example. He's a
*  Lutheran. He's the head of the Lutheran Church in Palestine. He comes to Dallas sometimes and talks
*  about the plight of Palestinian Christians. I think if you're talking to people in leadership,
*  obviously there are some that will be able to represent themselves in English.
*  Hanan Ashrawi is a very eloquent person, for example. I don't know if you're going to have
*  any luck getting into Gaza, but I'll pray for you if you do. But obviously, if you want to talk to
*  everybody, you got to talk to everybody, man. So- Well, and I also want to say this very importantly,
*  whitewashing, because I've heard this a lot, also with Ukraine and Russia. There's an interesting
*  line between whitewashing, which is something you definitely should not do, and a deep empathy
*  for a large number of human beings. It's a really tricky line to walk. And I also disagree with you
*  about, well, I think, I don't know if it's a disagreement, but I think I disagree about
*  leaders. I think I agree 100% that the most important people are the people on the ground.
*  Okay. But I think those are extremely important people to understand, not just as leaders,
*  but as human beings too. And in many cases, to have a challenging conversation,
*  but from a place of empathy, from understanding a human being.
*  So if you plan to talk to right-wing, the current leadership of Israel,
*  my only request to you is talk to the victims themselves, not the Palestinian authority,
*  talk to the victim. I know you want to, right? So I appreciate-
*  But the victims, yes, the victims. Talk to the victims themselves,
*  talk to those people that are being thrown out of their homes and subjected to the daily humiliation.
*  Go to a checkpoint and walk through the checkpoint the way that a Palestinian walks
*  through a checkpoint and tell me that's not apartheid. Walk through that checkpoint,
*  crammed in in cages and tell me it's not apartheid. So I think you're a very sincere
*  person. I think you're going to do your best. I'll be praying for you.
*  Some of these things are harder than others, but yes, I feel like we're in the middle of
*  a negotiation and we've come to a point where we both agree.
*  Everyone deserves to be, not everyone deserves to be, but I think there's great value and benefit.
*  Let me say I agree with you in hearing people, even tyrants, hearing them so that you can
*  properly deconstruct and decipher what you're hearing, but just think of the voices that don't
*  get heard. And a lot of times what's been done to the Muslim world is, and what's being done
*  right now in the name of the Abraham Accords, what's wrong with the Palestinians? The other
*  Arabs are making peace with them. Let me tell you something, those regimes that are signing
*  on to the Abraham Accords, the people are not happy, but they're terrified of challenging
*  those regimes. So if you go talk to the leaders of some of these countries that have signed on to
*  the Abraham Accords and that are in some twisted way making this about religion and peace,
*  you can greatly skew the narrative to where Palestinians are just an inherently disagreeable
*  people that don't want peace. They just want to live in their homes. They just want to live
*  as full equal human beings. They want the things that everybody wants. And they're only being
*  further disenfranchised in the name of peace now because voices are being amplified in the
*  name of peace that are suffocating voices for justice.
*  You said hope. As a man of faith, you have hope. What gives you hope about
*  this part of the world and our world in general when you look across and see so much conflict,
*  so much division happening? What gives you hope?
*  I think that if you look through history, we have been through point-blank,
*  where we almost were not going to exist anymore. If you lived in the time of the Crusades, if you
*  lived in some of these darker moments of history, World War I, World War II, you probably thought
*  you weren't going to come out of this as a world. I have hope in God. I have hope in God. I have
*  hope that godly people, people that are devoted to God and people of righteousness,
*  can shift things with his help. I also believe that younger people, I hope they'll be different.
*  I think younger people, hopefully, are using the word hope a lot. You might hear inshallah,
*  God willing, we'll see the path that we're heading and we'll seek to disrupt
*  this bleak trajectory and bring it back to something else.
*  Here's the thing. We live in a time of hyper-exposure. That hyper-exposure could
*  paralyze you or it could empower you. It could make you completely shut down and say,
*  what's the point of even trying to help these people out? Why even talk about the Palestinians?
*  Well, you've got these people here, the Uyghurs, the Rohingya. You've got what's happening in
*  Honduras, Guatemala, El Salvador, Brazil, South America, Africa, Ethiopia,
*  Somalia. It's so much and it can be overwhelming to a person who cares.
*  But you ultimately realize that the difference that you can make
*  can become a much greater difference, even if it's after your lifetime.
*  I'll tell you actually a story that I remember the first time it was in Syria, Syrian refugee camps.
*  And you deal with people in this deeply human way. For me, the most clarifying parts
*  of the world are the refugee camps. It's where I feel the most clarity in life
*  about what I'm supposed to be doing in life. You go to the refugee camps and then after
*  you're interacting with these people and maybe giving a few people some trailer homes and some
*  food and something to sustain themselves, some coats and blankets, you drive out of the refugee
*  camps back to where you're staying. And the camps get bigger and bigger and bigger and bigger,
*  and the people get smaller and smaller and smaller and smaller.
*  But then you realize that it might be that that small section that I touched
*  is going to be the change that affects all of them. What's going to happen to that 12-year-old boy
*  that has seen the horrors of this world and that is absolutely committed to uplifting his people
*  and bringing about a change, being responsible for the plight of his people?
*  And so when I look at any section of devastation in the world, you never know which part of it
*  that you're going to touch that's going to change everything by the grace of God, by the help of God.
*  So you keep trying to do your part. The Prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him, said that the most
*  beloved of deeds to God are the consistent ones, even if they're small. That small act of charity,
*  that small smile, that small act of kindness, that small prayer might go a long way if he blesses it.
*  So keep chipping away, chipping away, chipping away.
*  So do not be paralyzed by the scale of the division, just chip away at it.
*  Chip away at it.
*  Small step at a time. I suppose all of us can do that. Young people can do that.
*  Just one person at a time, try to help.
*  Yes, absolutely.
*  Omar, you're an incredible person. You're an inspiration.
*  I think you mentioned you came to Dallas for a podcast and instead you got a friend.
*  So it's an honor to be your new friend. And I think it's time we go pray.
*  Absolutely.
*  I hope it's okay that I join you, at least in movement in prayer.
*  Thank you so much. I appreciate you coming down. It's been an absolute pleasure.
*  As-salamu alaikum wa rahmatullah
*  All right. Thank you so much.
*  You sure you don't want to come back? Do a round two?
*  Yeah. Thank you, man.
*  It's a great time.
*  Great time, man.
*  Thanks for listening to this conversation with Omar Suleiman. To support this podcast,
*  please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, let me leave you with some words from
*  Muhammad Ali. Impossible is just a big word thrown around by small men who find it easier to live in
*  a world they've been given than to explore the power they have to change it. Impossible is not
*  a fact. It's an opinion. Impossible is not a declaration. It's a dare. Thank you for listening
*  and hope to see you next time.
