---
Date Generated: April 08, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 4271s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence', 'artificial intelligence podcast', 'benjamin netanyahu', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex podcast', 'mit ai']
Video Views: 1384699
Video Rating: None
---

# Benjamin Netanyahu: Israel, Palestine, Power, Corruption, Hate, and Peace | Lex Fridman Podcast #389
**Lex Fridman:** [July 12, 2023](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XpC7SVDXimg)
*  We should never, and I never, sit aside and say, oh, they're just threatening to destroy us.
*  They won't do it. If somebody threatens to eliminate you, as Iran is doing today,
*  and as Hitler did then, and people discounted it, well, if somebody threatens to annihilate us,
*  take them seriously and act to prevent it early on. Don't let them have the means to do so,
*  because that may be too late.
*  The following is a conversation with Benjamin Netanyahu, Prime Minister of Israel, currently
*  serving his sixth term in office. He's one of the most influential, powerful, and controversial men
*  in the world, leading a right-wing coalition government at the center of one of the most
*  intense and long-lasting conflicts and crises in human history. As we spoke, and as I speak now,
*  large-scale protests are breaking out all over Israel over this government's proposed judicial
*  reform that seeks to weaken the Supreme Court in a bold accumulation of power.
*  Given the current intense political battles in Israel, our previous intention to speak for
*  three hours was adjusted to one hour for the time being, but we agreed to speak again for much
*  longer in the future. I will also interview people who harshly disagree with the words
*  spoken in this conversation. I will speak with other world leaders, with religious leaders,
*  with historians and activists, and with people who have lived and have suffered through the pain of
*  war, destruction, and loss that stoke the fires of anger and hate in their heart. For this,
*  I will travel anywhere, no matter how dangerous, if there's any chance it may help add to
*  understanding and love in the world. I believe in the power of conversation,
*  to do just this, to remind us of our common humanity. I know I'm underqualified and under
*  skilled for these conversations, so I will often fall short and I will certainly get attacked,
*  derided, and slandered. But I will always turn the other cheek and use these attacks to learn,
*  to improve, and no matter what, never give in to cynicism. This life, this world of ours,
*  is too beautiful not to keep trying, trying to do some good, in whatever way each of us know how.
*  I love you all. This is the Lex Friedman Podcast. To support it,
*  please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, dear friends, here's Benjamin Netanyahu.
*  You're loved by many people here in Israel and in the world, but you're also hated by many.
*  In fact, I think you may be one of the most hated men in the world. So if there's a young man or
*  a young woman listening to this right now who have such hate in their heart, what can you say to them
*  to one day turn that hate into love? I disagree with the premise of your question. I think I have
*  enjoyed a very broad support around the world. There are certain corners in which we have
*  this animosity that you describe, and it sort of permeates in some of the newspapers and
*  news organs and so on in the United States. But it certainly doesn't reflect the broad support
*  that I have. I just gave an interview on an Iranian channel, 16 million viewers. I gave another one,
*  just did a little video a few years ago, 25 million viewers from Iran. Certainly no hate there,
*  not from the regime. And when I go around the world, and I've been around the world,
*  I think people want to hear what we have to say, what I have to say as a leader of Israel,
*  whom they respect increasingly as a rising power in the world. So I disagree with that.
*  And the most important thing that goes against what you said is the respect that we receive from
*  the Arab world and the fact that we've made four historic peace agreements with Arab countries.
*  They made it with me. They didn't make it with anyone else. And I respect them and they respect
*  me. And probably more to come. So I think the premise is wrong. That's all. Well, there's a
*  lot of love. Yes. A lot of leaders are collaborating. Respect, I said. Okay. All right. Well,
*  it's a spectrum. But there is people who don't have good things to say about Israel,
*  who do have hate in their heart for Israel. And what can you say to those people?
*  Well, I think they don't know very much. I think they're guided by a lot of ignorance. They don't
*  know about Israel. They don't know that Israel is a stellar democracy, that it happens to be one of
*  the most advanced societies on the planet, that what Israel develops helps humanity in every field,
*  in medicine and agriculture and the environment and telecoms and talk about AI in a minute,
*  but changing the world for the better and spreading this among six continents. We've sent rescue teams
*  more than any other country in the world and we're one tenth of one percent of the world's
*  population. But when there's an earthquake or a devastation in Haiti or in the Philippines,
*  Israel is there. When there's an earthquake, a devastating earthquake in Turkey, Turkey,
*  Israel was there. When there's something in Nepal, Israel is there and it's a second country.
*  It's the second country. In one case, India or after another case, the United States,
*  Israel is there. Tiny Israel is a benefactor to all of humanity.
*  So you're a student of history. If I can just linger on that philosophical notion of hate,
*  that part of human nature, if you look at World War II, what do you learn from human nature,
*  from the rise of the Third Reich and the rise of somebody like Hitler and the hate that permeates
*  that? Well, what I've learned is that you have to nip bad things in the bud. There's a Latin term
*  that says, stop bad things when they're small. And the deliberate hatred, the incitement of
*  hatred against one community, its demonization, delegitimization that goes with it is a very
*  dangerous thing. And that happened in the case of the Jews. What started with the Jews
*  soon spread to all of humanity. So what we've learned is that's what we should never,
*  and I never sit aside and say, oh, they're just threatening to destroy us. They won't do it.
*  If somebody threatens to eliminate you, as Iran is doing today and as Hitler did then,
*  and people discounted it, well, if somebody threatens to annihilate us, take them seriously
*  and act to prevent it early on. Don't let them have the means to do so because that may be too
*  late. So in those threats, underlying that hatred, how much of it is anti-Zionism and how
*  much of it is anti-Semitism? I don't distinguish between the two. You can't say, well, I'm okay
*  with Jews, but I just don't think there should be a Jewish state. It's like saying, I'm not anti-American,
*  I just don't think there should be an America. That's basically what people are saying vis-a-vis
*  anti-Semitism and anti-Zionism. When you say anti-Zionism, you're saying the Jewish people
*  don't have a right to have a state of their own. And that is a denial of a basic principle that
*  I think completely unmasks what is involved here. Today, anti-Semitism is anti-Zionism. Those who
*  oppose the Jewish people oppose the Jewish state. If we jump from human history to the current
*  particular moment, there's protests in Israel now about the proposed judicial reform that gives
*  power to your government to override the Supreme Court. So the critics say that this gives too
*  much power to you, virtually making you a dictator. Yeah, well, that's ridiculous. The mere fact that
*  you have so many demonstrations and protests, some dictatorship, huh? There's a lot of democracy here,
*  more ambunctious and more robust than just anywhere on the planet.
*  R. Can you still man the case that this may give too much power to the coalition government, to
*  the prime minister, not just to you, but to those who follow?
*  No, I think that's complete hogwash because I think there's very few people who are demonstrating
*  against this. Quite a few, quite many don't have an idea what is being discussed. They're basically
*  being sloganized. You can sloganize, you know something about not mass media right now, but the
*  social network. You can basically feed deliberately with big data and big money. You can just feed
*  slogans and get into people's minds. I'm sure you don't think I exaggerate because you can tell me
*  more about that. And you can create mass mobilization based on these absurd slogans.
*  So here's where I come from and what we're doing, what we're trying to do and what we've
*  changed in what we're trying to do. I'm a 19th century Democrat in my, small d, yes, in my views.
*  That is, I ask the question, what is democracy? Okay. So democracy is the will of the majority
*  and the protection of the rights of, they call it the rights of the minority, but I say the rights
*  of the individual. Okay. So how do you balance the two? Okay. How do you avoid mobocracy? Okay.
*  And how do you avoid dictatorship? The opposite side. The way you avoid it is something that was
*  built essentially by British philosophers and French philosophers, but was encapsulated by the
*  founding fathers of the United States. You create a balance between the three branches of government.
*  Okay. The legislative, the executive and the judiciary. And this balance is what assures
*  the balance between majority rights and individual rights. And you have to balance all of them. Okay.
*  That balance was maintained in Israel in its first 50 years and was gradually overtaken
*  and basically broken by the most activist judicial court on the planet. That's what
*  happened here. And gradually over the last two, three decades, the court
*  arrogated for itself the powers of the parliament and the executive. So we're trying to bring it
*  back into line. Bringing it back into line into what is common in all parliamentary democracies
*  and in the United States doesn't mean taking the pendulum from one side and bringing it to the
*  other side. We want checks and balances, not unrivaled power. Just as we said, we want an
*  independent judiciary, but not an all-powerful judiciary. That balance does not mean bringing
*  it back into line. It doesn't mean that you can have the parliament, our Knesset, override any
*  decision that the Supreme Court does. So I pretty much early on said after the judicial
*  reform was introduced, get rid of the idea of a sweeping override clause that would have with
*  61 votes, that's majority of one, you can just nullify any Supreme Court decision. So let's move
*  it back into the center. So that's gone. And most of the criticism on the judicial reform was based
*  on an unlimited override clause, which I've said is simply not going to happen. People are
*  discussing something that already for six months does not exist. The second point that
*  we received criticism on was the structure of how do you choose Supreme Court judges?
*  And the critics of the reform are saying that the idea that elected officials should choose
*  Supreme Court judges is the end of democracy. If that's the case, the United States is not a
*  democracy. Neither is France, and neither are just, I don't know, just about every democracy on the
*  planet. So there is a view here that you can't have the sordid hands of elected officials
*  involved in the choosing of judges. And in the Israeli system, the judicial activism went so far
*  that effectively the sitting judges have an effective veto on choosing judges, which means
*  that this is a self-selecting court that just perpetrates itself. And we want to correct that,
*  again, we want to correct it in a balanced way. And that's basically what we're trying to do.
*  So I think there's a lot of misinformation about that. We're trying to bring Israeli democracy
*  to where it was in its first 50 years. And it was a stellar democracy. It still is. Israel is a
*  democracy. It will remain a democracy, a vibrant democracy. And believe me, the fact that people
*  are arguing and demonstrating in the streets and protesting is just the best proof of that.
*  And that's how it will remain. We spoke about tech companies offline. There's a lot of tech companies
*  nervous about this judicial reform. Can you speak to why large and small companies have a
*  future in Israel? Because Israel is a free market economy. I had something to do with that. I
*  introduced dozens and dozens of free market reforms that made Israel move from $17,000 per
*  capita income to within a very short time to $54,000. That's nominal GDP per capita,
*  according to the IMF. And we've overtaken in that Japan, France, Britain, Germany.
*  How did that happen? Because we unleashed the genius that we have and the initiative and the
*  entrepreneurship that is latent in our population. And to do that, we had to create free markets.
*  So we created that. So Israel has one of the most vibrant free market economies in the world. And
*  the second thing we have is a permanent investment in conceptual products because we have a permanent
*  investment in the military, in our security services, creating basically knowledge workers
*  who then become knowledge entrepreneurs. And so we create this structure. And that's not going to
*  go away. There's been a decline in investments in high tech globally. I think that's driven by many
*  factors, but the most important one is the interest rate, which I think will fluctuate up and down.
*  But Israel will remain a very attractive country because it produces so many, so many knowledge
*  workers in a knowledge-based economy. And it's changing so rapidly. The world is changing.
*  You're looking for the places that have innovation. The future belongs to those who innovate.
*  Israel is the preeminent innovation nation. It has few competitors. And I would say, all right,
*  where do you have this close cross-disciplinary fermentation of various skills and areas? I would
*  say it's in Israel. And I'll tell you why. We used to be just telecoms because people went out of the
*  military intelligence, RNSA. But that's been now broad-based. So you find it in medicine,
*  you find it in biology, you find it in agri-tech, you find it everywhere. Everything is becoming
*  technologized. And in Israel, everybody is dealing in everything. And that's a potent reservoir of
*  talent that the world is not going to pass up. And in fact, it's coming to us. We just had Nvidia
*  coming here, and they decided to build a supercomputer in Israel. I wonder why. We've had Intel coming
*  here and deciding not to invest $25 billion just now in a new plant in Israel. I wonder why.
*  I don't wonder why. They know why. Because the talent is here and the freedom is here.
*  Then it will remain so. So you had a conversation about AI with Sam Altman of OpenAI and with Elon
*  Musk. What was the content of that conversation? What's your vision for this very highest of
*  tech, which is artificial intelligence?
*  Well, first of all, I have a high regard for the people I talk to.
*  And I understand that they understand things I don't understand. And I don't pretend to
*  understand everything. But I do understand one thing. I understand that AI is developing at a
*  geometric rate. And mostly in political life and in life in general, people don't have an intuitive
*  grasp of geometric growth. You understand things basically in linear increments. And the idea that
*  you're coming up a ski slope is very foreign to people. So they don't understand it. And they're
*  naturally also taken aback by it. Because what do you do? Okay. So I think there are several
*  conclusions from my conversations with them and from my other observations that I've been talking
*  about for many years. I'm talking about the need to do this. Well, the first thing is this.
*  There is no possibility of not entering AI with full force. Secondly, there is a need for regulation.
*  Third, it's not clear there'll be global regulation. Fourth, it's not clear where it ends up.
*  I certainly cannot say that. Now you might say, does it come to control us? Okay, that's a question.
*  Does it come to control us? I don't know the answer to that. I think that as one
*  observation that I had from these conversations is if it does come to control us, that's probably
*  the only chance of having universal regulation because I don't see
*  anyone deciding to avoid the race and cooperate unless you have that threat.
*  Doesn't mean you can't regulate AI within countries even without that understanding.
*  But it does mean that there's a limit to regulation because every country will want to
*  make sure that it doesn't give up competitive advantage if there is no universal regulation.
*  I think that right now, just as 10 years ago, I read a novel. I don't read novels, but I was
*  forced to read one by a scientific advisor. I read history. I read about economics. I read
*  about technology. I just don't read novels. Okay. On this, I followed Churchill. He said,
*  fact is better than fiction. Well, this fiction would become fact. It was a novel about
*  a Chinese-American future cyber war. I read the book in one sitting, called in a team of experts,
*  and I said, all right, let's turn Israel into one of the world's five cyber powers and let's do it
*  very quickly. And we did, actually. We did exactly that. I think AI is bigger than that.
*  I think it's a very important question related to that because it'll affect, well, cyber affects
*  everything, but AI will affect it even more fundamentally, and the joining of the two could
*  be very powerful. So I think in Israel, we have to do it anyway for security reasons, and we're
*  doing it. But I think what about our databases that are already very robust on the medical records
*  why don't we stick a genetic database on that? Why don't we do other things that could
*  bring magical, what seem are seemingly magical cures and drugs and medical instruments for that?
*  That's one possibility. We have it in, as I said, in every single field. The conclusion is this.
*  We have to move on AI. We are moving on AI just as we moved on cyber, and I think Israel will be
*  one of the leading AI powers in the world. The questions I don't have an answer to is
*  where does it go? How much does it eat chew up on jobs? There's an assumption that I'm not sure is
*  true that all previous, the two big previous revolutions in the human condition, namely the
*  agricultural revolution and the industrial revolution, definitely produce more jobs than
*  they consumed. That is not obvious to me at all. I could see new jobs creating, and yes,
*  I have that comforting statement, but it's not quite true because I think on balance,
*  they'll probably consume more jobs, many more jobs than they'll create.
*  At least in the short term, and we don't know about the long term.
*  I don't know about the long term, but I used to have the comfort being a free market guy. I always
*  said, we're going to produce more jobs than by limiting certain government jobs. We're actually
*  putting out in the market, we'll create more jobs, which obviously happened. We had one telecom
*  company, a government company, when I said we're going to create competition, they said,
*  you're going to run us out, we're not going to have more workers. Yeah, they had 13,000 workers,
*  they went down to seven, but we created another 40,000 in the other companies. That was a
*  comforting thought. I always knew that was true. Not only that, I also knew that wealth would spread
*  by opening up the markets completely opposite to the socialist and semi-socialist creed that
*  they had here. They said, you're going to make the rich richer and the poor poor, no, and made
*  everyone richer. Actually, the people who entered the job market because of the reforms we did
*  actually became a lot richer on the lower ladders of the socioeconomic measure. Here's the point.
*  I don't know. I don't know that we will not have what Elon Musk calls the end of scarcity.
*  You'll have the end of scarcity, you'll have enormous productivity.
*  Very few people are producing enormous added value. You're going to have to tax that
*  to pass it to the others. You're going to have to do that. That's a political question. I'm not sure
*  how we answer that. What if you tax and somebody else doesn't tax, you're going to get everybody
*  to go there. That's an issue, an international issue that we constantly have to deal with.
*  The second question you have is suppose you solve that problem and you deliver money to those who
*  are not involved in the AI economy. What do they do? The first question you ask somebody
*  whom you just met after the polite exchanges is, what do you do? Well, people define themselves
*  by their profession. It's going to be difficult if you don't have a profession. People will spend
*  more time self-searching, more time in the arts, more time in leisure. I understand that.
*  If I have to bet it will annihilate many more jobs, then it will create and it will force a
*  structural change in our economics, in our economic models, and in our politics. I'm not
*  sure where it's going to go. That's something we have to respond to at the nation level and
*  just as a human civilization, both the threat of AI to just us as a human species and then the
*  effect on the jobs and, like you said, cybersecurity. What do you think? Do you think we're going to lose
*  control? No. First of all, I do believe maybe naively that it will create more jobs than it takes.
*  Write that down and we'll check it. It's on record.
*  We don't say we'll check it after our lifetime. No, we'll see it in a few years.
*  We'll see it in a few years. I'm really concerned about cybersecurity and the nature of how that
*  changes with the power of AI. In terms of existential threats, I think there will be so much
*  threats that aren't existential along the way that that's the thing I'm most concerned about
*  versus AI taking complete control and becoming superseding the human species.
*  Although that is something you should consider seriously because of the exponential growth
*  of its capabilities. Exactly. The exponential growth which we understand
*  is before us, but we don't really, it's very hard to project forward.
*  To really understand. That's right. Exactly right.
*  I deal with what I can and where I can affect something. I tend not to worry about things I
*  don't control because there's a certain point, there's no point. You have to decide what you're
*  spending your time on. I think in practical terms, I think we'll make Israel a formidable AI power.
*  We understand the limitation of scale, computing power and other things. I think within those
*  limits, I think we can make here this miracle that we did in many other things. We do
*  more with less. I don't care if it's water, the production of water or the production of energy
*  or the production of knowledge or the production of cyber capabilities, defense and other.
*  We just do more with less. I think in AI, we're going to do a lot more
*  with relatively small but highly gifted population. Very gifted.
*  Taking a small tangent, as we talked about offline, you have a background in Taekwondo.
*  We'll mention you almost. I've trained with both.
*  This is a quick question. Who are you betting on in a fight?
*  I refuse to answer that. I will say this.
*  Such a politician you are.
*  Yeah, of course. Here I'm a politician. I'm openly telling you then I'm dodging the question.
*  I'll say this. I spent five years in our special forces in the military. We barely spent a
*  minute on martial arts. I actually learned Taekwondo later when I came to…
*  It wasn't even at MIT. At MIT, I think I did karate. But when I came to the UN,
*  I had a martial arts expert and he taught me Taekwondo, which was kind of interesting.
*  Now, the question you really have to ask is why did we learn martial arts in this special
*  elite unit? The answer is there's no point if you saw Indiana Jones.
*  There's no point. Just pull the trigger. That's simple. Now, I don't expect anyone to pull the
*  trigger on this combat. I'm sure you'll make sure that doesn't happen.
*  Yeah. I mean, martial arts is bigger than just combat. It's this kind of journey of humility.
*  It's an art form. It truly is an art. But it's fascinating that these two figures in Taek
*  are facing each other. I won't ask a question of who you would face and how you would do.
*  Well, I'm facing opponents all the time.
*  All the time?
*  Yeah. That's part of life. Part of life is…
*  Not yet.
*  I'm not sure about that.
*  Are you announcing in the whites?
*  No. Part of life is competition. The only time competition ends is death. But political life,
*  economic life, cultural life is engaged continuously in creativity and competition.
*  The problem I have with that, as I mentioned earlier just before we began the podcast,
*  is that at a certain point, you want to put barriers to monopoly. If you're a really
*  able competitor, you're going to create a monopoly. That's what Peter Thiel says
*  is a natural course of things. It's what I learned basically in the Boston Consulting Group.
*  If you're a very able competitor, you'll create scale advantages that give you the ability to
*  lock out your competition. As a prime minister, I want to assure that there is competition in
*  the market. You have to limit this competitive power at a certain point. That becomes increasingly
*  hard in a world where everything is intermixed. Where do you define market segments? Where do you
*  define monopoly? How do you do that? That actually, conceptually, I find very challenging.
*  Because of all the dozens of economic reforms that I've made, the most difficult part is the
*  conceptual part. Once you've ironed it out, you say, here's what I want to do, here's the right
*  thing to do. Then you have a practical problem of overcoming union resistance, political resistance,
*  press calumny, opponents from this or that corner. That's a practical matter.
*  But if you have it conceptually defined, you can move ahead to reform economies or reform
*  education or reform transportation. Fine. In the question of the growing power of large companies,
*  big tech companies, to monopolize the markets because they're better at it,
*  they provide a service, they provide a lower cost, a rapidly declining cost. Where do you stop?
*  Where do you stop monopoly power is a crucial question because it also becomes now a political
*  question. If you amass enormous amount of economic power, which is information power,
*  that also monopolizes the political process, which creates these are real questions that are
*  not obvious. I don't have an obvious answer because as I said, as a 19th century Democrat,
*  these are questions of the 21st century, which people should begin to think, do you have a
*  solution to that? The solution of monopolies growing arbitrarily,
*  unstoppably in power. Economic power and therefore in political power.
*  I mean, some of that is regulation. Some of that is competition.
*  You know where to put, to draw the line. It's not breaking up AT&T. It's not that simple.
*  Well, I believe in the power of competition that there will always be somebody that challenges the
*  big guys, especially in the space of AI. The more open source movements are taking hold,
*  the more the little guy can become the big guy. So you're saying basically the regulatory
*  the regulatory instrument is the market. In large part, in most part, that's the hope.
*  Maybe I'm a dreamer. That's been in many ways by policy up to now.
*  Okay. The best regulator is the market. The best regulator in economic activity is the market.
*  And the best regulator in political matters is the political market. That's called elections.
*  That's what regulates. You have a lousy government and people make lousy decisions.
*  Well, you don't need the wise men raised above the masses to decide what is good and what is bad.
*  Let the masses decide. Let them vote every four years or whatever and they throw you up.
*  By the way, it happened to me. There's life after political death. There's actually political life.
*  I was reelected five or six times and this is my sixth term. So I believe in that. I'm not sure.
*  I'm not sure that in economic matters, in the geometric growth of tech companies,
*  that you'll always have the little guy, the nimble mammal that will come out and slay the
*  dinosaurs or overcome the dinosaurs, which is essentially what you said.
*  Yeah. I wouldn't count out the little guy.
*  You wouldn't count out the little guy. I hope you're right.
*  But let me ask you about this market of politics. You have served six terms as Prime Minister
*  over 15 years in power. Let me ask you again, human nature. Do you worry about the corrupting
*  nature of power on you as a leader, on you as a man?
*  Not at all. Because I think that, again, the thing that drives me is nothing but the mission
*  that I took to assure the survival and thriving of the state, the Jewish state. That is, its
*  economic prosperity, but its security and its ability to achieve peace with our neighbors.
*  And I'm committed to it. I think there are still many things that have been done. There are
*  a few big things that I can still do, but it doesn't only depend on my sense of mission. It
*  depends on the market, as we say. It depends really on the will of the Israeli voters.
*  And the Israeli voters have decided to vote for me again and again, even though I wield
*  no power in the press, no power in many quarters here and so on. Nothing. I mean, I am probably,
*  I'm going to be very soon the longest serving Prime Minister in the last half century in the
*  Western democracies. But that's not because I amass great political power in any of the
*  institutions. I remember I had a conversation with Silvio Berlusconi who recently died,
*  and he said to me about, I don't know, 15 years ago, something like that. He said,
*  so baby, how many of Israel's television stations do you have? And I said, none. He said,
*  do you have none? I have two. Do you have? I said, none. I have two. He said, no, no, but
*  what you mean, you don't have any that you control. I said, not only do I have
*  none that I control, they're all against me. So he said, so how do you win elections?
*  And with both hands tied behind your back. And I said, the hard way. That's why I have the largest
*  party, but I don't have many more seats that I would have if I had a sympathetic voice in the
*  media. And Israel until recently was dominated completely by one side of the political spectrum
*  that often vilified me. Not me, because they viewed me as representing basically the conservative
*  voices in Israel that are majority. And so the idea that I'm an omnipotent, authoritarian
*  dictator is ridiculous. I would say I'm not merely a champion of democracy and democratization.
*  I believe ultimately the decision is with the voters. And the voters, even though they've had,
*  you know, they have constant, constant press attacks, they have chosen to put me back in.
*  So I don't believe in this thing of amassing the corrupting power. If you don't have elections,
*  if you don't have, if you control the means of influencing the voters, I understand
*  what you're saying. But in my case, it's the exact opposite. I have to constantly go in elections,
*  constantly, you know, with a disadvantage that the major media outlets are very
*  violently sometimes against me. But it's fine. And I keep on winning. So I don't know what you're
*  talking about. I would say the concentration of power lies elsewhere, not here.
*  R. Well, you have been involved in several corruption cases. How much corruption is there
*  in Israel? And how do you fight it in your own party and in Israel?
*  Well, you should ask a different question. What's happened to these cases? These cases have
*  basically are collapsing. And before our eyes, there was recently an event in which the judges,
*  the three judges in my case called in the prosecution and said, you know, your flagship,
*  the bribery charge, so-called bribery charge, you know, is gone, doesn't exist. Before a single
*  a single defense witness was called. And it sort of tells you that this thing is evaporating. It's
*  quite astounding. Even that, I have to say, was covered even by the mainstream press in Israel
*  because it's such an earthquake. So, you know, a lot of these charges are not a lot. These charges
*  will prove to be nothing. I always said, listen, I stand before the legal process. I don't claim
*  that I'm exempt from it in any way. On the contrary, I think the truth will come out,
*  and it's coming out. And we see that not only that, but with other things. So,
*  I think it's kind of instructive that, you know, no politician has been more vilified.
*  No, none has been put to such a, you know, what is it, about a quarter of a billion
*  shekels were used to scrutinize me, scour my bank accounts, sending people to the Philippines,
*  into Mexico, into Europe, into America, and looking at everybody using spyware,
*  the most advanced spyware on the planet against my associates, blackmailing witnesses,
*  telling them, you know, think about your family, think about your wife, you know,
*  you better tell us what you want. All that is coming out of the trial. So, I would say
*  that most people now are not asking, are no longer asking, including my opponents,
*  it's sort of trickling in as the stuff comes out. People are not saying,
*  what did Netanyahu do? Because he apparently did nothing. What was done to him is something
*  that people ask. What was done to him? What was done to our democracy? What was done in the attempt
*  to put down somebody who keeps winning elections despite the handicaps that I described? Maybe we
*  can nail him by framing him. And the one thing I can say about this court trial is that things
*  are coming out. And that's very good. Just objective things are coming out, changing the picture.
*  So, I would say the attempt to brand me as corrupt is falling on its face. But the thing that is
*  being uncovered in the trial, such as the use of spyware on a politician,
*  a politician's surroundings to try to shake them down in investigations,
*  put them in flea-ridden cells for 21 days, invite their 84-year-old
*  mother to investigations without cause, bringing in their mistresses in the corridor,
*  shaking them down. That's what people are asking. That corruption is what they want corrected.
*  R. What is the top obstacle to peaceful coexistence of Israelis and Palestinians?
*  Let's talk about the big question of peace in this part of the world.
*  R. Well, I think the reason you have the persistence of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict,
*  which goes back about a century, is the persistent Palestinian refusal to recognize
*  a Jewish state, a nation state for the Jewish people in any boundary. That's why they opposed
*  the establishment of the state of Israel before we had a state. And that's why they've opposed it
*  after we had a state. They opposed it when we didn't have Judea and Samaria, the West Bank in
*  our heads and Gaza. They opposed it after we had it. It doesn't make a difference. It's basically
*  the persistent refusal to recognize a Jewish state in any boundaries. And I think their tragedy is
*  that they've been commandeered for a century by leadership that refused to compromise with the
*  idea of Zionism, namely that the Jews deserve a state in this part of the world. The territorial
*  dispute is something else. You have a territorial dispute if you say, okay, you're living on this
*  side, we're living on that side, let's decide where the border is and so on. That's not what
*  the argument is. The Palestinian society, which is itself fragmented, but all the factions agree,
*  there shouldn't be a Jewish state anywhere. They just disagree between Hamas that says, oh well,
*  you should have it. We should get rid of it with terror. And the others are saying, we should also
*  use political means to dissolve it. So that is the problem.
*  Jared Larson So even as part of a two-state solution,
*  they're still against the idea.
*  Dr. Michael O'Brien Well, they don't want a state next to Israel.
*  They want a state instead of Israel. And they say, if we get a state, we'll use it as a springboard
*  to destroy the smaller Israeli state, which is what happened when Israel unilaterally walked
*  out of Gaza and effectively established a Hamas state there. They didn't say, oh good, now we have
*  our own territory, our own state, Israel is no longer there, let's build peace, let's build
*  economic projects, let's enfranchise our people. No, they turned it into a terror bastion from
*  which they fired 10,000 rockets into Israel. When Israel left Lebanon, you know, because we had
*  terrorist attacks from there, then we had Lebanon taken over by Hezbollah, a terrorist organization
*  that seeks to destroy Israel. And therefore, every time we just walked out, what we got was not peace.
*  We didn't give, you know, territory for peace, we got territory for terror. That's what we had.
*  And that's what would happen as long as the reigning ideology says, we don't want Israel in
*  any border. So, the idea of two states assumes that you'd have on the other side, a state that
*  wants to live in peace and not one that will be overtaken by Iran and its proxies in two seconds
*  and become a base to destroy Israel. And therefore, I think that most Israelis today,
*  if you ask them, they'd say, it's not going to work in that concept. So, what do you do with
*  the Palestinians? Okay? They're still there. And I don't, unlike them, I don't want to throw them
*  out. They're going to be living here and we're going to be living here in an area which is,
*  by the way, just so you understand, the area, the entire area of so-called West Bank and Israel
*  is the width of the Washington Beltway, more or less. Just a little more, not much more.
*  You can't really divide it up. You can't say, well, you're going to fly in. Who controls the
*  airspace? Well, it takes you about two and a half minutes to cross it with a regular
*  747, okay? With a fighter plane, it takes you a minute and a half. Okay? So, you're not,
*  how are you going to divide the airspace? Well, you're not going to divide it. Israel is going
*  to control that airspace and the electromagnetic space and so on. So, security has to be in the
*  hands of Israel. My view of how you solve this problem is that it is a simple principle.
*  The Palestinians should have all the powers to govern themselves and none of the powers to
*  threaten Israel, which basically means that the responsibility for overall security remains with
*  Israel. And from a practical point of view, we've seen that every time that Israel leaves a territory
*  and takes its security forces out of an area, it immediately is overtaken by Hamas or Hezbollah
*  or jihadists who basically are committed to the destruction of Israel and also bring misery to the
*  Palestinians or Arab subjects. So, I think that that principle is less than perfect sovereignty
*  because you're taking a certain amount of power, sovereign powers, especially security away. But I
*  think it's the only practical solution. So, people say, ah, but it's not a perfect state. I say,
*  okay, call it what you will call it. I don't know, limited sovereignty, call it autonomy plus,
*  call it whatever you want to call it. But that's the reality. And right now, if you ask Israelis
*  across the political spectrum, except the very hard left, most Israelis agree with that. They
*  don't really debate it. So, a two-state solution where Israel controls the security of the entire
*  region. We don't call it quite that. I mean, there are different names, but the idea is,
*  yes, Israel controls security and it's the entire area. It's this tiny area between the Jordan River
*  and the sea. I mean, it's like, you can walk it in not one afternoon. If you're really fit,
*  you can do it in a day. Less than a day, I did. So, the expansion of settlements in the West Bank
*  has been a top priority for this new government. People may harshly criticize this as contributing
*  to escalating the Israel-Palestine tensions. Can you understand that perspective that this
*  expansion of settlements is not good for this two-state solution?
*  Yeah, I can understand what they're saying and they don't understand why they're wrong.
*  First, most Israelis who live in Judea Samaria live in urban blocks, and that accounts for about
*  90% of the population. And everybody recognizes that those urban blocks are going to be part of
*  Israel in any future arrangement. So, they're really arguing about something that has already
*  been decided and agreed upon really by Americans, even by Arabs, many Arabs. They don't think that
*  Israel is going to dismantle these blocks. You look outside the window here, and within
*  about a kilometer, a mile from here, is you have Jerusalem. Half of Jerusalem grew naturally
*  beyond the old 1967 border. So, you're not going to dismantle half of Jerusalem. That's not going to
*  happen. And most people don't expect that. Then you have the other 10% scattered in tiny, you know,
*  small communities. And people say, well, you're going to have to take them out. Why? Why? Remember
*  that in pre-1967 Israel, we have over a million and a half Arabs here. We don't say, oh, Israel
*  has to be ethically cleansed from its Arab citizens in order to have peace. Of course not.
*  Jews can live among Arabs, and Arabs can live among Jews. And what is being advanced by those
*  people who say that we can't live in our ancestral homeland in these disputed areas? Nobody says that
*  this is Palestinian areas. And nobody says that these are Israeli areas. We claim them. They claim
*  them. We've only been attached to this land for, oh, 3500 years. But, you know, but it's a dispute.
*  I agree. But I don't agree that we should throw out the Arabs, and I don't think that they should
*  throw out the Jews. And if somebody said to you, the only way we're going to have peace with Israel
*  is to have an ethnically cleansed Palestinian entity, you know, that's outrageous. If you said
*  the only way you shouldn't have Jews living in, I don't know, in suburbs of London or New York
*  and so on, I don't think that will play too well. The world is actually advancing a solution that
*  says that Jews cannot live among Arabs, and Arabs cannot live among Jews. I don't think that's the
*  right way to do it. And I think there's a solution out there. But I don't think we're going to get to
*  it, which is less than perfect sovereignty, which involves Israeli security maintained for
*  the entire territory by Israel, which involves not rooting out anybody, not kicking out,
*  uprooting Arabs or Palestinians. They're going to live in enclaves in sovereign Israel, and we're
*  going to live in, probably in enclaves there, probably through transportation continuity as
*  opposed to territorial continuity. That is, you know, for example, you can have tunnels and
*  overpasses and so on that connect the various communities. And we're doing that right now.
*  We're doing that right now, and it actually works. I think there is a solution to this.
*  It's not the perfect world that people think of, because that model, I think, doesn't apply here.
*  If it applies elsewhere, it's a question. I don't think so. But I think there's one other thing,
*  and that's the main thing that I've been involved in. You know, people said,
*  if you don't solve the Palestinian problem, you're not going to get to the Arab world.
*  You're not going to have peace with the Arab world. Remember, the Palestinians are about
*  2% of the Arab world, and the other 98%, you're not going to make peace with them, and that's
*  our goal. And for a long time, people accepted that after the initial peace treaties with Egypt,
*  with Prime Minister Begin of the Likud and President Sadat of Egypt, and then with Jordan
*  between Prime Minister Rabin and King Hussein. For a quarter of a century, we didn't have any
*  more peace treaties because people said, you've got to go through the Palestinians. And the
*  Palestinians, they don't want a solution of the kind that I described or any kind, except the one
*  that involved the dissolution of the state of Israel. So we could wait another half century.
*  And I said, no. I mean, I don't think that we should accept the premise that we have to wait
*  for the Palestinians because we'll have to wait forever. So I decided to do it differently. I
*  decided to go directly to the Arab capitals and to make the historic Abraham Accords,
*  and essentially reversing the equation, not a peace process that goes inside out,
*  but outside in. And we went directly to these countries and forged these breakthrough peace
*  accords with the United Arab Emirates, with Bahrain, with Morocco, and with Sudan.
*  And we're now trying to expand that in a quantum leap with Saudi Arabia.
*  RG What does it take to do that with Saudi Arabia, with the Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed
*  Besamah? CB You know, I'm a student of history and I
*  read a lot of history and I read that, you know, in the Versailles discussions after World War I,
*  President Woodrow Wilson said, I believe in open covenants openly arrived at. I have my correction.
*  I believed in open covenants secretly arrived at. So we're not going to advance a Saudi-Israeli
*  peace by having it publicly discussed. And in any case, it's a decision of the Saudis
*  if they want to do it. But there's obviously a mutual interest. So here's my view. If we try
*  to wait for the 2% in order to get to the 98%, we're going to fail. And we have failed. If we
*  go to the 98%, we have a much greater chance of persuading the 2%. You know why? Because the 2%,
*  the Palestinian hope to vanquish the State of Israel and not make peace with it is based,
*  among other things, on the assumption that eventually the 98%, the rest of the Arab world
*  will kick in and destroy the Jewish state, help them dissolve or destroy the Jewish state.
*  When that hope is taken away, then you begin to have a turn to the realistic solutions
*  of coexistence. By the way, they'll require compromise on the Israeli side too.
*  And I'm perfectly cognizant of that and willing to do that. But I think a realistic compromise
*  will be struck much more readily when the conflict between Israel and the Arab states,
*  the Arab world is effectively solved. And I think we're on that path. It was a conceptual change,
*  just like I've been involved in a few. I told you, the conceptual battle is always
*  the most difficult one. And I had to fight this battle to convert a semi-socialist state into
*  a free market capitalist state. And I have to say that most people today recognize the power of
*  competition and the benefits of free markets. So we also had to fight this battle that said,
*  you have to go through the Palestinian straight, S-T-R-A-I-T, to get to the other places. There's
*  no way to avoid this. You have to go through this impassable pass. And I think that now people are
*  recognizing that we'll go around it and probably circle back. And that I think actually gives hope
*  not only to have an Arab-Israeli peace, but circling back an Israeli-Palestinian peace.
*  And obviously, this is not something that you find in the sound bites and so on,
*  in the popular discussion of the press. But that idea is permeating. And I think it's the
*  right idea because I think it's the only one that will work.
*  So expanding the circle of peace, just to linger on that, requires what? Secretly talking man to
*  man, human to human, to leaders of other nations. Theoretically, you're right.
*  Theoretically, okay. Well, let me ask you another theoretical question. On the circle of peace,
*  as a student of history, looking at the ideas of war and peace, what do you think
*  can achieve peace in the war in Ukraine? Looking at another part of the world, if you consider
*  the fight for peace in this part of the world, how can you apply that to that other part of the world
*  between Russia and Ukraine now?
*  I think it's one of the savage horrors of history and one of the great tragedies that is occurring.
*  And let me say in advance that if I have any opportunity to use my contacts to help bring
*  about an end to this tragedy, I'll do so. I've had, I know both leaders,
*  I've had, I know both leaders, but I don't just jump in and assume, you know, if there'll be a
*  desire at a certain point, because the conditions have created the possibility of helping stop this
*  carnage, then I'll do it. And that's why I choose my words carefully, because I think that may be
*  the best thing that I could do. Look, I think what you see in Ukraine is what happens if you have
*  territorial designs on a territory by a country that has nuclear weapons.
*  And that, to me, you see the change in the equation. Now, I think that people are loathe
*  to use nuclear weapons, and I'm not sure that I would think that the Russian side would use them
*  with happy abandon. I don't think that's the question. But you see how the whole
*  configuration changes when that happens. So you have to be very careful on how you resolve this
*  conflict so it doesn't, well, it doesn't go off the rails, so to speak. That's, by the way,
*  the corollary is here. We don't want Iran, which is an aggressive force with an
*  aggressive ideology of dominating first the Muslim world and then eliminating Israel and then becoming
*  a global force. Having nuclear weapons, it's totally different when they don't have it than
*  when they do have it. And that's why one of my main goals has been to prevent Iran from having
*  the means of mass destruction, which will be used atomic bombs, which they openly say will
*  be used against us, and you can understand that. How to bring about an end to Ukraine?
*  I have my ideas. I don't think it's worthwhile
*  discussing them now because they might be required later on.
*  Do you believe in the power of conversation since you have contacts with Volodymyr Zelensky
*  and Vladimir Putin, just leaders sitting in a room and discussing how the end of war can be brought
*  about? I think it's a combination of that, but I think it's the question of interest and whether
*  you have to get both sides to a point where they think that that conversation would lead to something
*  useful. I don't think they're there right now. What part of this is just basic human ego,
*  stubbornness, all of this between leaders, which is why I bring up the power of conversation,
*  of sitting in a room realizing we're human beings and then there's a history that connects
*  Ukraine and Russia. Yeah, I don't think they're in a position to enter a room right now,
*  realistically. I mean, you can posit that it would be good if that could happen,
*  but entering the room is sometimes more complicated than what happens in the room,
*  there's a lot of pre-negotiation on the negotiation, then you negotiate endlessly
*  on the negotiation. They're not even there. It took a lot of work for you to get to handshake
*  in the past. It's an interesting question. How did the piece, the Abraham Accords, how did that
*  begin? I mean, we had decades, 70 years or 65 years where these people would not
*  meet openly or even secretly with an Israeli leader. Yeah, we had the Mossad making contacts
*  with them all the time and so on, but how do we break the ice to the top level of leadership?
*  Well, we broke the ice because I took a very strong stance against Iran, and the Gulf States
*  understood that Iran is a formidable danger to them, so we had a common interest. And the
*  second thing is that because of the economic reforms that we had produced in Israel, Israel
*  became a technological powerhouse, and that could help their nations, not only in terms of anything,
*  just bettering the life of their peoples. And the combination of the desire to have some kind of
*  protection against Iran or some kind of cooperation against Iran and
*  civilian economic cooperation came to a head when I gave a speech in the American Congress,
*  which I didn't do lightheartedly. I had to decide to challenge a sitting American president
*  and on the so-called Iranian deal, which I thought would pave Iran's path with gold
*  to be an effective nuclear power. That's what would happen. So I went there.
*  And in the course of giving that speech before the joint session of Congress,
*  our delegation received calls from Gulf States who said, we can't believe what your prime
*  minister is doing. He's challenging, you know, the president of the United States. Well,
*  I had no choice. I mean, because I thought my country's own existence was imperiled.
*  And remember, we always understand through changing administrations that America
*  no matter what leadership is always the irreplaceable and indispensable ally of Israel
*  and will always remain that. We can have arguments as we have, but in the family, as we say,
*  in the mishpucha, you know, it's the family. But nevertheless, I was forced to take a stand.
*  That produced calls from Gulf States that ultimately led to clandestine meetings,
*  that ultimately flowered into the Abraham Accords. Then I think we're at a point where
*  the idea of ending the Arab-Israeli conflict, not the Palestinian-Israeli conflict,
*  the Arab-Israeli conflict can happen. I'm not sure it will. It depends on quite a few things,
*  but it could happen. And if it happens, it might open up the ending of
*  the Israeli-Islamic conflict. Remember, the Arab world is a small part. It's an important part,
*  but there are large Islamic populations. And it could bring about an end to
*  an historic enmity between Islam and Judaism. It could be a great thing.
*  So I'm looking at this larger thing. You know, you can be hobbled by saying,
*  oh, well, you know, you've had this hiccup in Gaza or this or that thing happening in
*  the Palestinians. It's important for us because we want security. But I think the larger question is,
*  can we break out into a much wider peace and ultimately come back and make the peace between
*  Israel and the Palestinians rather than waiting to solve that and never getting to paint on the
*  larger canvas? I want to paint on the larger canvas and come back to the Palestinian-Israeli
*  conflict. As you write about in your book, what have you learned about life from your father?
*  LARSON My father was a great historian.
*  Well, he taught me several things. He said that the first condition for a living organism
*  is to identify danger in time. Because if you don't, you could be devoured, you could be destroyed
*  very quickly. And that's the nature of human conflict. In fact, for the Jewish people,
*  we didn't. We lost the capacity to identify danger in time, and we were almost devoured
*  and destroyed by the Nazi threat. So when I see somebody parroting the Nazi
*  goal of destroying the Jewish state, I try to mobilize the country and the world in time,
*  because I think Iran is a global threat, not only a threat to Israel. That's the first thing.
*  The second thing is I once asked him before I got elected, I said, well, what do you think is the
*  most important quality for a prime minister of Israel? And he came back with the question,
*  what do you think? And I said, well, you have to have a vision and you have to have the flexibility
*  of navigating and working towards that vision, be flexible, but understand where you're heading.
*  And he said, well, you need that for anything. You need it for, you know, if you're a university
*  president or if you're a leader of a corporation or anything, anybody would have to have that.
*  I said, all right, so what do you need to be the leader of Israel? He said,
*  he came back to me with a word that stunned me. He said, education. You need a broad
*  and deep education or you'll be at the mercy of your clerks or the press or whatever.
*  You have to be able to do that. As I spend time in government being reelected by the people of Israel,
*  I recognize more and more how right it was. You need to constantly ask yourself,
*  where's the direction we want to take the country? How do we achieve that goal,
*  but also understand that new disciplines are being added. You have to learn all the time.
*  You have to learn all the time. You have to add to your intellectual capital all the time.
*  Kissinger said that, he wrote that once you enter public life, you will begin to draw on your
*  intellectual capital and, you know, it'll be depleted very quickly if you stay a long time.
*  I disagree with that. I think you have to constantly, constantly increase your understanding
*  of things as they change because my father was right. You need to broaden and deepen your
*  education as you go along. You can't just sit back and say, well, I studied some things in
*  university or in college or in Boston or at MIT and that's enough. I've done it. No. Learn, learn,
*  learn, learn, learn. Never stop. And if I may suggest, as part of the education, I would add
*  in a little literature, maybe Dostoevsky, in the plentiful of time you have as a prime minister to
*  read. Well, I read him, but I'll tell you what I think is bigger than Dostoevsky. Oh, no. Who's that?
*  Not who's that, but what's that? Dan Rather came to see me with his grandson a few years ago.
*  And he asked me, the grandson asked me, he was a student in Ivy League college,
*  and he said, he's 18 years old and he wants to study to enter politics. And he said, what's
*  what's the most important thing that I have to study to enter a political life?
*  And I said, you have three things you have to study. Okay? History, history, and history.
*  That's the fundamental discipline for political life. But then you have to study other things,
*  study economics, study politics, and so on, and study the military. I had an advantage because I
*  spent some years there, so I learned a lot of that. But I had to acquire the other disciplines,
*  and you never acquire enough. So read, read, read. And by the way, if I have to choose,
*  I read history, history, and history. Good works of history, not lousy books.
*  Jared Last question. You've talked about a survival of a nation. You yourself are a mortal
*  being. Do you contemplate your mortality? Do you contemplate your death or you're afraid of death?
*  Dan Aren't you?
*  Jared Yes.
*  Dan Who is not? I mean, if you're a conscience, if you're a being with conscience, I mean,
*  one of the unhappy things about the human brain is that it can contemplate its own demise. And so,
*  we all make our compromises with this. But I think the question is what lives on?
*  What lives on beyond us? And I think that you have to define how much of posterity do you want to
*  influence? I cannot influence the course of humanity. We all are specks, you know,
*  little specks. So that's not the issue. But in my case, I've devoted my life to a very defined
*  purpose, and that is to assure the future and security and I would say permanence, but that is
*  obviously a limited thing, of the Jewish state and the Jewish people. And I don't think one can exist
*  without the other. So, I've devoted my life to that and I hope that in my time on this earth
*  and in my years in office, I'd have contributed to that.
*  Jared Well, you had one heck of a life, starting from MIT to six terms as Prime Minister.
*  Thank you for this stroll through human history and for this conversation. It was an honor.
*  Thank you, and I hope you come back to Israel many times. Remember, it's the innovation nation.
*  It's a robust democracy. Don't believe all the stuff that you're being told. It'll remain that.
*  It can't be any other way. And it's, I'll tell you the other thing, it's the best ally of the
*  United States. And its importance is growing by the day because their capacities in the information
*  world are growing by the day. We need a coalition of the like-minded smarts.
*  This is a smart nation and we share the basic values of freedom and liberty with the United
*  States. So, the coalition of the smarts means Israel is the sixth eye and America has no better ally.
*  All right. Now off mic, I'm going to force you to finally tell me who is going to win Elon Musk or
*  Mark Zuckerberg, but that's a good time to end. We ran out of time here.
*  I'll tell you outside.
*  Thanks for listening to this conversation with Benjamin Netanyahu. To support this podcast,
*  please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, let me leave you with some words from
*  Ahatma Gandhi. An eye for an eye will only make the whole world blind. Thank you for listening
*  and hope to see you next time.
