---
Date Generated: April 08, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 7892s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence', 'elon musk', 'jeff bezos', 'joe rogan', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex friedman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex pod', 'lex podcast']
Video Views: 4088683
Video Rating: None
---

# Jeff Bezos: Amazon and Blue Origin | Lex Fridman Podcast #405
**Lex Fridman:** [December 14, 2023](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DcWqzZ3I2cY)
*  The following is a conversation with Jeff Bezos, founder of Amazon and Blue Origin.
*  This is his first time doing a conversation of this kind and of this length. And as he told me,
*  it felt like we could have easily talked for many more hours, and I'm sure we will.
*  This is the Lak's Treatment Podcast. And now, dear friends, here's Jeff Bezos.
*  You spent a lot of your childhood with your grandfather on a ranch here in Texas. And I
*  heard you had a lot of work to do around the ranch. So what's the coolest job you remember doing there?
*  Wow, coolest.
*  Most interesting. Most memorable.
*  Most memorable.
*  Most impactful.
*  I mean, it was a real working ranch. And I spent all my summers on that ranch from age 4 to 16.
*  And my grandfather was really taking me in the summers. In the early summers, he was letting me
*  pretend to help on the ranch. Because of course, a 4-year-old is a burden, not a help in real life.
*  He was really just watching me and taking care of me. He was doing that because my mom was so young.
*  She had me when she was 17. And so he was sort of giving her a break. And my grandmother and
*  my grandfather would take me for these summers. But as I got a little older, I actually was helpful
*  on the ranch and I loved it. I was out there. My grandfather had a huge influence on me,
*  huge factor in my life. I did all the jobs you would do on a ranch. I've
*  fixed windmills and laid fences and pipelines and done all the things that any rancher would do,
*  vaccinated the animals, everything. But we had a, my grandfather, after my grandmother died,
*  I was about 12 and I kept coming to the ranch. Then it was just him and me, just the two of us.
*  And he was completely addicted to the soap opera, The Days of Our Lives. And we would go back to
*  the ranch house every day around 1 PM or so to watch Days of Our Lives. Sands through an hourglass,
*  so are the Days of Our Lives. Just the image of that, the two of us sitting there,
*  watching soap opera. He had these big crazy dogs. It was really a very formative experience for me.
*  But the key thing about it for me, the great gift I got from it was that my grandfather was so
*  resourceful. He did everything himself. He made his own veterinary tools. He would make needles to
*  suture the cattle up with. He would find a little piece of wire and heat it up and pound it thin and
*  drill a hole in it and sharpen it. So you learn different things on a ranch than you would learn
*  growing up in a city. So self-reliance. Yeah. Like figuring out that you can solve problems with
*  enough persistence and ingenuity. And my grandfather bought a D6 bulldozer, which is a big bulldozer,
*  and he got it for like $5,000 because it was completely broken down. It was like a 1955
*  Caterpillar D6 bulldozer. I knew it would have cost, I don't know, more than $100,000.
*  We spent an entire summer fixing, preparing that bulldozer. We'd use mail order to buy big gears
*  for the transmission and they'd show up. They'd be too heavy to move, so we'd have to build a crane.
*  Just that kind of problem-solving mentality. He had it so powerfully. He did all of his own
*  he just, he didn't pick up the phone and call somebody. He would figure it out on his own.
*  Doing his own veterinary work. But just the image of the two of you fixing a D6 bulldozer and then
*  going in for a little break at 1 PM to watch soap opera. Laying on the floor. That's how he watched
*  TV. He was a really, really remarkable guy. That's how I imagine Clint Eastwood also.
*  In all those Westerns, when he's not doing what he's doing, he's just watching soap operas.
*  All right. I read that you fell in love with the idea of space and space exploration when you were
*  five. Watching Neil Armstrong walking on the moon. So let me ask you to look back at the historical
*  context and impact of that. So the space race from 1957 to 1969 between the Soviet Union and the US
*  was in many ways epic. It was a rapid sequence of dramatic events. First satellite to space,
*  first human to space, first spacewalk, first uncrewed landing on the moon, then some failures,
*  explosions, deaths on both sides actually. And then the first human walking on the moon.
*  What are some of the more inspiring moments or insights you take away from that time,
*  those few years, that just 12 years? Well, I mean, there's so much inspiring there.
*  One of the great things to take away from that, one of the great von Braun quotes is
*  I have come to use the word impossible with great caution.
*  That's kind of the big story of Apollo is that things, going to the moon was literally
*  an analogy that people used for something that's impossible. Oh yeah, you'll do that when men walk
*  on the moon. And of course it finally happened. So I think it was pulled forward in time because
*  of the space race. I think with the geopolitical implications and how much resource was put into
*  it. At the peak, that program was spending two or 3% of GDP on the Apollo program. So much resource.
*  I think it was pulled forward in time. We kind of did it ahead of when we, quote unquote,
*  should have done it. And so in that way, it's also a technical marvel. I mean, it's truly incredible.
*  It's the 20th century version of building the pyramids or something. It's an achievement that
*  because it was pulled forward in time, because it did something that had previously been thought
*  impossible, it rightly deserves its place in the pantheon of great human achievements.
*  And of course you named the projects, the rockets that Blue Origin is working on after some of the
*  folks involved. I don't understand why I didn't say new Gagarin. Is that-
*  There's an American bias in the naming. I apologize.
*  It's very strange.
*  Just asking for a friend.
*  I'm a big fan of Gagarin's though. In fact, I think his first words in space,
*  I think are incredible. He purportedly said, my God, it's blue. And that really drives home.
*  No one had seen the earth from space. No one knew that we were on this blue planet.
*  No one knew what it looked like from out there. And Gagarin was the first person to see it.
*  One of the things I think about is how dangerous those early days were for Gagarin, for Glenn,
*  for everybody involved. How big of a risk they were all taking.
*  They were taking huge risks. I'm not sure what the Soviets thought about Gagarin's flight, but
*  I think that the Americans thought that the Alan Shepard flight, the flight that New Shepard is
*  named after, the first American in space, he'd been on his suborbital flight, they thought he
*  had about a 75% chance of success. So that's a pretty big risk, a 25% risk.
*  It's kind of interesting that Alan Shepard is not quite as famous as John Glenn. So for
*  people who don't know, Alan Shepard is the first astronaut.
*  The first American in space. American in suborbital flight.
*  Correct. And then the first orbital flight is John Glenn.
*  John Glenn is the first American to orbit the Earth. By the way, I have the most charming,
*  sweet, incredible letter from John Glenn, which I have framed and hang on my office wall,
*  where he tells me how grateful he is that we have named New Glenn after him. And he sent me that
*  letter about a week before he died. And it's really incredible. It's also a very funny letter.
*  He's writing and he says, you know, this is a letter about New Glenn from the original Glenn.
*  And he's just, he's got a great sense of humor and he's very, he's very happy about it and grateful.
*  It's very sweet. Does he say, P.S. don't mess this up or is it?
*  No, he doesn't. Make me look good. He doesn't do that. But John, wherever you are,
*  we got you covered. Good. So back to maybe the big picture of space, when you look up at the stars
*  and think big, what do you hope is the future of humanity, hundreds,
*  thousands of years from now out in space? I would love to see, you know, a trillion humans
*  living in the solar system. If we had a trillion humans, we would have at any given time, a thousand
*  Mozarts and a thousand Einsteins. That would be, you know, our solar system would be full of life
*  and intelligence and energy. And we can easily support a civilization that large with all of the
*  resources in the solar system. So what do you think that looks like? Giant space stations?
*  Yeah. The only way to get to that vision is with giant space stations. You know,
*  the planetary surfaces are just way too small. So you can, I mean, unless you turn them into
*  giant space stations or something, but yeah, we will take materials from the moon and from
*  near earth objects and from the asteroid belt and so on. And we'll build giant O'Neill style
*  colonies and people will live in those. And they have a lot of advantages over planetary surfaces.
*  You can spin them to get normal earth gravity. You can put them where you want them. I think
*  most people are going to want to live near earth, not necessarily in earth orbit, but in, you know,
*  earth, but near earth vicinity orbits. And so they can move relatively quickly back and forth
*  between their station and earth. So, but I think a lot of people, especially in the early stages,
*  are not going to want to give up earth altogether. They go to earth for vacation.
*  Yeah. Same way that, you know, you might go to Yellowstone National Park for vacation. People
*  will, and the event, and people will get to choose where they live on earth or where they
*  live in space, but they'll be able to use much more energy and much more material resource in
*  space than they would be able to use on earth. One interesting ideas you had is to move the heavy
*  industry away from earth. So people sometimes have this idea that somehow space exploration
*  is in conflict with the celebration of the planet earth, that we should focus on preserving earth
*  and basically your ideas that space travel and space exploration is a way to preserve earth.
*  Exactly. This planet, we've sent robotic probes to all the planets. We know that this is the good
*  one. Not to play favorites or anything. But earth really is the good planet. It's amazing. The
*  ecosystem we have here, all of the life and the lush plant life and, you know, the water resources,
*  everything, this planet is really extraordinary. And of course we evolved on this planet. So of
*  course it's perfect for us, but it's also perfect for all of the advanced life forms on this planet,
*  all the animals and so on. And so this is a gym. We do need to take care of it. And as we enter the
*  Anthropocene, as we humans have gotten so sophisticated and large and impactful, as we
*  stride across this planet, you know, that is going to, as we continue, we want to use a lot of energy.
*  We want to use a lot of energy per capita. We've gotten amazing things. We don't want to go
*  backwards. You know, if you think about the good old days, they're mostly an illusion. Like in
*  almost every way, life is better for almost everyone today than it was, say, 50 years ago
*  or a hundred years ago. We live better lives by and large than our grandparents did and their
*  grandparents did and so on. And you can see that in global illiteracy rates, global poverty rates,
*  global infant mortality rates. Like almost any metric you choose, we're better off than we used
*  to be. And we get, you know, antibiotics and all kinds of lifesaving medical care and so on and so
*  on. And there's one thing that is moving backwards and it's the natural world. So it is a fact that
*  500 years ago, pre-industrial age, the natural world was pristine. It was incredible. And we have
*  traded some of that pristine beauty for all of these other gifts that we have as an advanced
*  society. And we can have both, but to do that, we have to go to space. And all of this really,
*  the most fundamental measure is energy usage per capita. And when you look at, you know,
*  you do want to continue to use more and more energy. It is going to make your life better in
*  so many ways, but that's not compatible ultimately with living on a finite planet. And so we have to
*  go out into the solar system. And really you could argue about when you have to do that,
*  but you can't credibly argue about whether you have to do that.
*  Yeah. Eventually we have to do that.
*  Exactly.
*  You don't often talk about it, but let me ask you on that topic about the Blue Ring and the Orbital
*  Reef space infrastructure projects. What's your vision for these?
*  So Blue Ring is a very interesting spacecraft that is designed to take up to 3000 kilograms
*  of payload up to geosynchronous orbit or in lunar vicinity. It has two different kinds of propulsion.
*  It has chemical propulsion and it has electric propulsion. And so you can use Blue Ring in a
*  couple of different ways. You can slowly move, let's say up to geosynchronous orbit using
*  electric propulsion that might take, you know, a hundred days or 150 days, depending on how much
*  mass you're carrying. And then, and reserve your chemical propulsion so that you can change orbits
*  quickly in geosynchronous orbit. Or you can use the chemical propulsion first to quickly get up
*  to geosynchronous and then use your electrical propulsion to slowly change your geosynchronous
*  orbit. Blue Ring has a couple of interesting features. It provides a lot of services to
*  these payloads. So the payload, it could be one large payload or it can be a number of small
*  payloads. And it provides thermal management. It provides electric power. It provides compute,
*  provides communications. And so when you design a payload for Blue Ring, you don't have to
*  figure out all of those things on your own. So kind of radiation tolerant compute is a complicated
*  thing to do. And so we have an unusually large amount of radiation tolerant compute on board
*  Blue Ring. And you can, your payload can just use that when it needs to. So it's a, it's sort of
*  all these services. It's like a set of APIs. It's a little bit like Amazon Web Services,
*  but for space payloads that need to move about an earth vicinity or lunar vicinity.
*  AWSS. Okay. So compute in space. So you get a giant chemical rocket to get a payload
*  out to orbit. And then you have these admins that show up, this Blue Ring thing that manages various
*  things like compute. Exactly. And it can also provide transportation and move you around to
*  different orbits. Including humans? You think? No, but Blue Ring is not designed to move humans
*  around. It's designed to move payloads around. So we're also building a lunar lander, which is,
*  of course, designed to land humans on the surface of the moon. I want to ask you about that. Well,
*  let me actually just step back to the old days. You were at Princeton with aspirations to be a
*  theoretical physicist. What attracted you to physics and why did you change your mind
*  and not become, why are you not Jeff Bezos, the famous theoretical physicist?
*  So I loved physics and I said physics and computer science. And I was proceeding along
*  along the physics path. I was planning to major in physics and I wanted to be a theoretical
*  physicist. And the computer science was sort of something I was doing for fun. I really loved it.
*  And I was very good at the programming and doing those things. And I enjoyed all my computer science
*  classes immensely, but I really was determined to be a theoretical physicist. That's why I went to
*  Princeton in the first place. It was definitely, and then I realized I was going to be a mediocre
*  theoretical physicist. And there were a few people in my classes, like in quantum mechanics and so on,
*  who they could effortlessly do things that were so difficult for me. And I realized,
*  there are a thousand ways to be smart and to be really, theoretical physics is not one of those
*  fields where only the top few percent actually move the state of the art forward.
*  It's one of those things where you have to be really, just your brain has to be wired in a
*  certain way. And there was a guy named, one of these people who was convinced me, he didn't mean
*  to convince me, but just by observing him, he convinced me that I should not try to be a
*  theoretical physicist. His name was Josanta. And Josanta was from Sri Lanka. And he was one of the
*  most brilliant people I'd ever met. My friend Joe and I were working on a very difficult partial
*  differential equations problem set one night. And there was one problem that we worked on for three
*  hours and we made no headway whatsoever. And we looked up at each other at the same time and we
*  said, Josanta. So we went to Josanta's dorm room and he was there. He was almost always there.
*  And we said, Josanta, we're having trouble solving this partial differential equation,
*  would you mind taking a look? And he said, of course, by the way, he was the most humble,
*  most kind person. And so he took our, he looked at our problem and he stared at it for just a few
*  seconds, maybe 10 seconds. And he said, cosine. And I said, what do you mean, Josanta? What do you
*  mean cosine? He said, that's the answer. And I said, no, no, no, come on. And he said, let me
*  show you. And he took out some paper and he wrote down three pages of equations, everything canceled
*  out and the answer was cosine. And I said, Josanta, did you do that in your head? And he said,
*  no, no, that would be impossible. A few years ago, I solved a similar problem and I could map this
*  problem onto that problem. And then it was immediately obvious that the answer was cosine.
*  I had a few, you know, you have an experience like that. You realize maybe being a theoretical
*  physicist isn't what the universe wants you to be. And so I switched to computer science and,
*  and you know, that worked out really well for me. I enjoy it. I still enjoy it today.
*  Yeah. There's a particular kind of intuition. You need to be a great physicist applied to physics.
*  I think the mathematical skill required today is so high. You have to be a world-class mathematician
*  to be a successful theoretical physicist today. And it's not, you know, you probably need other
*  skills too, intuition, lateral thinking, and so on. But without just top-notch math skills,
*  you're unlikely to be successful. And visualization skill, you have to be able to
*  really kind of do these kinds of thought experiments. And if you want truly great
*  creativity, actually Walter Isaacson writes about you. It puts you on the same level as Einstein.
*  That's very kind. I have, I'm an inventor. If you, if you want to boil down what I am,
*  I'm really an inventor. And I look at things and I can come up with atypical solutions and,
*  you know, and then I can create a hundred such atypical solutions for something.
*  Ninety-nine of them may not survive, you know, scrutiny, but one of those 100 is like, hmm,
*  maybe there is, maybe that might work. And then you can keep going from there. So that kind of
*  lateral thinking, that kind of inventiveness in a high dimensionality space where the search space
*  is very large. That's where my inventive skills come. That's the thing I'm, if I,
*  I self-identify as an inventor more than anything else.
*  Yeah. And he describes in all kinds of different ways. Walter Isaacson does that creativity
*  combined with childlike, uh, wander that you've maintained still to this day,
*  all of that combined together. Is there like, if you were to study your own brain introspect,
*  how do you think? What's your thinking process like? We'll talk about the writing process of
*  putting it down on paper, which is quite rigorous and famous at, at, uh, Amazon. But how do you,
*  when you sit down, maybe alone, maybe with others and thinking through this high dimensional space
*  and looking for creative solutions, uh, creative paths forward, is there something you could say
*  about that process? It's such a good question. And I honestly
*  don't know how it works. If I did, I would try to explain it. I know it involves lots of wandering.
*  So I, you know, when I sit down to work on a problem, I know I don't know where I'm going.
*  So to, to go in a straight line, to be efficient, efficiency and invention are sort of at odds
*  because invention, real invention, not incremental improvement. Incremental improvement is so
*  important in every endeavor and everything you do, you have to work hard on also just making
*  things a little bit better. But I'm talking about real invention, real lateral thinking
*  that requires wandering and you have to give yourself permission to wander. I think a lot of people,
*  um, they feel like wandering is inefficient. And you know, like when, when I sit down
*  at a meeting, I don't know how long the meeting is going to take if we're trying to solve a problem
*  because if I did, then I'd already, I know there's some kind of straight line that we're drawing to
*  the solution. The reality is we may have to wander for a long time. And I do like group invention.
*  I think there's really nothing more fun than sitting at a whiteboard with a number, you know,
*  a group of smart people and spit balling and coming up with new ideas and objections to those
*  ideas and then solutions to the objections and going back and forth. So like, um, you know,
*  sometimes you wake up with an idea in the middle of the night and sometimes you sit down with a
*  group of people and go back and forth and both things are really pleasurable. And when you wander,
*  I think one key thing is to notice a good idea and to, to maybe to notice the kernel of a good
*  idea. Maybe pull out that string because I don't think a good idea has come fully formed.
*  A hundred percent right. In fact, when I come up with what I think is a good idea and it survives
*  kind of the first level of scrutiny, you know, that I do in my own head and I'm ready to tell
*  somebody else about the idea, I will often say, look, it is going to be really easy for you to
*  find objections to this idea, but work with me. There's something there. There's something there.
*  And that is intuition because it's really easy to kill new ideas in the beginning because they do
*  have so many, so many easy objections to them. So you need to, uh, you need to kind of forewarn
*  people and say, look, I know it's going to take a lot of work to get this to a fully formed idea.
*  Let's get started on that. It'll be fun. So you got that ability to say
*  cosine in you somewhere after all, maybe not on math, but in a different domain.
*  There are a thousand ways to be smart by the way. And that is a really like when I go around,
*  you know, and I meet people, I'm always looking for the way that they're smart.
*  And you find it is, that's one of the things that makes the world so interesting and fun
*  is that it is not, it's not like IQ is a single dimension. There are people who are smart in so
*  such unique ways. Yeah. You just gave me a good response is when somebody calls me an idiot on
*  the internet, you know, there's a thousand ways to be smart. Well, they might tell you, yeah,
*  but there are a million ways to be done. I feel like that's a Mark Twain quote.
*  Okay. All right. You gave me an amazing tour of the origin rocket factory and launch complex
*  and the historic Cape Canaveral. That's where new Glenn, the big rocket we talked about as being
*  built and will launch. Can you explain what the new Glenn rocket is and tell me some interesting
*  technical aspects of how it works? Sure. New Glenn is a very large,
*  heavy lift launch vehicle. It'll take about 45 metric tons to Leo, very large class.
*  It's about half the thrust, a little more than half the thrust of the Saturn five
*  rocket. So it's about 3.9 million pounds of thrust on lift off. The booster has seven
*  BE4 engines. The each engine generates a little more than 550,000 pounds of thrust.
*  The engines are fueled by liquid natural gas, liquefied natural gas, LNG as the fuel and locks
*  as the oxidizer. The cycle is an Ox rich stage combustion cycle. It's a cycle that was really
*  pioneered by the Russians. It's a very good cycle. And that engine is also going to power the first
*  stage of the Vulcan rocket, which is the United Launch Alliance rocket. Then the second stage of
*  new Glenn is powered by two BE3U engines, which is a upper stage variant of our new
*  shepherd liquid hydrogen engine. So the BE3U has 160,000 pounds of thrust. So two of those
*  320,000 pounds of thrust. And hydrogen is a very good propellant for upper stages because it has
*  very high ISP. It's not a great propellant in my view for booster stages because the stages then
*  get physically so large. Hydrogen has very high ISP, but liquid hydrogen is not dense at all.
*  So to store liquid hydrogen, if you need to store many thousands of pounds of liquid hydrogen,
*  your tanks, your liquid hydrogen tank, it's very large. So you get more benefit from the higher ISP,
*  the specific impulse. You get more benefit from the higher specific impulse on the second stage.
*  And that stage carries less propellant. So you don't get such geometrically gigantic tanks.
*  The Delta IV is an example of a vehicle that is all hydrogen. The booster stage is also hydrogen.
*  And I think that it's a very effective vehicle, but it never was very cost effective.
*  So it's operationally very capable, but not very cost effective.
*  So size is also costly.
*  Size is costly. So it's interesting. Rockets love to be big. Everything works better.
*  What do you mean by that? You've told me that before. It sounds epic.
*  I mean, when you look at the physics of rocket engines and also when you look at parasitic mass,
*  let's say you have an avionics system. So you have a guidance and control system.
*  That is going to be about the same mass and size for a giant rocket as it is going to be for a tiny
*  rocket. And so that's just parasitic mass that is very consequential if you're building a very small
*  rocket, but is trivial if you're building a very large rocket. So you have the parasitic mass thing.
*  And then if you look at, for example, rocket engines have turbo pumps. They have to pressurize
*  the fuel and the oxidizer up to a very high pressure level in order to inject it into the
*  thrust chamber where it burns. And those pumps, all rotating machines in fact, get more efficient
*  as they get larger. So really tiny turbo pumps are very challenging to manufacture.
*  And any kind of gaps are like between the housing, for example, and the rotating impeller
*  that pressurizes the fuel. There has to be some gap there. You can't have those parts scraping
*  against one another. And those gaps drive inefficiencies. And so if you have a very
*  large turbo pump, those gaps and percentage terms end up being very small. And so there's a bunch of
*  things that you end up loving about having a large rocket and that you end up hating for a small
*  rocket. But there's a giant exception to this rule and it is manufacturing. So manufacturing
*  large structures is very, very challenging. It's a pain in the butt. And so it's just,
*  if you're making a small rocket engine, you can move all the pieces by hand. You could assemble
*  it on a table. One person can do it. You don't need cranes and heavy lift operations and tooling
*  and so on and so on. When you start building big objects, infrastructure, civil infrastructure,
*  just like the launch pad and the, you know, all this, we went and visited it and took you to the
*  launch pad and you can see it's so monumental. And so just these things become major undertakings,
*  both from an engineering point of view, but also from a construction and cost point of view.
*  Even the foundation of the launch pad. I mean, this is Florida.
*  Isn't it like Swamp Land? Like how deep do you have to go?
*  At Cape Canaveral, in fact, at most ocean, most launch pads are on beaches somewhere in the
*  oceans because you want to launch over water for safety reasons. Yes, you have to drive pilings,
*  you know, dozens and dozens and dozens of pilings, you know, 50, 150 feet deep
*  to get enough structural integrity for these very large, you know, it's, yes, these turn into major
*  civil engineering projects. I just have to say everything about that factory
*  is pretty badass. You say tooling, the bigger it gets, the more epic it is.
*  It does make it epic. It's fun to look at. It's extraordinary.
*  It's humbling also because your humans are so small compared to it.
*  We are building these enormous machines that are harnessing enormous amounts of chemical power,
*  you know, in very, very compact packages. It's truly extraordinary.
*  But then there's all the different components and, you know, the materials involved. Is there
*  something interesting that you can describe about the materials that comprise the rocket? So it has
*  to be as light as possible, I guess, whilst withstanding the heat and the harsh conditions.
*  Pete Slauson Yeah, I play a little kind of game sometimes with other rocket people that I run
*  into where I say, what are the things that would amaze the 1960s engineers? Like, what's the change?
*  Because surprisingly, some of Rocketry's greatest hits have not changed. They are still, they would
*  recognize immediately a lot of what we do today and it's exactly what they pioneered back in the
*  60s. But a few things have changed. You know, the use of carbon composites is very different today.
*  We can build very sophisticated, you saw our carbon tape laying machine that builds the
*  giant fairings and we can build these incredibly light, very stiff fairing structures out of
*  carbon composite material that they could not have dreamed of. I mean, the efficiency,
*  the structural efficiency of that material is so high compared to any, you know, metallic material
*  you might use or anything else. So that's one. Aluminum lithium and the ability to
*  friction stir weld aluminum lithium. Do you remember the friction stir welding that I showed you?
*  This is a remarkable technology. This invented decades ago, but has become very practical over
*  just the last couple of decades. And instead of using heat to weld two pieces of metal together,
*  it literally stirs the two pieces. There's a pin that rotates at a certain rate and you put that
*  pin between the two plates of metal that you want to weld together and then you move it at a very
*  precise speed. And instead of heating the material, it heats it a little bit because
*  of friction, but not very much. You can literally immediately after welding with
*  stir friction welding, you can touch the material and it's just barely warm.
*  It literally stirs the molecules together. It's quite extraordinary.
*  Relatively low temperature. And I guess high temperature is what makes them,
*  that's the, that makes it a weak point.
*  Exactly. So with traditional, with traditional welding techniques, you may have whatever the
*  underlying strength characteristics of the material are, you end up with weak regions where
*  you weld. And with friction stir welding, the welds are just as strong as the bulk material.
*  So it really allows you, and so, cause when you're, you know, let's say you're building a
*  tank that you're going to pressurize, you know, a large, you know, liquid natural gas tank for,
*  for our booster stage, for example, you know, if you are welding that with traditional methods,
*  you have to size those weld lands, the thickness of those pieces with that knockdown for whatever
*  damage you're doing with the weld. And that's going to add a lot of weight to that tank.
*  I mean, even just looking at the fairings, the result of that, the complex shape that it takes
*  and, and like what it's supposed to do is kind of incredible because so people don't know it's
*  on top of the rocket, it's going to fall apart. That's its task, but it has to stay strong
*  sometimes and then disappear when it needs to. That's right. She's a very difficult task.
*  Yes. When you need something that needs to have 100% integrity until it needs to have
*  0% integrity, it needs to stay attached until it's ready to go away. And then when it goes away,
*  it has to go away completely. You use explosive charges for that. And so it's a very robust way
*  of separating structure when you need to. Exploding.
*  Yeah. It was a little tiny bits of explosive material and it just, it'll sever the whole
*  connection. So if you want to go from 100% structural integrity to zero as fast as possible,
*  it's explosives. Use explosives.
*  The entirety of this thing is so bad ass. Okay. So we're back to the two stages. So the first stage
*  is reusable. Yeah. Second stage is expendable. Second stage is liquid hydrogen, liquid oxygen.
*  So we get to take advantage of the higher specific impulse. The first stage lands down range on a
*  landing platform in the ocean, comes back for maintenance and get ready to do the next mission.
*  I mean, there's a million questions, but also is there a path towards reusability for the second
*  stage? There is. And we know how to do that. Right now we're going to work on manufacturing
*  that second stage to make it as inexpensive as possible. Sort of two paths for a second stage.
*  Make it reusable or work really hard to make it inexpensive so you can afford to expend it.
*  And that trade is actually not obvious which one is better.
*  Even in terms of cost, like time, cost.
*  I'm talking about cost. Space flight, getting into orbit is a solved problem. We solved it back in
*  the 50s and 60s. The only interesting problem is dramatically reducing the cost of access to orbit,
*  which is if you can do that, you open up a bunch of new
*  endeavors that lots of startup companies, everybody else can do.
*  So that's one of our missions is to be part of this industry and lower the cost to orbit so that
*  there can be a kind of a renaissance, a golden age of people doing all kinds of interesting things
*  in space. I like how you said getting to orbit is a solved problem. It's just the only interesting
*  thing is reducing the cost. You know you can describe every single problem facing human
*  civilization that way. The physicist would say everything is a solved problem. We've solved
*  everything. The rest is just, as Rutherford said, just stamp collecting. It's just the details.
*  Some of the greatest innovations and inventions and brilliance is in that cost reduction stage.
*  You've had a long career of cost reduction.
*  What does cost reduction really mean? It means inventing a better way.
*  Yeah, exactly.
*  And when you invent a better way, you make the whole world richer. So whatever it was,
*  I don't know how many thousands of years ago, somebody invented the plow. And when they invented
*  the plow, they made the whole world richer because they made farming less expensive.
*  And so it is a big deal to invent better ways. That's how the world gets richer.
*  So what are some of the biggest challenges on the manufacturing side and the engineering side
*  that you're facing in working to get to the first launch of New Glenn?
*  The first launch is one thing, and we'll do that in 2024 coming up in this coming year.
*  The real thing that's the bigger challenge is making sure that our factory is efficiently
*  manufacturing at rate. So rate production. So consider if you want to launch
*  New Glenn 24 times a year, you need to manufacture an upper stage since they're expendable
*  every twice a month. You need to do it every two weeks. So you need to have all of your
*  manufacturing facilities and processes and inspection techniques and acceptance tests
*  and everything operating at rate. And rate manufacturing is at least as difficult as
*  designing the vehicle in the first place. And the same thing. So every upper stage has
*  two BE3U engines. So those engines, if you're going to launch the vehicle twice a month,
*  you need four engines a month. So you need an engine every week. So that engine needs to be
*  being produced at rate. And there's all of the things that you need to do that,
*  all the right machine tools, all the right fixtures, the right people, process, etc.
*  So it's one thing to build a first article. To launch New Glenn for the first time,
*  you need to produce a first article. But that's not the hard part. The hard part is everything
*  that's going on behind the scenes to build a factory that can produce New Glens at rate.
*  So the first one is produced in a way that enables the production of the second,
*  third, fourth, fifth, and sixth. You can think of the first article as kind of pushing,
*  it pushes all of the rate manufacturing technology along. In other words, it's kind of the,
*  it's the test article in a way that's testing out your manufacturing technologies.
*  The manufacturing is the big challenge.
*  Yes. I mean, I don't want to make it sound like any of it is easy. I mean, the people who are
*  designing the engines and all of this, all of it is hard for sure. But the challenge right now
*  is driving really hard to get to, is to get to rate manufacturing and to do that in an efficient
*  way. Again, kind of back to our cost point. If you get to rate manufacturing in an inefficient way,
*  you haven't really solved the cost problem and maybe you haven't really moved the state of the
*  art forward. All this has to be about moving the state of the art forward. There are easier
*  businesses to do. I always tell people, look, if you are trying to make money,
*  start a salty snack food company or something. You write that idea down.
*  Make the Lex Friedman potato chips.
*  Okay, don't say it. People are going to steal it.
*  But yeah, it's hard.
*  You see what I'm saying? It's like, there's nothing easy about this business,
*  and but it's its own reward. It's fascinating. It's worthwhile. It's meaningful.
*  And so, I don't want to pick on salty snack food companies, but I think it's less meaningful.
*  At the end of the day, you're not going to have accomplished something amazing.
*  Even if you do make a lot of money out of it.
*  Yeah, there's something fundamentally different about the quote unquote business
*  of space exploration. It's a grand project of humanity.
*  Yes, it's one of humanity's grand challenges. And especially as you look at going to the moon
*  and going to Mars and building giant O'Neill colonies and unlocking all the things.
*  I won't live long enough to see the fruits of this, but the fruits of this come from
*  building a road to space, getting the infrastructure.
*  I'll give you an analogy. When I started Amazon, I didn't have to develop a payment system.
*  It already existed. It was called the credit card. I didn't have to develop a transportation
*  system to deliver the packages. It already existed. It was called the postal service
*  and Royal Mail and Deutsche Post and so on. So, all this heavy lifting infrastructure
*  was already in place and I could stand on its shoulders.
*  And that's why when you look at the internet, by the way, another giant piece of infrastructure
*  that was around in the early, I'm taking you back to 1994, people were using dial-up modems
*  and it was piggybacking on top of the long distance phone network.
*  That's how the internet, that's how people were accessing servers and so on.
*  And again, if that hadn't existed, it would have been hundreds of billions of capex to
*  put that out there. No startup company could have done that.
*  And so, the problem you see if you look at the dynamism in the internet space over the last 20
*  years, it's because you see two kids in a dorm room could start an internet company that could
*  be successful and do amazing things because they didn't have to build heavy infrastructure.
*  It was already there. And that's what I want to do. I take my Amazon winnings and use that to
*  build heavy infrastructure so that the next generation, the generation that's my children
*  and their children, those generations can then use that heavy infrastructure. Then there'll be space
*  entrepreneurs who start in their dorm room. That will be a marker of success. When you can have a
*  really valuable space company started in a dorm room, then we know that we've built enough
*  infrastructure so that ingenuity and imagination can really be unleashed. I find that very exciting.
*  They will, of course, as kids do, take all of this hard infrastructure building for granted.
*  Of course. Which is the entrepreneurial spirit.
*  That's an inventor's greatest dream is that their inventions are so successful that they are one day
*  taken for granted. Nobody thinks of Amazon as an invention anymore. Nobody thinks of customer
*  reviews as an invention. We pioneered customer reviews, but now they're so commonplace.
*  Same thing with one-click shopping and so on. But that's a compliment. You invent something that's so
*  used, so beneficially used by so many people that they take it for granted.
*  I don't know about nobody. Every time I use Amazon, I'm still amazed. How does this work?
*  That proves you're a very curious explorer.
*  All right, all right. Back to rockets. Timeline. You said 2024. As it stands now,
*  are both the first test launch and the launch of Escapade Explorers to Mars still possible?
*  2024? Yeah, I think so. For sure, the first launch. Then we'll see if Escapade goes on that or not.
*  I think that the first launch for sure, and I hope Escapade too.
*  Hope? Well, I just don't know which mission it's actually going to be slated on. We also have other
*  things that might go on that first mission. Oh, I got it. But you're optimistic that the launches
*  will still- Oh, the first launch. I'm very optimistic that the first launch of New
*  Glenn will be in 2024. I'm just not 100% certain what payload will be on that first launch.
*  Are you nervous about it? Are you kidding? I'm extremely nervous about it.
*  100%. Every launch I go to for New Shepard, for other vehicles too, I'm always nervous for
*  these launches. But yes, for sure, a first launch, to have no nervous about that would be some sign
*  of derangement, I think. Well, I got to visit the launch but it's pretty epic.
*  We have done a tremendous amount of ground testing, a tremendous amount of simulation.
*  A lot of the problems that we might find in flight have been resolved, but there are some
*  problems you can only find in flight. So cross your fingers. I guarantee you, you'll have fun
*  watching it no matter what happens. 100%. When the thing is fully assembled and comes up-
*  Yeah, the transporter erector, just the transporter erector for a rocket of this scale
*  is extraordinary. That's an incredible machine. The vehicle travels out horizontally and then
*  comes up- Over a few hours?
*  Yeah, it's a beautiful thing to watch. Speaking of which, if that makes you nervous,
*  I don't know if you remember, but you were aboard New Shepard on its first crewed flight.
*  How was that experience? Were you terrified then?
*  You know, strangely, I wasn't. You know, I-
*  You ride the rocket. It's true.
*  I've watched other people ride in the rocket and I'm more nervous than when I was inside the rocket
*  myself. It was a difficult conversation to have with my mother when I told her I was going to go
*  on the first one. Not only was I going to go, but I was going to bring my brother too. This is a
*  tough conversation to have with a mom. There's a long pause when you told her.
*  She's like, both of you? It was an incredible experience and we were laughing inside the capsule
*  and we're not nervous. The people on the ground were very nervous for us.
*  It was actually one of the most emotionally powerful parts of the experience was not-
*  happened even before the flight. At 4.30 in the morning, brother and I are getting ready to go
*  to the launch site and Lauren is going to take us there in her helicopter and we're getting ready
*  to leave. We go outside, outside the ranch house there in West Texas where the launch facility is.
*  All of our family, my kids, my brother's kids, our parents and close friends are assembled there
*  and they're saying goodbye to us, but they're kind of saying- maybe they think they're saying
*  goodbye to us forever. We might not have felt that way, but it was obvious from their faces
*  how nervous they were that they felt that way. It was powerful because it allowed us to see- it was
*  almost like attending your own memorial service or something. You could feel how loved you were
*  in that moment and it was really amazing. There's just an epic nature to it too.
*  The ascent, the floating zero gravity, I'll tell you something very interesting.
*  Zero gravity feels very natural. I don't know if it's because we're, you know,
*  it's like a return to the womb or what it is.
*  You just confirmed you're an alien, but that's-
*  I think that's what you just said.
*  It feels so natural to be in zero G. It was really interesting. Then
*  what people talk about the overview effect and seeing earth from space,
*  I had that feeling very powerfully. I think everyone did. You see how fragile the earth is.
*  If you're not an environmentalist, it will make you one. The great Jim Lovell quote,
*  he looked back at the earth from space and he said he realized you don't go to heaven when you die,
*  you go to heaven when you're born. That's the feeling that people get when they're in space.
*  You see all this blackness, all this nothingness, and there's one gem of life and it's earth.
*  It is a gem. You've talked a lot about decision making throughout your time with Amazon.
*  What was that decision like to be the first to ride in your shepherd? Just before you talk
*  to your mom, the pros and cons. Actually, as one human being, as a leader of a company,
*  on all fronts, what was that decision making like?
*  I decided that, first of all, I knew the vehicle extremely well. I know the team who built it.
*  I know the vehicle. I'm very comfortable with the escape system. We put as much effort
*  into the escape system on that vehicle as we put into all the rest of the vehicle combined.
*  It's one of the hardest pieces of engineering in the entire New Shepard architecture.
*  Can you actually describe what you mean by escape system? What's involved?
*  We have a solid rocket motor in the base of the crew capsule so that if anything goes wrong on
*  ascent while the main rocket engine is firing, we can ignite this solid rocket motor in the base of
*  the crew capsule and escape from the booster. It's a very challenging system to build, design,
*  validate, test, all of these things. It is the reason that I am comfortable letting anyone
*  go on New Shepard. The booster is as safe and reliable as we can make it, but we're harnessing.
*  Whenever you're talking about rocket engines, I don't care what rocket engine you're talking
*  about, you are harnessing such vast power in such a small compact geometric space.
*  The power density is so enormous that it is impossible to ever be sure that nothing will
*  go wrong. The only way to improve safety is to have an escape system. Historically,
*  rockets, human-rated rockets have had escape systems. Only the space shuttle did not.
*  Apollo had one, all of the previous Gemini, etc. They all had escape systems.
*  We have on New Shepard, unusual escape systems. Most escape systems are towers.
*  We have a pusher escape system. The solid rocket motor is actually embedded in the base of the crew
*  capsule and it pushes. It is reusable in the sense that if we don't use it, so if we have a
*  nominal mission, we land with it. The tower systems have to be ejected at a certain point in the
*  mission, so they get wasted even in a nominal mission. Again, cost really matters on these
*  things. We figured out how to have the escape system be reusable in the event that it is not
*  used. It is a very sophisticated thing. I knew these things. You asked me about my decision to go.
*  I know the vehicle very well. I know the people who designed it. I have great trust in them
*  and in the engineering that we did. I thought to myself, look, if I am not ready to go, then
*  I wouldn't want anyone to go. A tourism vehicle has to be designed, in my view,
*  to be as safe as one can make it. You can't make it perfectly safe. It is impossible.
*  People take risks. They climb mountains. They skydive. They do deep underwater scuba diving
*  and so on. People are okay taking risks. You can't eliminate the risk, but it is something,
*  because it is a tourism vehicle, you have to do your utmost to eliminate those risks. I felt
*  very good about the system. I think that is one of the reasons I was so calm inside. Maybe others
*  weren't as calm. They didn't know as much about it as I did. Who was in charge of engaging the
*  escape system? It is automated. The escape system is completely automated. Automated is
*  better because it can react so much faster. For tourism rockets, safety is a huge, huge,
*  huge priority for space exploration also, but a little less.
*  Yes. I think if you are doing, there are human activities where we tolerate more risk. If you
*  are saving somebody's life, if you are engaging in real exploration, these are things where
*  I personally think we would accept more risk, in part because you have to.
*  Is there a part of you that is frustrated by the rate of progress in Blue Origin?
*  Blue Origin needs to be much faster. It is one of the reasons that I left my role as the CEO of
*  Amazon a couple of years ago. I wanted to come in and Blue Origin needs me right now. I had
*  always, when I was the CEO of Amazon, my point of view on this is if I am the CEO of a publicly
*  traded company, it is going to get my full attention. It is just how I think about things.
*  It was very important to me. I felt I had an obligation to all the stakeholders at Amazon
*  to do that. I was still the executive chair there, but I turned the CEO role over.
*  And the primary reason I did that is so that I could spend time on Blue Origin, adding some
*  energy, some sense of urgency. We need to move much faster, and we are going to.
*  What are the ways to speed it up? You have talked a lot of different ways at Amazon,
*  removing barriers for progress, distributing, making everybody autonomous, and so forth.
*  All those kinds of things. Does that apply at Blue Origin?
*  It does apply. I am leading this directly. We are going to become the world's most decisive company
*  across any industry. At Amazon, forever since the beginning, we are going to become the world's most
*  customer-obsessed company, no matter the industry. One day, people are going to come to Amazon from
*  the healthcare industry and want to know how are you so customer-obsessed? How do you not just
*  pay lip service to that, but actually do that? All different industries should come on and study
*  us to see how we accomplish that. The analogous thing at Blue Origin that will help us move faster
*  is we are going to become the world's most decisive company. We are going to get really good at
*  taking appropriate technology risk, making those decisions quickly, being bold on those things.
*  And having the right culture that supports that, you need people to be ambitious,
*  technically ambitious. If there are five ways to do something, we will study them,
*  but let's study them very quickly and make a decision. We can always change our mind.
*  Changing your mind, I talk about one-way doors and two-way doors. Most decisions are two-way doors.
*  Can you explain that? I love that metaphor. If you make the wrong decision,
*  if it's a two-way door decision, you walk out the door, you pick a door, you walk out,
*  and you spend a little time there, it turns out to be the wrong decision,
*  come back in and pick another door. Some decisions are so consequential and so important and so hard
*  to reverse that they really are one-way door decisions. You go in that door, you're not coming
*  back. Those decisions have to be made very deliberately, very carefully. If you can think
*  of yet another way to analyze the decision, you should slow down and do that. When I was CEO of
*  Amazon, I often found myself in the position of being the chief slow down officer because
*  somebody would be bringing me a one-way door decision. I was okay, I can think of three
*  more ways to analyze that. Let's go do that because we are not going to be able to reverse
*  this one easily. Maybe you can reverse it, but it's going to be very costly and very time consuming.
*  We really have to get this one right from the beginning. What happens, unfortunately,
*  in companies, what can happen is that you have a one-size-fits-all decision-making process
*  where you end up using the heavyweight process on all decisions, including the lightweight ones,
*  the two-way door decisions. Two-way door decisions should mostly be made by single individuals or by
*  very small teams deep in the organization. One-way door decisions are the irreversible ones. Those are
*  the ones that should be elevated up to the senior-most executives who should slow them down and make
*  sure that the right thing is being done. Yeah. Part of the skill here is to know the
*  difference between one-way and two-way. I think you mentioned Amazon Prime,
*  the decision to create Amazon Prime as a one-way door. It's unclear if it is or not,
*  but it probably is, and it's a really big risk to go there.
*  There are a bunch of decisions like that that are changing the decision is going to be very,
*  very complicated. Some of them are technical decisions too, because some technical decisions
*  are like quick-drying cement. Once you make them, it gets really hard. Choosing which propellants
*  to use in a vehicle, selecting LNG for the booster stage and selecting hydrogen for the upper stage,
*  that has turned out to be a very good decision. But if you change your mind,
*  that would be a very big setback. Do you see what I'm saying? Yeah.
*  That's the kind of decision you scrutinize very, very carefully. Other things just aren't like
*  that. Most decisions are not that way. Most decisions should be made by single individuals,
*  but they need and done quickly in the full understanding that you can always change your
*  mind. Yeah. One of the things I really liked, perhaps it's not a two-way door decisions, is
*  I disagree and commit phrase. Somebody brings up an idea to you. If it's a two-way door,
*  you state that you don't understand enough to agree, but you still back them. I'd love for you
*  to explain that. Yeah. Disagree and commit is a really important principle that saves a lot of
*  arguing. Yeah. I'm going to use that in my personal life. I disagree, but commit.
*  It's very common in any endeavor in life and business and anybody where you have teammates,
*  you have a teammate and the two of you disagree. At some point, you have to make a decision.
*  In companies, we tend to organize hierarchically. Whoever is the more senior person ultimately gets
*  to make the decision. Ultimately, the CEO gets to make that decision. The CEO may not always make
*  the decision that they agree with. I would be the one who would disagree and commit.
*  One of my direct reports would very much want to do something in a particular way.
*  I would think it was a bad idea. I would explain my point of view. They would say,
*  Jeff, I think you're wrong and here's why. We would go back and forth.
*  I would often say, you know what? I don't think you're right, but I'm going to gamble with you.
*  You're closer to the ground truth than I am. I had known you for 20 years. You have great judgment.
*  I don't know that I'm right either. Not really. Not for sure. All these decisions are complicated.
*  Let's do it your way. At least then you've made a decision. I'm agreeing to commit to that decision.
*  I'm not going to be second guessing it. I'm not going to be sniping at it. I'm not going to be
*  saying, I told you so. I'm going to try actively to help make sure it works. That's a really important
*  teammate behavior. There are so many ways that dispute resolution is a really interesting thing
*  on teams. There are so many ways. When two people disagree about something, even though I'm assuming
*  the case where everybody's well-intentioned, they just have a very different opinion about what the
*  right decision is. We have in our society and inside companies, we have a bunch of
*  mechanisms that we use to resolve these kinds of disputes. A lot of them are, I think, really bad.
*  An example of a really bad way of coming to agreement is compromise. We're in a room here,
*  and I could say, Lex, how tall do you think this ceiling is? You'd be like, I don't know, Jeff,
*  maybe 12 feet tall. I would say, I think it's 11 feet tall. Then we'd say, you know what,
*  let's just call it 11 and a half feet. That's compromise. Instead of the right thing to do is
*  to get a tape measure or figure out some way of actually measuring. But I think getting that tape
*  measure and figure out how to get it to the top of the ceiling and all these things, that requires
*  energy. The advantage of compromise as a resolution mechanism is that it's low energy,
*  but it doesn't lead to truth. In things like the height of the ceiling where truth is a knowable
*  thing, you shouldn't allow compromise to be used when you can know the truth.
*  Another really bad resolution mechanism that happens all the time is just who's more stubborn.
*  This is also, let's say, two executives who disagree, and they just have a war of attrition,
*  and whichever one gets exhausted first capitulates to the other one. Again,
*  you haven't arrived at truth, and this is very demoralizing. This is where escalation, I try to
*  ask people on my team, never get to a point where you are resolving something by who gets exhausted
*  first. Escalate that. I'll help you make the decision because that's so de-energizing and
*  it's such a terrible lousy way to make a decision. Do you want to get to the resolution as quickly as
*  possible because that ultimately leads to a high velocity of decision? Yes, and you want to try to
*  get as close to truth as possible. So you want exhausting the other person is not truth seeking
*  and compromise is not truth seeking. There are a lot of cases where no one knows the real truth,
*  and that's where disagree and commit can come in. But escalation is better than war of attrition.
*  Escalate to your boss and say, hey, we can't agree on this. We like each other. We're respectful of
*  each other, but we strongly disagree with each other. We need you to make a decision here so
*  we can move forward. But decisiveness, moving forward quickly on decisions, as quickly as you
*  responsibly can, is how you increase velocity. Most of what slows things down is taking too long
*  to make decisions at all scale levels. So it has to be part of the culture to get high velocity.
*  Amazon has a million and a half people and the company is still fast. We're still decisive.
*  We're still quick. And that's because the culture supports that. At every scale in a distributed
*  way, try to maximize the velocity of decisions. Exactly. You mentioned the lunar program. Let
*  me ask you about that. Yeah. There's a lot going on there and you haven't really talked about it
*  much. So in addition to the Artemis program with NASA, Blue is doing its own lander program. Can
*  you describe it? There's a sexy picture on Instagram with one of them. Is it the MK1, I guess?
*  Yeah, the Mark 1. The picture is me with Bill Nelson, the NASA administrator.
*  Just to clarify, the lander is the sexy thing about the Instagram.
*  I know it's not me. I know it was either the lander or Bill.
*  Bill, I love Bill, but yeah. Thank you for clarifying.
*  Okay. Yes, the Mark 1 lander is designed to take 3,000 kilograms to the surface of the moon,
*  expendable cargo. It's expendable lander, lands on the moon, stays there,
*  take 3,000 kilograms to the surface. It can be launched on a single New Glenn flight,
*  which is very important. So it's a relatively simple architecture. Just like the human landing
*  system lander, they call the Mark 2. Mark 1 is also fueled with liquid hydrogen,
*  which is for high energy missions like landing on the surface of the moon, the high specific
*  impulse of hydrogen is a very big advantage. The disadvantage of hydrogen has always been that it's
*  such a deep cryogen. It's not storable. It's constantly boiling off and you're losing propellant
*  because it's boiling off. What we're doing as part of our lunar program is developing solar-powered
*  cryocoolers that can actually make hydrogen a storable propellant for deep space. That's
*  a real game changer. It's a game changer for any high energy mission, so to the moon, but to the
*  outer planets, to Mars, everywhere. So the idea with both Mark 1 and Mark 2 is the New Glenn can
*  carry it from the surface of earth to the surface of the moon.
*  Exactly. So the Mark 1 is expendable. The lunar lander we're developing for NASA,
*  the Mark 2 lander, that's part of the Artemis program. They call it the Sustaining Lander
*  program. That lander is designed to be reusable. It can land on the surface of the moon in a
*  single stage configuration and then take off. If you look at the Apollo program,
*  the lunar lander in Apollo was really two stages. It would land on the surface and then it would
*  leave the descent stage on the surface of the moon and only the ascent stage would go back up into
*  lunar orbit where it would rendezvous with the command module. Here what we're doing is we have
*  a single stage lunar lander that carries down enough propellant so that it can bring the whole
*  thing back up so that it can be reused over and over. The point of doing that, of course,
*  is to reduce cost so that you can make lunar missions more affordable over time. That's one
*  of NASA's big objectives because this time the whole point of Artemis is go back to the moon,
*  but this time to stay. Back in the Apollo program, we went to the moon six times and then ended the
*  program and it really was too expensive to continue. There's a few questions there,
*  but one is how do you stay on the moon? What ideas do you have about
*  a sustaining life where a few folks can stay there for prolonged periods of time?
*  Well, one of the things we're working on is using lunar resources like lunar regolith
*  to manufacture commodities and even solar cells on the surface of the moon. We've already built
*  a solar cell that is completely made from lunar regolith simulant. This solar cell is only about
*  7% power efficient, so it's very inefficient compared to the more advanced solar cells that
*  we make here on earth. If you can figure out how to make a practical solar cell factory
*  that you can land on the surface of the moon and then the raw material for those solar cells
*  is simply lunar regolith, then you can just continue to churn out solar cells on the surface
*  of the moon, have lots of power on the surface of the moon. That will make it easier for people to
*  live on the moon. Similarly, we're working on extracting oxygen from lunar regolith. Lunar
*  regolith by weight has a lot of oxygen in it. It's bound very tightly as oxides with other
*  elements. You have to separate the oxygen, which is very energy intensive. That also could work
*  together with the solar cells. Ultimately, we may be able to find practical quantities of ice
*  in the permanently shadowed craters on the poles of the moon. We know there is ice water
*  in those or water ice in those craters. We know that we can break that down with electrolysis
*  into hydrogen and oxygen. Then you'd not only have oxygen, but you'd also have a very good,
*  high efficiency propellant fuel in hydrogen. There's a lot we can do to make the moon more
*  sustainable over time. The very first step, the gate that all of that has to go through
*  is we need to be able to land cargo and humans on the surface of the moon at an acceptable cost.
*  To fast forward a little bit, is there any chance Jeff Bezos steps foot on the moon
*  and on Mars, one or the other or both? It's very unlikely. I think it's probably something that
*  gets done by future generations by the time it gets to me. I think in my lifetime, that's probably
*  going to be done by professional astronauts. Sadly, I would love to sign up for that mission.
*  So don't count me out yet, Lex. Give me a finding shot here, maybe. But I think if we are placing
*  reasonable bets on such a thing in my lifetime, that will continue to be done by professional
*  astronauts. These are risky, difficult missions.
*  Probably missions that require a lot of training. You are going there for a very specific purpose
*  to do something. We're going to be able to do a lot on the moon too with automation.
*  In terms of setting up these factories and doing all that, we're sophisticated enough now with
*  automation that we probably don't need humans to tend those factories and machines. There's a lot
*  that's going to be done in both modes. I have to ask the bigger picture question about
*  the two companies pushing humanity forward out towards the stars, Blue Origin and SpaceX.
*  Are you competitors, collaborators? To what degree?
*  Well, I would say just like the internet is big and there are lots of winners at all skill levels.
*  There are half a dozen giant companies that the internet has made, but they're a bunch of
*  medium-sized companies and a bunch of small companies, all successful, all with profit
*  streams, all driving great customer experiences. That's what we want to see in space, that kind of
*  dynamism. Space is big. There's room for a bunch of winners and it's going to happen at all skill
*  levels. SpaceX is going to be successful for sure. I want Blue Origin to be successful.
*  I hope there are another five companies right behind us.
*  I spoke to Elon a few times recently about you, about Blue Origin, and he was very positive about
*  you as a person and very supportive of all the efforts you've been leading at Blue.
*  What's your thoughts? You worked with a lot of leaders at Amazon,
*  at Blue. What's your thoughts about Elon as a human being and a leader?
*  Well, I don't really know Elon very well. I know his public persona, but I also know
*  you can't know anyone by their public persona. It's impossible. You may think you do,
*  but I guarantee you don't. You know Elon way better than I do, Lex. In terms of his judging
*  by the results, he must be a very capable leader. There's no way you could have Tesla and SpaceX
*  without being a capable leader. It's impossible.
*  Yeah. I hope you guys hang out sometimes, shake hands, and have a kind of friendship that would
*  inspire just the entirety of humanity. Because what you're doing is like one of the big grand
*  challenges ahead for humanity. Well, I agree with you. I think in a lot of these
*  endeavors, we're very like-minded. I'm not saying we're identical, but I think we're very like-minded.
*  I love that idea. All right. Going back to sexy pictures on your Instagram, there's a video
*  of you from the early days of Amazon giving a tour of your quote offices. I think your dad
*  is holding the camera. He is. Yeah, I know. This is what the giant orange extension cord.
*  Yeah. You're explaining the genius of the extension cord and how this is a desk and the CRT monitor.
*  That's where all the magic happened. I forget what your dad said, but this is the center of it all.
*  So, what was it like? What was going through your mind at that time? You left a good job
*  in New York and took this leap. Were you excited? Were you scared?
*  I was so excited and scared, anxious, thought the odds of success were low,
*  told all of our early investors that I thought there was a 30% chance of success,
*  by which I'd just been getting your money back, not what actually happened.
*  Because that's the truth. Every startup company is unlikely to work. It's helpful to be in reality
*  about that, but that doesn't mean you can't be optimistic. So, you kind of have to have this
*  duality in your head. On the one hand, you know what the baseline statistics say about startup
*  companies, and on the other hand, you have to ignore all of that and just be 100% sure it's
*  going to work. You're doing both things at the same time. You're holding that contradiction in
*  your head. But it was so exciting. Every from 1994 when the company was founded to 1995 when we
*  opened our doors, all the way until today, I find Amazon so exciting. That doesn't mean it's full of
*  pain, full of problems. There's so many things that need to be resolved and worked and made
*  better and et cetera. But on balance, it's so fun. It's such a privilege. It's been such a joy. I
*  feel so grateful that I've been part of that journey. It's just been incredible.
*  So, in some sense, you don't want a single day of comfort. You've written about this
*  many times. We'll talk about your writing, which I would highly recommend people read in just the
*  letters to shareholders. So, you wrote explaining the idea of day one thinking. I think you first
*  wrote about it in 97 letters to shareholders. Then you also, in a way, wrote about, sad to say,
*  your last letter to shareholders as CEO. You said that day two is stasis, followed by irrelevance,
*  followed by excruciating painful decline, followed by death. That is why it's always day one.
*  Can you explain this day one thing? This is a really powerful way to describe the beginning
*  in the journey of Amazon. It's really a very simple and, I think, age old idea about renewal
*  and rebirth. Every day is day one. Every day, you're deciding what you're going to do.
*  You are not trapped by what you were or who you were or any self-consistency. Self-consistency,
*  even, can be a trap. Day one thinking is we start fresh every day and we get to make new decisions
*  every day about invention, about customers, about how we're going to operate. Even as deeply as
*  what our principles are, we can go back to that. It turns out we don't change those very often,
*  but we change them occasionally. When we work on programs at Amazon, we often make a list of
*  tenets. The tenets are not principles. They're a little more tactical than principles, but it's
*  kind of the main ideas that we want this program to embody, whatever those are. One of the things
*  that we do is we put these are the tenets for this program and in parentheses, we always put
*  unless you know a better way. That idea, unless you know a better way, is so important because
*  you never want to get trapped by dogma. You never want to get trapped by history. It doesn't mean
*  you discard history or ignore it. There's so much value in what has worked in the past, but you can't
*  blindly follow what you've done. That's the heart of day one. You're always starting fresh.
*  To the question of how to fend off day two, you said,
*  such a question can't have a simple answer, as you're saying. There will be many elements,
*  multiple paths, and many traps. I don't know the whole answer, but I may know bits of it.
*  Here's a starter pack of essentials. Maybe others come to mind. For day one, defense.
*  Customer obsession, a skeptical view of proxies, the eager adoption of external trends,
*  and high velocity decision making. We talked about high velocity decision making.
*  That's more difficult than it sounds. Maybe you can pick one that stands out to you as you can
*  comment on. Eager adoption of external trends, high velocity decision making, skeptical view
*  of proxies. How do you fight off day two? Well, I'll talk about it because I think it's the one
*  maybe in some ways the hardest to understand is the skeptical view of proxies.
*  One of the things that happens in business, probably anything where you have an ongoing
*  program and something is underway for a number of years, is you develop certain things that you're
*  managing to. Let's say, the typical case would be a metric. That metric isn't the real underlying
*  thing. Maybe the metric is efficiency metric around customer contacts per unit sold or something.
*  If you sell a million units, how many customer contacts do you get? Or how many returns do
*  you get? What happens is a little bit of a kind of inertia sets in where somebody a long time ago
*  invented that metric. They invented that metric. They decided we need to watch for
*  customer returns per unit sold as an important metric. They had a reason why they chose that
*  metric, the person who invented that metric and decided it was worth watching.
*  And then fast forward five years, that metric is the proxy. The proxy for truth, the proxy for
*  customer, let's say in this case, it's a proxy for customer happiness.
*  But that metric is not actually customer happiness. It's a proxy for customer happiness.
*  The person who invented the metric understood that connection. Five years later,
*  a kind of inertia can set in and you forget the truth behind why you were watching that metric
*  in the first place and the world shifts a little. And now that proxy isn't as valuable as it used
*  to be or it's missing something. And you have to be on alert for that. You have to know, okay,
*  I don't really care about this metric. I care about customer happiness. And this metric is worth
*  putting energy into and following and improving and scrutinizing only in so much as it actually
*  affects customer happiness. And so you've got to constantly be on guard. And it's very, very common.
*  This is a nuanced problem. It's very common, especially in large companies,
*  that they are managing to metrics that they don't really understand. They don't really know why they
*  exist. And the world may have shifted out from under them a little. And the metrics are no longer
*  as relevant as they were when somebody 10 years earlier invented the metric.
*  That is a nuance, but that's a big problem, right? There's something so compelling to have a nice
*  metric to try to optimize. Yes. And by the way, you do need metrics. You can't ignore them.
*  You want them, but you just have to be constantly on guard. This is a way to slip into day two
*  thinking would be to manage your business to metrics that you don't really understand. And
*  you're not really sure why they were invented in the first place. And you're not sure they're still
*  as relevant as they used to be. What does it take to be the guy or gal who brings up the point that
*  this proxy might be outdated? I guess what does it take to have a culture that enables that in the
*  meeting? Because that's a very uncomfortable thing to bring up at a meeting. We all showed up here
*  at the Friday. You have just asked a million dollar question. So this is, if I generalize
*  what you're asking, you're talking in general about truth telling. Yeah. And we humans are not
*  really truth seeking animals. We are social animals. Yeah, we are. And take you back in time 10,000
*  years and you're in a small village. If you go along to get along, you can survive. You can
*  procreate. If you're the village truth teller, you might get clubbed to death in the middle of
*  the night. Truths are often, they don't want to be heard because important truths can be
*  uncomfortable. They can be awkward. They can be exhausting. Impolite. Yes. Challenging. They can
*  make people defensive even if that's not the intent. But any high performing organization,
*  whether it's a sports team, a business, a political organization, an activist group,
*  I don't care what it is. Any high performing organization has to have mechanisms and a culture
*  that supports truth telling. One of the things you have to do is you have to talk about that.
*  You have to talk about the fact that it takes energy to do that. You have to talk to people.
*  You have to remind people it's okay that it's uncomfortable. You have to literally tell people
*  it's not what we're designed to do as humans. It's kind of a side effect. We can do that.
*  But it's not how we survive. We mostly survive by being social animals and being cordial and
*  cooperative. That's really important. Science is all about truth telling. It's actually a very
*  formal mechanism for trying to tell the truth. Even in science, you find that it's hard to tell
*  the truth. Even you're supposed to have a hypothesis, test it, and find data, and reject
*  the hypothesis, and so on. It's not easy. But even in science, there's the senior scientists
*  and the junior scientists, and then there's a hierarchy of humans where the somehow seniority
*  matters in the scientific process, which it should not.
*  That's true inside companies too. You want to set up your culture so that the most junior person
*  can overrule the most senior person if they have data. There are little things you can do. For
*  example, in every meeting that I attend, I always speak last. I know from experience that
*  if I speak first, even very strong-willed, highly intelligent, high judgment participants in that
*  meeting will wonder, well, if Jeff thinks that, I came in this meeting thinking one thing, but maybe
*  I'm not right. You can do little things like if you're the most senior person in the room,
*  go last. But everybody else go first. In fact, ideally, try to have the most junior person go
*  first and then try to go in order of seniority so that you can hear everyone's opinion in a kind of
*  unfiltered way. Because we really do. We actually literally change our opinions. If somebody who you
*  really respect says something, it makes you change your mind a little.
*  So you're saying implicitly or explicitly give permission for people to have a strong opinion
*  that as long as it's backed by data. Yes. And sometimes it can even, by the way,
*  a lot of our most powerful truths turn out to be hunches. They turn out to be based on anecdotes.
*  They're intuition-based. And sometimes you don't even have strong data. But you may know the person
*  well enough to trust their judgment. You may feel yourself leaning in. It may resonate with
*  a set of anecdotes you have. And then you may be able to say, something about that feels right.
*  Let's go collect some data on that. Let's try to see if we can actually know whether it's right.
*  But for now, let's not disregard it because it feels right. You can also fight inherent bias.
*  There's an optimism bias. If there are two interpretations of a new set of data,
*  and one of them is happy and one of them is unhappy, it's a little dangerous to jump to
*  the conclusion that the happy interpretation is right. You may want to sort of compensate for that
*  human bias of looking for, trying to find the silver lining and say, look, that might be good,
*  but I'm going to go with it's bad for now until we're sure.
*  So speaking of happiness bias, data collection and anecdotes, you have to, how's that for
*  transition? You have to tell me the story of the call you made, the customer service call you made
*  to demonstrate a point about wait times. Yeah, this is very early in the history of Amazon.
*  And we were going over a weekly business review and a set of documents. And I have a saying,
*  when the data and the anecdotes disagree, the anecdotes are usually right. And it doesn't mean
*  you just slavishly go follow the anecdotes then. It means you go examine the data. It's usually not
*  that the data is being miscollected. It's usually that you're not measuring the right thing. And so
*  if you have a bunch of customers complaining about something, and at the same time, your metrics
*  look like why they shouldn't be complaining, you should doubt the metrics. And an early example of
*  this was we had metrics that showed that our customers were waiting, I think, less than,
*  I don't know, 60 seconds when they called a 1-800 number to get phone customer service.
*  The wait time was supposed to be less than 60 seconds. But we had a lot of complaints
*  that it was longer than that. And anecdotally, it seemed longer than that. I would call customer
*  service myself. And so one day we're in a meeting, we're going through the WBR
*  and the weekly business review, and we get to this metric in the deck. And the guy who leads customer
*  service is to fit in the metric. And I said, okay, let's call. I picked up the phone and I dialed the
*  1-800 number and called customer service. And we just waited in silence.
*  What did it turn out to be? Oh, it was really long. More than 10 minutes, I think. Oh, wow.
*  I mean, it was many minutes. And so it dramatically made the point that something was wrong with the
*  data collection. We weren't measuring the right thing. And that set off a whole chain of events
*  where we started measuring it right. And that's an example, by the way, of truth telling. That's an
*  uncomfortable thing to do. But you have to seek truth even when it's uncomfortable. And you have
*  to get people's attention and they have to buy into it and they have to get energized around
*  really fixing things. So that speaks to the obsession with the customer experience. So one
*  of the defining aspects of your approach to Amazon is just being obsessed with making customers happy.
*  I think companies sometimes say that, but Amazon is really obsessed with that. I think there's
*  something really profound to that, which is seeing the world through the eyes of the customer.
*  The customer experience, the human being that's using the product, that's enjoying the product.
*  The subtle little things that make up their experience. How do you optimize those?
*  This is another really good and deep question because there are big things that are really
*  important to manage. And then there are small things internally into Amazon. We call them paper
*  cuts. We're always working on the big things. And most of the energy goes into the big things,
*  as it should. And you can identify the big things. And I would encourage anybody,
*  if anybody listening to this is an entrepreneur, that's a small business, whatever,
*  think about the things that are not going to change over 10 years. And those are probably
*  the big things. So I know in our retail business today, Amazon, 10 years from now, customers are
*  still going to want low prices. I know they're still going to want fast delivery. And I just
*  know they're still going to want big selection. So it's impossible to imagine a scenario where 10
*  years from now, I say, where customers say, I love Amazon. I just wish the prices were a little
*  higher. Or I love Amazon. I just wish you'd delivered a little more slowly. So when you identify the
*  big things, you can tell they're worth putting energy into because they're stable in time.
*  But you're asking about something a little different, which is in every customer experience,
*  there are those big things. And by the way, it's astonishingly hard to focus even on just the big
*  things. So even though they're obvious, they're really hard to focus on. But in addition to that,
*  there are all these little tiny customer experience deficiencies. And we call those
*  paper cuts, and we make long lists of them. And then we have dedicated teams that go fix paper cuts,
*  because the teams working on the big issues never get to the paper cuts. They never work
*  their way down the list to get to they're working on big things as they should. And as you want them
*  to. And so you need special teams who are charged with fixing paper cuts. Where would you put on the
*  paper cut spectrum the buy now with one click button, which is I think pretty genius. So to me,
*  okay, my interaction with things I love on the internet, there's things I do a lot, I may be
*  representing regular human, I would love for those things to be frictionless. For example,
*  booking airline tickets. Just saying. But it's buying a thing with one click, making that
*  experience frictionless, intuitive, all aspects of that, like that, that just
*  fundamentally makes my life better. Not just in terms of efficiency in terms of some kind of
*  cognitive load. Yeah, cognitive load and peace, inner peace and happiness. First of all, buying
*  stuff is a pleasant experience. Having enough money to buy a thing and then buying it is a
*  pleasant experience. And having pain around that is somehow just you're ruining a beautiful
*  experience. And I guess all I'm saying as a person who loves good ideas, is that a paper cut,
*  a solution to a paper cut? Yes. So that particular thing is probably a solution to a number of paper
*  cuts. So if you go back and look at our order pipeline and how people shopped on Amazon before
*  we invented one click shopping, there was more friction. There was a whole series of paper cuts
*  and that invention eliminated a bunch of paper cuts. And I think you're absolutely right,
*  by the way, that when you come up with something like one click shopping, again, this is so
*  ingrained in people now. I'm impressed that you even notice it. I mean, most people-
*  Every time I click the button, I just- Most people never notice.
*  Surge of happiness. In the perfect invention, for the perfect moment, in the perfect context,
*  there is real beauty. It is actual beauty and it feels good. It's emotional. It's emotional for the
*  inventor. It's emotional for the team that builds it. It's emotional for the customer. It's a big
*  deal and you can feel those things. But to keep coming up with that idea, with those kinds of
*  ideas, I guess is the day one thinking effort. Yeah. And you need a big group of people who
*  feel that kind of satisfaction with creating that kind of beauty. There's a lot of books written
*  about you. There's a book, Invent and Wander, where Walter Isaacson does an intro. It's mostly
*  collected writings of yours. I've read that. I also recommend people check out the Founders podcast
*  that covers you a lot and it does different analysis of different business advice you've
*  given over the years. I bring all that up because I saw that there- I mentioned that you said that
*  books are an antidote for short attention spans. And I forget how it was phrased, but that when
*  you were thinking about the Kindle, that you're thinking about how technology changes us.
*  We co-evolve with our tools. So we invent new tools and then our tools change us.
*  Which is fascinating to think about.
*  It goes in a circle.
*  There's some aspect, even just inside business, where you don't just make the customer happy,
*  but you also have to think about where is this going to take humanity if you zoom out a bit?
*  A hundred percent. And you can feel your brain, brains are plastic,
*  and you can feel your brain getting reprogrammed. I remember the first time this happened to me
*  was when Tetris first came on the scene. I'm sure you've had anybody who's been a game player has
*  this experience where you close your eyes to lay down to go to sleep and you see all the little
*  blocks moving and you're kind of rotating them in your mind. And you can just tell as you walk
*  around the world that you have rewired your brain to play Tetris. But that happens with everything.
*  And so, one of the, I think, we still have yet to see the full repercussions of this, I fear.
*  I think one of the things that we've done online, largely because of social media, is we have
*  trained our brains to be really good at processing super short form content.
*  And your podcast flies in the face of this. You do these long format things.
*  And reading books is a long format thing. And we all do more of, if something is convenient,
*  we do more of it. And so, when you make tools, we carry around in our pocket a phone. And one
*  of the things that phone does for the most part is it is an attention shortening device.
*  Because most of the things we do on our phone shorten our attention spans.
*  And I'm not even going to say we know for sure that that's bad. But I do think it's happening.
*  It's one of the ways we're co-evolving with that tool. But I think it's important to spend some of
*  your time and some of your life doing long attention span things. Yeah, I think you've spoken
*  about the value in your own life of focus, of singular focus on a thing for prolonged periods
*  of time. And that's certainly what books do. And that's certainly what that piece of technology
*  does. But I bring all that up to ask you about another piece of technology, AI, that has the
*  potential to have various trajectories to have an impact on human civilization. How do you think AI
*  will change us? If you're talking about generative AI, large language models, things like chadgpt,
*  it's soon successors. These are incredibly powerful technologies to believe otherwise
*  is to bury your head in the sand, soon to be even more powerful.
*  It's interesting to me that large language models in their current form are not inventions
*  they're discoveries. The telescope was an invention. But looking through it at Jupiter,
*  knowing that it had moons was a discovery. My God, it has moons. And that's what Galileo did.
*  And so this is closer on that spectrum of invention. We know exactly what happens with
*  787. It's an engineered object. We designed it. We know how it behaves. We don't want any surprises.
*  Large language models are much more like discoveries. We're constantly getting
*  surprised by their capabilities. They're not really engineered objects. Then you have this
*  debate about whether they're going to be good for humanity or bad for humanity.
*  Even specialized AI can be very bad for humanity. Just regular machine learning models
*  can make certain weapons of war that could be incredibly destructive and very powerful.
*  And they're not general AIs. They could just be very smart weapons.
*  And so we have to think about all of those things.
*  I'm very optimistic about this. So even in the face of all this uncertainty,
*  my own view is that these powerful tools are much more likely to help us and save us even
*  than they are to, on balance, hurt us and destroy us. I think we humans have a lot of ways of
*  we can make ourselves go extinct. These things may help us not do that. They may actually save us.
*  So the people who are overly concerned, in my view, overly concerned, this is a valid debate.
*  I think that they may be missing part of the equation, which is how helpful they could be
*  in making sure we don't destroy ourselves. I don't know if you saw the movie Oppenheimer,
*  but to me, first of all, I loved the movie and I thought the best part of the movie
*  is this bureaucrat played by Robert Downey Jr. who some people have talked to,
*  you think that's the most boring part of the movie. I thought it was the most fascinating
*  because what's going on here is you realize we have invented these awesome, destructive,
*  powerful technologies called nuclear weapons and they are managed and we humans are,
*  we're not really capable of wielding those weapons. That's what he represented in that movie is
*  here's this guy who is, he wrongly thinks, he's like being so petty, he thinks that he said
*  something, that Oppenheimer said something bad to Einstein about him. They didn't talk about him at
*  all as you find out in the final scene of the movie and yet he spent his career trying to be
*  vengeful and petty. That's the problem. We as a species are not really
*  sophisticated enough and mature enough to handle these technologies.
*  By the way, before you get to general AI and the possibility of AI having agency,
*  and there's a lot of things that would have to happen, but there's so much benefit that's
*  going to come from these technologies in the meantime, even before their, you know,
*  general AI in terms of better medicines and better tools to develop more technologies and so on. So,
*  I think it's an incredible moment to be alive and to witness the transformations that are going to
*  happen, how quickly it will happen, no one knows, but over the next 10 years and 20 years, I think
*  we're going to see really remarkable advances and I personally am very excited about it.
*  First of all, really interesting to say that it's discoveries that it's true that we don't
*  know the limits of what's possible with the current language models. We don't.
*  It could be a few tricks and hacks here and there that open doors to hold entire new possibilities.
*  We do know that humans are doing something different from these models in part because,
*  you know, we're so power efficient. You know, the human brain does remarkable things
*  and it does it on about 20 watts of power and, you know, the AI techniques we use today use many
*  kilowatts of power to do equivalent tasks. So, there's something interesting about the way the
*  human brain does this and also we don't need as much data. So, you know, like self-driving cars
*  or they have to drive billions and billions of miles to try and to learn how to drive and,
*  you know, your average 16 year old figures it out with many fewer miles. So,
*  there are still some tricks I think that we have yet to learn. I don't think we've learned the
*  last trick. I don't think it's just a question of scaling things up, but what's interesting is that
*  just scaling things up and I put just in quotes because it's actually hard to scale things up,
*  but just scaling things up also appears to pay huge dividends.
*  Yeah, and there's some more nuanced aspects about human beings that's interesting if it's able to
*  accomplish like being truly original and novel to, you know, large language models being able to come
*  up with some truly new ideas. That's one and the other one is truth. It seems that large language
*  models are very good at sounding like they're saying a true thing, but they don't require or
*  often have a grounding in sort of a mathematical truth. It can just basically is a very good
*  bullshitter. So, if there's not enough data in the training data about a particular topic,
*  it's just going to concoct accurate sounding narratives, which is a very fascinating
*  problem to try to solve. How do you get language models to infer what is true or not
*  to sort of introspect? Yeah, they need to be taught to say, I don't know more often. And
*  I know of several humans who could be taught that as well. Sure.
*  And then the other stuff, because you're still a bit involved in the Amazon side with the AI things,
*  the other open question is what kind of products are created from this?
*  Oh, so many. Yeah. I mean, you know, just to, you know, we have Alexa and Echo, and Alexa has,
*  you know, hundreds of millions of installed base, you know, inputs. And so there's this, there's,
*  you know, there's Alexa everywhere. And guess what? Alexa is about to get a lot smarter.
*  Yeah. And so that's really, you know, from a product point of view, that's super exciting.
*  There's so many opportunities there. So many opportunities,
*  shopping assistant, you know, all that stuff is amazing. And AWS, you know, we're building Titan,
*  which is our foundational model. We're also building Bedrock, which our corporate clients at AWS,
*  our enterprise clients, they want to be able to use these powerful models with their own corporate
*  data without accidentally contributing their corporate data to that model. And so those are
*  the tools we're building for them with Bedrock. So there's tremendous opportunity here.
*  Yeah. The security, the privacy, all those things are fascinating of how to,
*  because so much value can be gained by training on private data, but you want to keep the secure.
*  It's a fascinating technical problem.
*  This is a very challenging technical problem. And it's one that we're, you know,
*  making progress on and dedicated to solving for our customers.
*  Do you think there will be a day when humans and robots, maybe Alexa have a romantic relationship?
*  Well, I mean, I think if you look at the, if you look at the spectrum of human variety and what
*  people like, you know, sexual variety, you know, there are people who like everything.
*  So the answer to your question has to be yes. I don't know how widespread that will be,
*  but it will happen.
*  I was just asking when for a friend, but it's all right. Moving on.
*  Next question. What's a perfectly productive day in the life of Jeff Bezos? You're one of the most
*  productive humans in the world.
*  Well, I, first of all, I get up in the morning and I putter. I like, I like have a coffee.
*  Can you define putter?
*  Just like I slowly move around. I'm not as productive as you might think I am. I mean,
*  because I do believe in wandering and I sort of, I, you know, I read my phone for a while. I read
*  newspapers for a while. I chat with Laura and I drink my first coffee. So I kind of,
*  I moved pretty slowly in the first couple of hours. I get up early, just naturally. And,
*  and then, you know, I exercise most days and most days it's not that hard for me.
*  Some days it's really hard and I do it anyway. I don't want to, you know, and it's painful.
*  And I'm like, why am I here? And I don't want to do that.
*  Why am I here at the gym?
*  Why am I here at the gym? Why don't I do something else? You know,
*  that this, it's not always easy.
*  What's your source of motivation in those moments?
*  I know that I'll feel better later if I do it. And so like the, the real source of motivation,
*  I can tell the days when I skip it. I'm not, I'm not quite as alert. I don't feel as good.
*  And then there's harder motivations. It's longer term. You want to be healthy as you age,
*  you know, you want health span, you want, ideally, you know, you want to be healthy
*  and moving around when you're 80 years old, you know, and so there's a lot of,
*  but that kind of motivation is so far in the future. It can be very hard to work in the second.
*  So thinking about the fact I'll feel better in about four hours if I do it now,
*  I'll have more energy for the rest of my day and so on and so on.
*  What's your exercise routine, just to linger on that? What do you, how much you curl?
*  I mean, what are we talking about here?
*  That's all I do at the gym. So I just, I, I, my, my routine, you know, on a good day,
*  I do about half an hour of cardio and I do about 45 minutes of weightlifting resistance training
*  of some kind, mostly weights. I have a trainer who, you know, I love who pushes me, which is
*  really helpful. You know, I'll be like, he'll say, Jeff, do you see, you could,
*  can we go up on that way a little bit and I'll think about it and I'll be like,
*  no, I don't think so. And he'll be, he'll look at me and say, yeah, I think you can.
*  And of course he's right. So it's always to have somebody push you a little bit.
*  But almost every day you do that.
*  I do almost every day. I do a little bit of cardio and a little bit of weightlifting and
*  I'd rotate. I do a pulling day and a pushing day and a leg day. It's all pretty standard stuff.
*  So puttering coffee, gym, coffee, gym, and then work.
*  Or what's work look like? What, what are the productive hours look like for you?
*  I, you know, so I, a couple of years ago I left as the CEO of Amazon
*  and I have never worked harder in my life. I am working so hard and I'm mostly enjoying it,
*  but there are also some very painful days. Most of my time is spent on Blue Origin and I've been,
*  I'm so deeply involved here now for the last couple of years. And in the big, I love it.
*  In the small, there's all the frustrations that come along with everything. You know,
*  we're trying to get to rate manufacturing as we talked about. That's super important.
*  We'll get there. We just hired a new CEO guy I've known for close to 15 years now,
*  a guy named Dave Lemp, who I love. He's amazing. You know, so we're super lucky to have Dave and,
*  you know, we're going to, you're going to see us move faster there. But so my day of work,
*  you know, reading documents, having meetings, sometimes in person, sometimes over Zoom,
*  depends on where I am. It's all about, you know, the technology. It's about the organization.
*  It's about, you know, I'm very, I have architecture and technology meetings almost every day on
*  various subsystems inside the vehicle, inside the engines. It's super fun for me. My favorite
*  part of it is the technology. My least favorite part of it is, you know, building organizations
*  and so on. That's important, but it's also my least favorite part. So, you know, that's why they
*  call it work. You don't always get to do what you want to do. How do you achieve time where you can
*  focus and truly think through problems? I do little thinking retreats. So this is not the only
*  thing. I can do that all day long. I'm very good at focusing. I'm very good at, you know, I don't
*  keep to a strict schedule. Like my meetings often go longer than I planned for them to,
*  because I believe in wandering. My perfect meeting starts with a crisp document. So the
*  document should be written with such clarity that it's like angels singing from on high.
*  I like a crisp document and a messy meeting. And so the meeting is about like asking questions
*  that nobody knows the answer to and trying to like wander your way to a solution. And
*  because like, and that is if when that happens just right, it makes all the other meetings
*  worthwhile. It feels good. It has a kind of beauty to it. It has an aesthetic beauty to it. And you
*  get real breakthroughs in meetings like that. Can you actually describe the crisp document?
*  Like this is one of the legendary aspects of Amazon of the way you approach meetings.
*  Is this the six page memo? Maybe first describe the process of running a meeting with memos.
*  Yeah. Meetings at Amazon and Blue Origin are unusual. When we get new,
*  when new people come in, like a new executive joins, they're a little taken aback sometimes
*  because a typical meeting will start with a six page narratively structured memo. And we do study
*  hall for 30 minutes. We sit there silently together in the meeting and read, take notes
*  in the margins. And then we, then we discuss. And the reason, by the way, we do study, you could say,
*  I would like everybody to read these memos in advance, but the problem is people don't have
*  time to do that. And they end up coming to the meeting, having only skimmed the memo or maybe
*  not read it at all. And they're trying to catch up. And they're also bluffing like they were in
*  college having pretended to do the reading. It's better just to carve out the time for people.
*  And do it together.
*  So now we're all on the same page. We've all read the memo. And now we can have a really elevated
*  discussion. And this is so much better from having a slideshow presentation, a PowerPoint
*  presentation of some kind where that has so many difficulties. But one of the problems is
*  PowerPoint is really designed to persuade. It's kind of a sales tool. And internally,
*  the last thing you want to do is sell. You want to, you're again, you're truth seeking,
*  you're trying to find truth. And the other problem with PowerPoint is it's easy for the author
*  and hard for the audience. And a memo is the opposite. It's hard to write a six page memo.
*  A good six page memo might take two weeks to write. You have to write it, you have to rewrite it,
*  you have to edit it, you have to talk to people about it. They have to poke holes in it for you.
*  You write it again. It might take two weeks. So the author, it's really a very difficult job,
*  but for the audience, it's much better. So you can read a half hour and, you know,
*  there are little problems with PowerPoint presentations too. You know, senior executives
*  interrupt with questions halfway through the presentation. That question is going to be
*  answered on the next slide, but you never got there. But if you read the whole memo in advance,
*  I often write lots of questions that I have in the margins of these memos.
*  And then I go cross them all out because by the time I get to the end of the memo,
*  they've been answered. That's why I save all that time. You also get, you know,
*  if the person who's preparing the memo, we talked earlier about, you know, group think and, you know,
*  the fact that I go last in meetings and that you don't want, you know, your ideas to kind of
*  pollute the meeting prematurely. You know, the author of the memo has kind of got to be very
*  vulnerable. They've got to put all their thoughts out there and they've got to go first. But that's
*  great because it makes them really good. And so, and you get to see their real ideas and you're
*  not tromping on them accidentally in a big, you know, PowerPoint presentation.
*  What's that feel like when you've authored a thing and then you're sitting there and everybody's
*  reading your thing? You're like-
*  I think it's mostly terrifying.
*  Yeah.
*  Like maybe in a good way?
*  I think it's-
*  Like a purifying-
*  I think it's terrifying in a productive way.
*  Yeah.
*  But I think it's mostly a very nerve-racking experience.
*  Is there a art science to the writing of the six page memo or just writing in general to you?
*  I mean, it's really got to be a real memo. So it means, you know, paragraphs have topic sentences,
*  verbs, nouns. That's the other problem with PowerPoint, there's often just bullet points.
*  And you can hide a lot of sloppy thinking behind bullet points. When you have to write in complete
*  sentences with narrative structure, it's really hard to hide sloppy thinking. So it does, it forces
*  the author to be at their best. And so you're getting somebody's, they're getting somebody's
*  really their best thinking. And then you don't have to spend a lot of time trying to tease that
*  thinking out of the person. You've got it from the very beginning. So it really saves you time
*  in the long run.
*  So that part is crisp and then the rest is messy, crisp document.
*  Yes. So you don't want to pretend that the discussion should be crisp.
*  There's, you know, most meetings you're trying to solve a really hard problem.
*  There's a different kind of meeting, which we call weekly business reviews or business reviews.
*  They may be weekly or monthly or daily, whatever they are. But these business review meetings,
*  that's usually for incremental improvement. And you're looking at a series of metrics every time
*  it's the same metrics. Those meetings can be very efficient. They can start on time and end on time.
*  So we're about to run out of time, which is a good time to ask about the 10,000 year clock.
*  That's what I'm known for is the humor. Okay. Can you explain what the 10,000 year clock is?
*  10,000 year clock is a physical clock of monumental scale. It's about 500 feet tall.
*  It's inside a mountain in West Texas in a chamber that's about 12 feet in diameter and 500 feet
*  tall. 10,000 year clock is an idea conceived by a brilliant guy named Danny Hillis way back in the
*  eighties. The idea is to build a clock as a symbol for long-term thinking. And you can kind of just
*  very conceptually think of the 10,000 year clock as it ticks once a year. It chimes once every
*  100 years and the cuckoo comes out once every thousand years. So it just sort of slows everything
*  down. And it's a completely mechanical clock. It is designed to last 10,000 years with no human
*  intervention. So the material choices and everything else, it's in a remote location,
*  both to protect it, but also so that visitors have to kind of make a pilgrimage. The idea is
*  that over time, this will take hundreds of years, but over time it will take on the patina of age
*  and then it will become a symbol for long-term thinking that will actually hopefully get humans
*  to extend their thinking horizons. And in my view, that's really important as we have become
*  as a species, as a civilization, more powerful. We're really affecting the planet now. We're
*  really affecting each other. We have weapons of mass destruction. We have all kinds of things
*  where we can really hurt ourselves. And the problems we create can be so large.
*  The unintended consequences of some of our actions, like climate change, putting carbon
*  in the atmosphere is a perfect example. That's an unintended consequence of the industrial revolution
*  that a lot of benefits from it, but we've also got this side effect that is very detrimental.
*  We need to be, we need to start training ourselves to think longer term. Long-term
*  thinking is a giant lever. You can literally solve problems if you think long-term that are
*  impossible to solve if you think short-term. And we aren't really good at thinking long-term
*  as it's not really, we're kind of, five years is a tough time frame for most institutions to think
*  past. And we probably need to stretch that to 10 years and 15 years and 20 years and 25 years.
*  And we'd do a better job for our children or our grandchildren if we could stretch those
*  thinking horizons. And so the clock is in a way, it's an art project. It's a symbol.
*  And if it ever has any power to influence people to think longer term, that won't happen for
*  hundreds of years, but we have to, we're going to build it now and let it accrue the patina of age.
*  Do you think humans will be here when the clock runs out? Here on earth?
*  I think so. But the United States won't exist. Like whole civilizations rise and fall. 10,000
*  years is so long. Like no nation state has ever survived for anywhere close to 10,000 years.
*  And the increasing rate of progress makes that even less likely.
*  So do I think humans will be here? Yes. How will we have changed ourselves and what will we be?
*  And so on and so on. I don't know, but I think we'll be here.
*  On that grand scale, a human life feels tiny. Do you ponder your own mortality? Are you afraid
*  of death? No, I used to be afraid of death. I did. I remember as a young person being kind of
*  very scared of mortality. Didn't want to think about it and so on. And
*  as I've gotten older, I'm 59 now, as I've gotten older, somehow that fear has sort of gone away.
*  I would like to stay alive for as long as possible, but I'm really more focused on
*  health span. I want to be healthy. I want that square wave. I want to be healthy, healthy,
*  healthy, and then gone. I don't want the long decay. And I'm curious. I want to see how things
*  turn out. I'd like to be here. I love my family and my close friends and I'm curious about them.
*  I have a lot of reasons to stay around, but mortality doesn't have that effect on me that
*  it did maybe when I was in my 20s. Well, Jeff, thank you for creating Amazon,
*  one of the most incredible companies in history. And thank you for trying your best to make humans
*  and multi-planetary species expanding out into our solar system, maybe beyond to meet the aliens out
*  there. And thank you for talking today. Well, Lex, thank you for doing your part to lengthen
*  our attention span. Appreciate that very much. Thanks for listening to this conversation with
*  Jeff Bezos. To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description.
*  And now let me leave you with some words from Jeff Bezos himself. Be stubborn on vision,
*  but flexible on the details. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
