---
Date Generated: April 09, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 7817s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence', 'artificial intelligence podcast', 'chris voss', 'closing deals', 'emotion', 'fbi', 'hostages', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex podcast', 'mit ai', 'negotiation', 'reason', 'strategy']
Video Views: 1661015
Video Rating: None
---

# Chris Voss: FBI Hostage Negotiator | Lex Fridman Podcast #364
**Lex Fridman:** [March 10, 2023](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8EguLJgkc54)
*  a crazy thing in the kidnap business.
*  We used to get asked by FBI leadership,
*  when is this gonna be over?
*  And the answer would be when the bad guys
*  feel like they've gotten everything they can.
*  Now dissecting that statement,
*  you're talking about when they feel
*  like they got everything they can.
*  So the key to kidnapping negotiations are the feelings
*  of the bad guys.
*  We're talking about feelings, kidnappers' feelings.
*  Which drives everything.
*  Doesn't matter what human endeavor it is.
*  The following is a conversation with Chris Voss,
*  former FBI hostage and crisis negotiator
*  and author of Never Split the Difference,
*  Negotiating As If Your Life Depended on It.
*  This is the Lex Friedman Podcast.
*  To support it, please check out our sponsors
*  in the description.
*  And now, dear friends, here's Chris Voss.
*  What is it like negotiating for a hostage
*  with a kidnapper?
*  What is the toughest part of that process?
*  The toughest part is if it looks bad from the beginning.
*  And you gotta engage in a process anyway.
*  What are the factors that make it bad?
*  That makes you nervous that if you're in a
*  observer situation where there's general negotiation
*  or it's a hostage negotiation,
*  what makes you think that this is going to be difficult?
*  If they wanna make it look like they're negotiating
*  but they're not.
*  Like in the 2004 timeframe, Al-Qaeda in Iraq
*  was executing people on camera for the publicity
*  and they wanted to make it look like they were negotiating.
*  So they'd come on and they'd say,
*  if you don't get all the women out of,
*  Iraqi women out of the jails in Iraq in 72 hours,
*  we're gonna kill a hostage.
*  It was one of the demands in one of the cases
*  in that timeframe.
*  Now, first of all, even if we'd have been willing,
*  the US government coalition would have been willing
*  to do that.
*  It wouldn't have been able to happen in 72 hours.
*  So is it an impossible ask from the beginning?
*  And so then that looks really bad.
*  Like they're trying to make it look like
*  they're talking reasonably, but they're not.
*  So your hostage is in bad shape there.
*  If they've made a demand that you just,
*  even if you wanted to do, you couldn't do.
*  So then what makes that very difficult is,
*  in kidnappings especially,
*  you're working with family members, you're coaching people.
*  Bad guys are in touch with family members,
*  or if they're not directly in touch with family members,
*  the other thing that Al-Qaeda was doing at that time was,
*  they didn't give us a way to talk to them.
*  They're making statements in the media,
*  but then not leaving their phone number, if you will.
*  So that's one more thing.
*  They're intentionally blocking you.
*  They're asking you to do something you can't do.
*  They're not giving you a way to talk to them.
*  So you gotta get with the family
*  and discuss with the family how you can approach things.
*  Now the family definitely wants to know,
*  is this gonna help?
*  So a bunch of cases like that in that timeframe.
*  And you gotta be honest with them.
*  It's a long shot.
*  Our chances here are slim and none.
*  And when it's slim and none, I'll take slim,
*  but it's still very, very slim.
*  And there were a number of people that were killed
*  in that timeframe before the tide finally got turned.
*  It was hard dealing with families at the time.
*  Can you negotiate in public
*  versus like a direct channel in private?
*  Oh yeah.
*  Bad guys pick the media.
*  They're making statements in the media.
*  And that's a big clue.
*  Their channel of choice tells you an awful lot.
*  And if they're choosing the media,
*  then that means there's people they're trying to appeal to.
*  That means in their view,
*  there's such a thing as good media.
*  So if there's good media, there's bad media.
*  How do you make it bad?
*  And we made it bad for them.
*  It just, unfortunately, it had to go through
*  a number of iterations before they got the message and quit.
*  In that negotiation,
*  do you think about the value of human life?
*  Is there a dollar figure?
*  Is there, how do you enumerate, not enumerate,
*  quantify the value of human life?
*  Yeah, that's like beauty, it's in the eye of the beholder.
*  So that was the first lesson on any hostage negotiation,
*  really any negotiation.
*  Like it doesn't matter what it is to you,
*  matters what it is to the other side.
*  One of the things, especially in your conversation,
*  I listened to with Andrew.
*  By the way, you guys,
*  another thing I really liked about that conversation,
*  first of all, I think the world of him.
*  Andrew Huberman.
*  Yeah, Andrew Huberman.
*  And you released it on my birthday, I appreciate that.
*  It was a nice birthday present to me.
*  I tried to tie it perfectly just for you.
*  Yeah, nice job, thank you.
*  But empathy is in the eye of the beholder
*  in every negotiation, whether it's over a car, a house,
*  collaboration in your company with the bad guys.
*  How does the other side see it?
*  Now, the nice thing about kidnapping for ransom,
*  if there's an actual ransom demand,
*  it's an actual demand,
*  is it's a mercenary's business.
*  They're gonna take what they could get,
*  and they tend to be really good
*  at figuring out how much money somebody has.
*  And again, I'll keep drawing business analogies.
*  You're looking for a job with an employer.
*  There's a market price of the job,
*  and then there's what the employer can pay you.
*  Now, maybe the market price of the job markets 150 grand.
*  Employer can pay you 120, but it's a great job.
*  We were talking about Elon a minute ago.
*  I'd work minimum wage to follow him around.
*  That would be worth it.
*  What are the value other than the dollars?
*  And how hard is it to get the dollars?
*  And how quickly can you get to them?
*  These are all things that the bad guys are good at,
*  and kidnapping are good at figuring out.
*  So the value of human life to them
*  is gonna be what can they get?
*  A crazy thing in the kidnap business,
*  we used to get asked by FBI leadership,
*  when is this gonna be over?
*  And the answer would be when the bad guys feel
*  like they've gotten everything they can.
*  Now dissecting that statement,
*  you're talking about when they feel
*  like they got everything they can.
*  So the key to kidnapping negotiations are the feelings.
*  The bad guys, we're talking about feelings,
*  kidnappers' feelings, which drives everything.
*  Doesn't matter what human endeavor it is.
*  So it's not reason, it's emotion.
*  There's no such thing as reason.
*  I should say, for a little bit of context,
*  I just talked yesterday with a guy named Sam Harris.
*  I don't know if you know Sam, but Sam,
*  and because I was preparing for a conversation with you,
*  I talked to him about empathy versus reason,
*  and he lands heavily on reason.
*  Empathy is somewhere between useless and erroneous
*  and leads you astray and is not effective.
*  That reason is the only way forward.
*  Well, let's draw some fine lines there.
*  The two fine lines I would draw is,
*  first, what is your definition of empathy,
*  and then secondly, how do people actually make up their minds?
*  And I'm gonna flip it, I'm gonna go with
*  how people make up their minds.
*  You make up your mind based on what you care about, period.
*  That makes reason emotion-based.
*  What do you care about?
*  You start with what you care about.
*  You see some guy swimming out off the coast of the ocean
*  and you see a shark coming up behind him.
*  Who are you cheering for?
*  If it's Adolf Hitler out there,
*  you're cheering for the shark.
*  You might actually feel bad for the shark
*  because it's gonna taste bad.
*  Who do you care about?
*  You mean the human will taste bad?
*  Yeah, he eats Adolf Hitler.
*  You're gonna leave a bad taste in your mouth,
*  even if you're a shark.
*  So you're making up your mind on every circumstance
*  based on what you care about.
*  So then what does that do to reason?
*  Your reason is based on what you care about
*  from the beginning.
*  Now then, empathy, if you define it as sympathy,
*  which it was never meant to be sympathy, ever.
*  Ever.
*  Etymology, I think is the word.
*  I keep getting etymology and entomology mixed up.
*  Etymology being, right, where words came from,
*  the origin, entomology being bugs.
*  Got it.
*  So I like etymology.
*  Where did something come from?
*  Also like entomology.
*  Anyway, etymology.
*  My understanding from my research,
*  the original definition of empathy
*  was an interpretation of a German word
*  where people were trying to figure out
*  what the artist was trying to convey.
*  It was about assessing art.
*  And so it was always about understanding
*  where somebody was coming from,
*  but not sharing necessarily that same thing.
*  So then when I was with the API
*  and I first started collaborating with Harvard,
*  Bob Menouken wrote a book,
*  Beyond Winning,
*  second chapter is the tension
*  between empathy and assertiveness.
*  Still the best chapter on empathy I've ever read anywhere.
*  And Bob writes in his book,
*  Bob was the head of the program on negotiation.
*  He's also agreed to be interviewed for a documentary
*  about me and my company that hasn't been released yet,
*  but it should be released sometime this year.
*  What's the name of the documentary?
*  Tactical Empathy.
*  Good name.
*  So Bob's definition of empathy said,
*  not agreeing or even liking the other side.
*  Don't even gotta like them.
*  Don't gotta agree with them.
*  Just straight understanding where they're coming from
*  and articulating it,
*  which requires no agreement whatsoever.
*  That becomes a very powerful tool,
*  like ridiculously powerful.
*  And if sympathy or compassion or agreement are not included,
*  you can be empathic with anybody.
*  I was thinking about this
*  when I was getting ready to sit down and talk to you,
*  because you use the word empathy a lot.
*  Putin.
*  I can be empathic with Putin, easy.
*  It's easy.
*  I don't agree with where he's coming from.
*  I don't agree with his methodology.
*  Early on the Ukraine-Russian war,
*  I saw an article that was very dismissive of Russia.
*  That said, Russia's basically Europe's gas station.
*  And I thought, all right,
*  so if you're in charge,
*  and the way you feed your people is via an industry
*  that the entire world is trying to quit.
*  The whole world is trying to get out of fossil fuels.
*  If that's how you feed your people,
*  if you don't come up with an answer to that,
*  the people that you've taken responsibility for
*  are gonna die alone in the cold and the dark.
*  They're gonna freeze and they're gonna die.
*  All right, so that doesn't mean that I agree
*  with where he's coming from or any of his means.
*  But how does this guy see things in his distorted world?
*  You're never gonna get through to somebody like that
*  in a conversation unless you can demonstrate to them
*  you understand where they're coming from,
*  whether or not you agree.
*  Early 90s, last century, I'm a last century guy,
*  I'm an old dude.
*  Refer to myself as a last century guy.
*  Also a deeply flawed human.
*  So terrorist case, New York City, civilian court,
*  terrorism does not have to be tried in military tribunals.
*  That's a very bad idea.
*  It was always bad.
*  The FBI was always against it.
*  I'm getting ready.
*  We have Muslims testifying in open court
*  against a legitimate Muslim cleric.
*  The guy that was on trial had the credentials
*  as a legitimate Muslim cleric.
*  The people that were testifying against him
*  didn't think he should be advocating
*  murder of innocent people.
*  We'd sit down with them, Arab Muslims, Egyptians mostly.
*  And I would say to them,
*  you believe that there's been a succession
*  of American governments for the last 200 years
*  that are anti-Islamic.
*  And they'd shake their head and go,
*  yeah, and that'd be the start of the conversation.
*  That's empathy.
*  You believe this to be the case.
*  I never said I agreed.
*  I never said I disagreed.
*  But I showed them that I wasn't afraid of their beliefs.
*  I was so unafraid of them
*  that I was willing to just state them
*  and not disagree or contradict.
*  Because I would say that and then I'd shut up
*  and let them react.
*  And I never had to say, here's why you're wrong.
*  I never gave my point of view.
*  Every single one of them that testified, that's empathy.
*  Not agreeing with where the other side is coming from.
*  I'm not sure how Sam would define it,
*  but common vernacular is it's sympathy and it's compassion.
*  And that's when it becomes useless.
*  And there's a gray area, maybe you can comment on it,
*  is sometimes a drop of compassion
*  helps make that empathy more effective in the conversation.
*  So you're just saying you believe
*  X
*  doesn't quite form a strong of a bond with the other person.
*  You're imagining it doesn't.
*  You may be right, yes, I'm imagining it doesn't.
*  I'm imagining you need to show that you're on the same side.
*  That you need to signal a little bit
*  about your actual beliefs, at least in that moment.
*  Even if that signaling is not as deep as it sounds,
*  but at first, basically patting the person on the back
*  and saying we're on the same side, brother.
*  That's what most people,
*  when they're really learning the concept,
*  that's the basic human reaction.
*  In application, especially in highly adversarial situations.
*  I need a regular guy, Muslim,
*  but how's that guy gonna say, buy it if I like,
*  you know, dude, I'm on your side.
*  I've been there, I feel you.
*  No, no, no, no, no, no.
*  People get conned by that so much.
*  If we're on opposite sides of the table
*  and I try to act like I'm not on the opposite side
*  of the table, that makes me disingenuous.
*  So I would rather be honest.
*  My currency is integrity.
*  And at some point in time, if you go like,
*  you know where I'm coming from?
*  My answer is gonna be like, look,
*  I can agree on maybe where we're going.
*  But if we're talking about, you know,
*  am I on your side now?
*  As a human being, I wanna see you survive and thrive.
*  Not at my expense.
*  I think the world is full of opportunity, optimistic.
*  I got more than enough reason for saying that.
*  It's enough for here for both of us.
*  So I got no problem with you getting yours.
*  You know, just don't take it out of my head.
*  And I'm gonna be honest about it.
*  About both of those things.
*  I'm not interested in you taking it out of my head.
*  I think there's plenty here for both of us.
*  Now, I don't need to be on your side,
*  except in a human sense.
*  But do I have to side with you over the war?
*  No.
*  Or how we're distributing the stock
*  or how much I get paid or how much you make off this car.
*  I think people, my experience as a layman
*  is that empathy's not got a downside.
*  That you don't need me to act like I'm on your side
*  for us to make a great deal.
*  Great deal.
*  Well, we'll talk about two things.
*  A great deal and a great conversation.
*  They're often going to be the same thing,
*  but at times they're going to be different.
*  That's a, you mentioned Vladimir Putin.
*  There is some zoom level at which
*  you do want to say we're on the same side.
*  You said the human level.
*  It's possible to say, kind of zoom out
*  and say that we're all in this together.
*  Not we Slavic people, we Europeans,
*  but we human beings.
*  On the same planet.
*  Same planet.
*  Right.
*  Several years ago, and his name has evidently been Mud now,
*  but he was very nice to me.
*  Lawyer here in town named Tom Girardi.
*  And no shortage of bad reporting on him now.
*  I have absolutely no idea if any of it's true.
*  I do know that in my interaction with him,
*  he was always a gentleman to me and was very generous.
*  When he'd get into conversations with people,
*  he'd always say like, you know,
*  let's look at 10 years from now,
*  where we could both be in a phenomenal place together.
*  Now let's work our way back from there.
*  That's a good line.
*  Yeah, and then, you know, I saw him do it in simulations.
*  He, I was teaching at USC.
*  We were at a function together and a gentleman at the time
*  told me that who he was and he was really influential.
*  So I walked up to the guy cold and I said, hey, you know,
*  I'm coming to talk to my class at USC.
*  He didn't know me other than the fact that
*  we had mutual acquaintance and he graciously
*  consented to come in.
*  And he said, what do you want me to talk about?
*  And I said, look, dude, just from your success here,
*  it doesn't matter what you talk about.
*  You know, either I'm gonna agree or I'm gonna disagree
*  or I'm gonna learn from it.
*  My students are gonna learn from it.
*  So students wanna role play with them, you know,
*  they dispute, let's do a negotiation.
*  Every single time you go to pick a point in the future
*  where we're both happy 10 years, 20 years from now,
*  and let's work our way back.
*  Now hostage negotiator, same thing.
*  I call into a bank, bad guy picks up on the phone
*  and I'm gonna say, I want you to live.
*  You know, I wanna see you survive this.
*  You know, whatever else goes with that.
*  Let's pick a point in the future
*  that we're both good with and then we work our way back.
*  And people make also, we were talking before
*  about emotion and what you care about.
*  People make their decisions based on their vision
*  of the future.
*  Like without question, I think there's a Hindu temple
*  in the United States has been or being assembled
*  same way that the Hindu temples were in India
*  a thousand years ago, by hand, volunteers, by hand.
*  These people are knocking themselves out
*  for a place in paradise, a vision of the future.
*  What you will go through today if the future portends
*  what you want, you'll go through incredible things today.
*  So it's a vision of the future.
*  So you have to try to paint a vision of the future
*  that the person you're negotiating with will like.
*  Just tough to do.
*  Let's find out what their vision of the future is
*  and then remove yourself as a threat.
*  Sure.
*  You know, if we can collaborate together at all,
*  if you think that I could do anything at all
*  to help you to that point and integrity is my currency,
*  I'm not gonna lie to you, which gets back before
*  that I lied to you about whether or not I'm on your side.
*  Right now, at the moment, we're on opposite sides of the fence.
*  That's not gonna stop us from being together in the future.
*  Inside, you're gonna say,
*  well, you didn't lie to me about today,
*  maybe you won't lie to me about tomorrow.
*  So going back to world leaders, for example,
*  whether it's Vladimir Zelensky or Vladimir Putin,
*  you don't think it closes off their mind to show that
*  you have a different opinion.
*  Depend upon when you showed it.
*  Are you arguing from the beginning
*  or are you displaying understanding from the beginning?
*  I don't think it stops you from being adversarial.
*  There was a thing about Manoukhan's chapter in his book,
*  the tension between empathy and assertiveness.
*  I remember reading that name of the chapter thinking like,
*  eh, you know, in my business, there is no tension.
*  And then I got into it and I read,
*  I thought, this is red herring.
*  He's drawing people in because his entire chapter
*  is that empathy puts you in a position to assert
*  and that there is no tension.
*  It's a sequencing issue.
*  And that's why, again, I think it was written for lawyers.
*  Sequencing issue.
*  So timing is everything.
*  So you emphasize the importance of,
*  in terms of sequencing and priority of listening,
*  of truly listening to the other person.
*  I'm sorry, what'd you say?
*  That was a bad joke, sorry.
*  I forgot.
*  I forgot.
*  Your timing is just perfect.
*  How do you listen?
*  How do you truly listen to another human being?
*  How do you notice them?
*  How do you really hear them?
*  I always hated the term active listening.
*  If anything, it's proactive.
*  And as soon as you start to try to anticipate
*  where somebody's going, you're dialed in more.
*  Because along the way,
*  either you're congratulating yourself for being right,
*  or when suddenly they say something that surprises you,
*  you really notice it.
*  Like, that's not what I expected.
*  You're dialed in, you're listening.
*  So it's proactive.
*  And then one of the reasons,
*  we named the book Tactical Empathy.
*  Name the book, never split the difference,
*  but we're talking about tactical empathy.
*  Calibrated emotional intelligence.
*  What's it calibrated by?
*  First, it was experiences,
*  Haase's negotiators,
*  and we've come to find out that our experience
*  as Haase's negotiators is backed up by neuroscience.
*  Another reason why I listen to
*  Andrew Huberman's podcast all the time.
*  Heavy, heavy, heavy, heavy on the neuroscience.
*  And so then emotional intelligence calibrated
*  by what we know about neuroscience.
*  What do we know about neuroscience?
*  And I'll talk about it from a layman's perspective,
*  and to even say we is an arrogant thing, you know,
*  human beings.
*  I didn't do the research.
*  I'm scooping up as much of it as I can as a layman.
*  The brain's largely negative.
*  I think there's ample evidence,
*  people would argue with you as to what the wiring is,
*  and what does what,
*  and the limbic system, and all of that,
*  but the brain is basically 75% negative.
*  As an layman, I make that contention, number one.
*  Number two, the best way to deactivate negativity
*  is by calling it out.
*  And I could say, look, I don't want you to be offended
*  by what I'm getting ready to say.
*  That's a denial.
*  Your guard is up, you're getting ready to get mad.
*  If I say, what I'm getting ready to say
*  is probably gonna offend you.
*  Now you relax a little bit,
*  and you go, all right, what is it?
*  And then I say it, whatever it is,
*  and you're gonna be like, oh, that wasn't that bad.
*  Because we knew from hostage negotiation
*  by calling out the negativity, deactivate it,
*  and then a number of neuroscience experiments
*  have been done right and left
*  by calling out negativity, deactivating the negativity.
*  Calling out ahead of time.
*  So acknowledging that this is,
*  that this is ahead of time, that this is going to hurt.
*  The experiments that I've seen have been
*  when the negativity was inflicted
*  and then having a person that it was being inflicted upon,
*  simply identify it.
*  Just identify.
*  Yeah, what are you feeling?
*  I'm angry, and the anger goes away.
*  It's tough because I've had a few,
*  and again, we're dancing between things,
*  but I've had a few conversations
*  where anger arose in the guests I spoke with.
*  Yeah.
*  And I'm not sure identifying it.
*  That's like leaning into it and going into the depths.
*  Because that's going to the depths
*  of some emotional psychological thing they're going through
*  that I'm not sure I wanna explore that iceberg
*  with the little ship we got.
*  You have to decide, do you want to avoid it
*  or do you wanna lean into it?
*  It's a tough choice.
*  It's an elephant in the room.
*  It is an elephant in the room.
*  It is an elephant.
*  Especially when I think that's the big difference
*  between conversations and negotiations.
*  Negotiation ultimately is looking for closure and resolution.
*  I think general conversations like this is more exploring.
*  There's not necessarily a goal.
*  If I had to put a goal for this conversation,
*  there's no real goal.
*  It's curiously exploring ideas.
*  So that'll gives you freedom to not call out the elephant.
*  For time, you could be like, all right,
*  let's go to the next room, get a snack,
*  and come back to the elephant.
*  Right.
*  All right, so I'd make a tiny adjustment
*  on the negotiation definition.
*  Because you said, I think seeking closure.
*  You used two words, and closure was one of them.
*  Goals, maybe another.
*  Well, yeah, what is negotiation?
*  Well, I would say seeking collaboration.
*  Because closure kind of puts a little bit of a finality
*  to it, and a real problem in any negotiations
*  is always implementation.
*  That's why we say yes, I say yes is nothing without how.
*  And yes, at its very best, is only temporary aspiration.
*  It's aspirational, it's usually counterfeit.
*  So if you're looking for, huh?
*  That's a good line.
*  Yes is usually counterfeit, it's aspirational.
*  Without the how.
*  Yes.
*  It's just a good line, yeah.
*  Thank you.
*  I've been working on it.
*  I was practicing, I was in front of the mirror
*  for a few minutes. You're doing pretty good.
*  You got a bright future ahead of you.
*  You should write a book or something.
*  Yeah.
*  Your book is excellent, by the way.
*  Thanks, appreciate that.
*  What am I doing here anyway?
*  This, on Earth, in general?
*  On you, with you.
*  I don't know.
*  We're collaborating.
*  Why me, though?
*  Why'd you wanna talk to me?
*  I've heard you speak in a few places.
*  I was like, this is a fascinating human.
*  I think on Clubhouse and different places,
*  and I listen to some YouTube stuff,
*  and this is just, you meet people that are interesting.
*  That's what I love doing with this podcast,
*  is just exploring the mind of an interesting person.
*  You notice people.
*  I think, yes.
*  Sometimes it's like a homeless person outside of 7-Eleven,
*  I notice, who are you?
*  Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
*  It's fascinating.
*  It doesn't, I don't look at the resumes
*  and the credentials and stuff like that,
*  it's just being able to notice a person.
*  As I've been leafing through the different choices
*  of the podcast, the young lady that,
*  OnlyFans and the sex workers,
*  that's a fascinating human being.
*  I wanna know what makes that person tech, at 1000%.
*  The fascinating thing about her is her worldview
*  is almost entirely different than mine,
*  and that's always interesting to talk to a person
*  who just is happy, flourishing,
*  but sees the world and the set of values she has
*  is completely different.
*  And is also not argumentative,
*  is accepting of other worldviews.
*  It's beautiful to explore that.
*  Yeah, no kidding, I would agree.
*  And then yeah, thought provoking,
*  because I consider myself,
*  the word I was looking for before is abundant.
*  I think it's an abundant world.
*  So I'm pretty optimistic.
*  I consider myself, I don't know, happy exactly describes it,
*  but yeah, so then if I'm happy, optimistic, abundant,
*  I got a worldview, and then you run into somebody
*  that has a vastly different worldview,
*  and they're happy and they think it's abundant too.
*  And you're like, what is going on in your head,
*  or mine, or what am I missing?
*  Yeah, so that's fascinating.
*  And the pie grows, which is useful for kind of negotiation
*  when you paint a picture of a future,
*  if you're optimistic about that future,
*  there's a kind of feeling like we're both gonna win here.
*  Exactly. And that's easy.
*  We live in a world where both people can win.
*  Yeah, and in point of fact, that's the case,
*  although a lot of people want us to think otherwise,
*  mostly because of the negativity
*  that I was talking about before.
*  So the brain is generally cynical.
*  Yeah, my description of it is
*  the pessimistic caveman survived,
*  and we're descendants of the pessimists.
*  The optimistic guy got eaten by a sabre-toothed tiger.
*  Yeah, but on the flip side,
*  the optimists seem to be the ones
*  that actually build stuff these days.
*  There's the switch.
*  So at what point in time do we catch on,
*  because the difference between survival and success mindset,
*  the success mindset is highly optimistic.
*  So where do we switch or how do we stay switched
*  from survival to success?
*  That's the challenge.
*  Yeah, somewhere we stopped being eaten by sabre-toothed tigers
*  and started building bridges and buildings
*  and computers and companies.
*  We started to experience, we got enough data back
*  to collaborate, and we stopped listening to our amygdala
*  and we started listening to our gut.
*  Let me just return briefly to terrorists.
*  What do you think about the policy
*  of not negotiating with terrorists?
*  Well, that's not the policy, first of all.
*  Now, everybody thinks that's the policy.
*  It hasn't been the policy since 2002
*  when Bush 43 signed a National Security
*  Presidential Directive, NSPD, the time it was NSPD-12,
*  which basically said, we won't make concessions.
*  That doesn't mean we won't talk.
*  So I'm in Columbia at the same time
*  and I have been intimately involved
*  with the signing of him signing that document.
*  I knew exactly what it said
*  and he didn't inherit it from somebody else, he signed it.
*  And I'm in Columbia and the number two in the embassy says,
*  last night on TV, the President of the United States said,
*  we don't negotiate with terrorists.
*  Are you calling the President of the United States a liar?
*  And I remember thinking like, all right, so,
*  he probably said that, and that's not on the document
*  that he signed.
*  So I said, look, I'm familiar with what he signed
*  and that's not what it says.
*  Well, you know, and so the argument,
*  but that's always been the soundbite that everybody likes.
*  We don't negotiate with terrorists.
*  Depends upon your definition of negotiation.
*  If it's just communication,
*  we negotiate with them all the time.
*  Number one, and number two,
*  like every president has made some boneheaded deal
*  with the bad guys.
*  Like Obama released five high level Taliban leaders
*  from Guantanamo in exchange for an AWOL soldier
*  that we immediately threw in jail.
*  And I thought that was a horrible deal.
*  And that's putting terrorists back on the battlefield.
*  And then Trump turned around and topped it
*  by putting 5,000 terrorists back on the battlefield.
*  So we haven't had a president that has stuck to that
*  on either side of the aisle
*  since people started throwing that out as a soundbite.
*  What do you think of that negotiation?
*  Forget terrorists, but the global negotiation,
*  like with Vladimir Putin,
*  the recent negotiation over prisoners,
*  the exchange, the Breitlinger-Eidner.
*  Is there a way to do that negotiation successfully?
*  First of all, I agree with the idea
*  that she was wrongfully detained
*  and she didn't deserve to be in jail.
*  And that there should be no second class citizens ever.
*  And whether you're a WNBA player
*  or you're just some bonehead
*  that walked into the wrong situation,
*  your government should not abandon you, ever, ever.
*  Now what they do in the meantime,
*  there should have been a negotiation.
*  They were desperate to make a deal at a bad time.
*  They'd been offered far better deals
*  and prisoner swaps earlier and turned them down.
*  And then the heat gets turned up.
*  And thank God for Brittany Greiner
*  that the public got enough attention.
*  They kept pressure on the administration.
*  They made a deal.
*  Now governments wanna make those kind of deals,
*  that's fine, as long as it,
*  because that was basically a political negotiation.
*  You're putting 5,000 Taliban back on a battlefield.
*  That ain't negotiating with another government.
*  You're putting five of them back on a battlefield.
*  That ain't negotiating with another government
*  that's directly contradicting this thing that you claimed.
*  And those were all bad deals.
*  Now, was the Brittany Greiner thing a bad deal?
*  I think it was great for her.
*  If I was in the middle of it, it would have been better.
*  And she still would have come home.
*  Yeah, there's some technical aspects of that negotiation.
*  What do you think is the value, just to linger on it,
*  of meeting in person for the negotiation?
*  I think it's a great idea.
*  Can I just follow that tangent along?
*  There's a war in Ukraine now.
*  It's been going on over a year.
*  It's, for me personally, given my life story
*  is a deeply personal one.
*  And I'm returning back to that area of the world
*  that was there.
*  Volodymyr Zelensky said he doesn't want to talk
*  to Vladimir Putin.
*  Do you think they could get in a room together
*  and say you were there in a room with Putin and Zelensky
*  and Biden is sitting in the bag drinking a cocktail
*  or maybe he is at the table participating.
*  How is it possible through negotiation,
*  through the art of conversation,
*  to find peace in this very tense geopolitical conflict?
*  I think it's eminently possible.
*  I think getting people together in person
*  has always been a good idea.
*  Now, who's getting them together under what circumstances
*  and how many times you get them together?
*  The documentary, The Human Factor
*  about the Mideast peace negotiations,
*  mostly through the 90s,
*  mostly into the Clinton administration.
*  Got kicked off under Bush 41.
*  And then the documentary continues through Trump,
*  but just touching basically on it.
*  But they're getting Arafat and the different
*  Israeli prime ministers together in person.
*  And these guys do not want to talk to each other
*  and depending upon the prime minister,
*  the mere thought of being on the same planet with Arafat
*  was offensive.
*  And they started getting these guys together in parts
*  and regularly, and they started seeing each other
*  as human beings.
*  And they started realizing that there was enough room
*  on a planet for them,
*  and that people dying was stupid.
*  And they would slowly work things out
*  by getting these guys together in person.
*  So how long does it take?
*  Who's hosting it?
*  But it's a good idea.
*  But the skill of achieving that thing
*  that you talk about a lot, which is empathy,
*  and I would say in that case, not just empathy,
*  but empathy plus a bit, you might disagree with this,
*  but a drop of compassion in there.
*  I think compassion is helpful,
*  but it's not essential.
*  Like if you just know where I'm coming from,
*  like the feeling of being understood.
*  Yeah, heard and understood, that's powerful.
*  Is, yeah, and again, I know I picked a vast majority
*  of this up on Andrew's podcast,
*  but I picked it up in other places,
*  because early on, when we were putting a book together,
*  Tal Raz, the writer, my son, uncredited co-author,
*  so the book's really a collaboration between me,
*  my son Brandon, and Tal Raz.
*  And we're driving for that's right.
*  When somebody feels like what you've said
*  is completely their position, they say that's right.
*  Not you're right, but that's right.
*  So Tal says, you know, I think what's happening here
*  is you're triggering a subtle epiphany in somebody.
*  So I'm like, all right, I'll buy that.
*  So I start looking up the neuroscience
*  of the feeling of epiphany,
*  getting a hit of oxytocin and serotonin.
*  Oxytocin is a bonding drug.
*  You bond to me.
*  I don't bond to you.
*  When you feel completely understood by me, you bond to me.
*  Then in one of the relationship podcasts
*  that I'm listening to on Andrew,
*  it says oxytocin inclines people to tell the truth.
*  You're more honest.
*  All right, so you feel deeply understood by me,
*  you bond to me, and you start getting more honest with me.
*  Serotonin, the neurochemical satisfaction,
*  epiphany, you feel oxytocin and serotonin being understood.
*  All right, I got you bonding to me.
*  I got you being more honest with me,
*  and I got you feeling more satisfied so you want less.
*  What more do you want out of a negotiation?
*  Of course, there's already with leaders
*  and great negotiators, there's walls built up,
*  defense mechanisms against that.
*  All right, you're resisting.
*  You're resisting this basic chemistry,
*  but yes, you should have that.
*  You should work towards that kind of empathy.
*  And I personally believe, I don't actually understand why,
*  but I've observed it time and time again,
*  but getting in a room together and really talking,
*  whether privately or publicly, but really talking.
*  And like this, so I'll comment on this.
*  So right now, this is being recorded,
*  and a few folks will hear this,
*  but when you really do a good job
*  of this kind of conversation, you forget there's cameras.
*  And that's much better than there being
*  even a third person in the room,
*  but often when world leaders meet,
*  there's like press or there's others in the room.
*  As man to man or man to woman,
*  you have to like meet like in a saloon,
*  just the two of you and talk.
*  There's some intimacy and power to that,
*  to achieve that if you're also willing
*  to couple that with empathy,
*  to really hear the other person.
*  I don't know what that is.
*  That's like a deep, deep intimacy that happens.
*  And I think there's actually,
*  because we get asked this in a Black Swan group all the time,
*  like how do you know Zoom, that's bad,
*  because you don't have the same visual feedback on Zoom.
*  And that's not true.
*  Like you and I, I see you from the waist up right now.
*  If we were on Zoom,
*  I'd be looking at you from the waist up.
*  I'm not wearing pants, yeah.
*  But the internet.
*  I apologize for that.
*  Sorry, yeah, yeah.
*  You only see a small portion.
*  Usually, that's usually where I go.
*  But anyway.
*  I'm glad we're both at Ridiculous Sentence,
*  I appreciate it.
*  But what makes this different in person?
*  I actually think, I think there's energy
*  that we don't have the instrumentation to define yet.
*  And I think that there's a feel,
*  I think there's an actual energetic feel that changes.
*  And just because we don't, again,
*  just because we can't measure it,
*  doesn't mean it's not there.
*  Yeah, I would love to figure out what that is.
*  Folks that are working on virtual reality
*  are trying to figure out what that is.
*  During the pandemic, everybody was on Zoom,
*  Zoom and Microsoft, everybody was trying to figure out
*  how do we replicate that.
*  I'm trying to understand how to replicate that
*  because it sure is not fun to travel across the world
*  just to talk to Snowden or Putin or Zelensky.
*  I'd love to do it over Zoom.
*  It's not the same, it's not the same.
*  No, it's not the same.
*  I'd go in a room with Putin.
*  You would go in a room?
*  I would, yeah, 1000%.
*  I'd get a that's right out of him.
*  That's right.
*  Well, first you would give him a that's right, probably.
*  Ah, getting a given.
*  See, and here's the issue that trips everybody up
*  in negotiations, the difference between hearing and speaking,
*  the same words are vastly different.
*  And what I'm looking for is the responses
*  I'm getting out of you.
*  Because if you can't, first, that's right, especially.
*  If you can't appreciate what that really means,
*  hearing it is unsatisfying.
*  So those two words are really important to you.
*  You talk about this in your book.
*  Why is that so?
*  What does that's right mean?
*  Why is it important?
*  Well, it means that what you just heard you think is
*  unequivocably the truth.
*  Like it's dead on, it hit the target.
*  It's a bullseye.
*  And it's been a topic of discussion,
*  especially between my son and I a lot, like what happens?
*  This oxytocin bonding moment.
*  And his contention has always been like,
*  Donald Trump is the poster child of what it means.
*  Because Donald Trump's in a dress in an audience,
*  he's in a debate with Hillary,
*  or he's giving a speech someplace.
*  And when the people that are devoted to him,
*  when they believe that what he's just said
*  is completely right, it's insightful,
*  they look at him or they look at the TV and they go,
*  that's right.
*  And it's what people say when they're bought in
*  to what they just heard.
*  Now, if you're not convinced of the way
*  that Donald Trump's followers are bonded to him,
*  and he also just like this, in my view,
*  destroys the idea of common ground.
*  Because when he first started to run for president,
*  the pundits all said, ah, he's a New Yorker.
*  Nobody in the Republican Party is gonna like him.
*  It's middle America, it's blue collar,
*  it's regular common folks, factory workers.
*  They're not gonna like Trump because he's from New York
*  and he went to ward and he's an Ivy leaguer
*  and he's a son of a wealthy real estate mogul
*  and he had a million dollars handed to him
*  when he got out of college.
*  He's born with a silver spoon in his mouth.
*  The rank and fire Republicans
*  are never gonna accept this guy based on common ground.
*  Look how smart that was.
*  Do you think he's a good negotiator?
*  Do you think Donald Trump is a good negotiator?
*  No, I think he's a great marketer.
*  If you look at his negotiation track record,
*  all right, so I started following Donald Trump
*  in the 80s when I was in New York.
*  I'm a last century guy, he's a last century guy.
*  We've got mutual acquaintances.
*  The minister that married him to Mahler Maples
*  was a friend of mine, a close friend of mine,
*  and in 1998, I threw a fundraiser in his apartment
*  at Trump Tower that he attended.
*  So no shortage of mutual friends.
*  We went to the same church,
*  still have mutual acquaintances, friends,
*  and I've watched his track record negotiation history,
*  which is exactly his track record with North Korea.
*  Where are we with North Korea?
*  What was the deal that he made with North Korea?
*  See, your answer is the same as everybody else's.
*  Well, I remember it started out with a lot of fanfare,
*  but I don't know what happened,
*  because nothing ever happens.
*  It's more public fanfare,
*  so marketing-minded presentation.
*  It starts out with a bang.
*  If he doesn't cut the deal in a short period,
*  a really short period of time, he moves on,
*  and everybody wonders what happened
*  because there was so much fanfare at the beginning.
*  Now, at the beginning, him even opening that dialogue
*  with North Korea was masterful.
*  I was such a fan when you got a president
*  of the United States that is willing to sit down
*  and talk with a leader of another nation.
*  When every other president, all their advisors are saying,
*  the leader of North Korea is beneath you,
*  you cannot dignify him by responding to him directly,
*  and consequently, the Trump administration
*  inherits a can of worms that has been simmering
*  for 30 years.
*  He didn't get a cent of that,
*  and he opened up a dialogue where nobody else
*  was capable of opening a dialogue,
*  and then it just went away.
*  Nobody knows what happened.
*  And there was no deal made.
*  Now, great negotiators make deals.
*  What do you think about these accusations
*  that he's a narcissist?
*  If you're a narcissist, does that help you or hurt you?
*  Is there a more popular term these days than narcissist?
*  Like everybody's a narcissist.
*  Everybody you don't like is a narcissist.
*  Like the homeless guy down on the corner,
*  he's a narcissist, that's why he's there.
*  Yeah, it's lost meaning for you a little bit?
*  Yeah, and first of all, most psychological terms,
*  as a hostage negotiator, and really,
*  we were never into psychology,
*  and we steered away from it,
*  because psychology at best is soft science.
*  If it's not informed these days,
*  if it's not informed by real studies or neuroscience,
*  the guys that I'm impressed with these days,
*  psychologists, neuroscientists,
*  now I'm interested in that guy or gal.
*  But then, psychology convention.
*  Do you get them all together and they all agree?
*  No.
*  But also the interesting thing about psychology
*  is each individual person is way more complicated
*  than the category psychology tries to create.
*  And there's something about the human brain.
*  The moment you classify somebody as a narcissist,
*  or depressed, or bipolar, or insane in any kind of way,
*  for some reason, you give yourself a convenient excuse
*  not to see them as a complicated human being,
*  to empathize with them.
*  I had that when I was talking to,
*  I did an interview with Kanye West,
*  and then there's a lot of popular opinions
*  about him being mentally unwell and so on.
*  And I felt that that kind of way of thinking
*  is a very convenient way of thinking,
*  to ignore the fact that he's a human being
*  that, again, wants to be understood and heard.
*  And that's the only way you can have that conversation.
*  Yeah, I agree completely.
*  That's right.
*  I feel so close to you now.
*  It might be because I'm not wearing pants.
*  All right, so what were you thinking?
*  You're funnier than I am.
*  That bothers me.
*  All right.
*  I'll say something stupid soon enough.
*  Don't worry about it.
*  But you said we were talking about terrorists
*  and not negotiating with terrorists.
*  Is there something- Nice job going all the way back
*  to where that rabbit hole started.
*  There's where Alice in Wonderland right now.
*  Is there something about walking the way
*  of not negotiating?
*  Is there power in that?
*  All right, so it depends upon whether or not
*  you're doing it with integrity or a tactic to start with.
*  And then also, hostage negotiators are successful
*  93% of the time, kind of across the board.
*  Which means that the 7% of the time is gonna go bad.
*  And that was my old boss, Gary Nessner.
*  I learned so much from Gary.
*  But a phrase that he used over and over and over again
*  until I finally worked the case and went bad
*  was this is gonna be the best chance of success.
*  Best chance of success.
*  And then something went bad and I remember thinking like,
*  well, best chance of success is no guarantee of success.
*  So your question is,
*  are there negotiations you should walk away from?
*  If you got no shot at success, then don't negotiate.
*  And you have to accept the fact
*  there's some deals you're never gonna make.
*  We teach in my company, it's not a sin to not get the deal,
*  it's a sin to take a long time to not get the deal.
*  And Gary, in his infinite wisdom,
*  they realized that there was something called suicide by cop
*  and that it might have,
*  Gary was very much into clusters of behavior.
*  He kept us away from psychological terms
*  and there would be clusters of behavior
*  that would be high risk indicators.
*  And he wrote a block of instruction
*  called high risk indicators,
*  which meant if you start seeing this stuff show up,
*  this thing's probably going bad.
*  And you're gonna need to recognize that
*  from the very beginning and adjust accordingly.
*  And it's the same way in business and personal life.
*  I'm talking to the head of a marketing company
*  I have tremendous respect for.
*  I admire that what this guy and his company does
*  started from scratch.
*  He borrowed space in the back of a drug store
*  to start his company.
*  And now it's hugely successful.
*  And he's laying out to me that he finally had to confront
*  a potential client and walk away from him.
*  And he said, how do you think I handle this?
*  My answer was 1000% correct.
*  And as a matter of fact, the behavior that he indicated,
*  he's a type and you should have walked away sooner
*  than you did because this guy was playing
*  at all time Al Qaeda 2004, they're playing us.
*  They're not negotiating.
*  We called them out on it.
*  We don't think you're negotiating.
*  You wouldn't say it exactly like that,
*  but that was absolutely the approach.
*  Confront people on their behavior in a respectful way.
*  And signal that you're willing to walk away.
*  And mean it 1000%.
*  Isn't that terrifying?
*  I mean, it's scary because you don't want
*  to really walk away.
*  Or do you have to really want to walk away?
*  Well, this gets core values, your view of reality.
*  If it's an abundant world, it's not scary to walk away.
*  If it's a finite world with limited opportunities,
*  then it's horrifying.
*  But you have to use that worldview
*  to be willing to actually walk away.
*  Yeah, it could be walking away from a lot of money.
*  It could be walking away from something
*  that's going to hurt people.
*  Because if you lose a hostage.
*  Yeah, well, but if they're not going to let the hostage out.
*  Yeah.
*  Suicide by cop, they ain't letting them go.
*  The 7%, how do most negotiations fail?
*  The bad guys were never there to make a deal in the first place.
*  The bad guys were never there to make a deal in the first place.
*  If it was suicide by cop, if they were there.
*  If they're on a killing journey.
*  It's an Israeli phrase.
*  If they're on a killing journey, and the actions
*  that they're currently engaged in are part of that killing journey.
*  Killing journey.
*  Is there advice you can give about, you mentioned Israel,
*  Palestine, the Middle East, taking on a few conversations on that topic.
*  Is there hope for that part of the world?
*  And from that hope, is there some advice you could lend?
*  Yeah, I think I think there's hope.
*  There's. Then I got friends on both sides.
*  And also.
*  When I got my after I left the FBI,
*  most people listen to this, probably not going to remember
*  who Rodney Dangerfield was.
*  Oh, come on.
*  But he's a comedian.
*  Still doesn't get any respect.
*  Yeah, yeah.
*  And New Yorker.
*  Is he a New Yorker?
*  I think he was a New Yorker.
*  Or like Jersey or something. Yeah.
*  Yeah. And he did a movie a long time ago called Back to School.
*  He went back to school.
*  He's an old guy back to school.
*  So I went back to school after I left the FBI.
*  I did get a master's at Harvard Kennedy.
*  And that's where, you know, I'm running across people on both sides of that.
*  And when they could talk,
*  they said, let's start from the promise that we both sides
*  want a better life for our kids, which is this version
*  that I was telling you earlier from Tom Girardi.
*  Let's pick a point in the future that we're all happy with.
*  And he found that they could talk.
*  You know, we all right.
*  So might not be better for us.
*  How do we make it better for our kids?
*  And that's where the hope derives from, because I think both sides
*  ultimately want it to be better for their kids, which is why
*  they still engage in interactions, and which is why I think the leadership,
*  regardless of how
*  compromised they might be on either side,
*  there are few straight players in the game in the Middle East.
*  Or anywhere, for that matter.
*  But they want a better future for their kids.
*  You get people to agree that you want a better future for your kids,
*  and then you start talking about, well, how do we work our way back from that?
*  And then, all right, so we got a mutual point in the future.
*  The Israeli-Palestinian negotiations
*  are also, for me, interesting, because you mentioned Clubhouse
*  about almost two years ago now.
*  When Israel was shelling Gaza, they hit the U.P.I. office.
*  You know, they were hitting, they got fed up with the rocket attacks from Hamas.
*  And of course, Hamas is putting rockets in the U.P.I. office, the AP office,
*  whichever press office it was there.
*  How's that office going to be there otherwise?
*  How's that office going to be there otherwise?
*  Hamas is running a show.
*  You're not going to run that office unless you let them store weapons there.
*  That's just part of the game.
*  And are they going to store them in specially designated ammunition dumps?
*  No, they're going to put them in schools, they're going to put them in hospitals,
*  they're going to put them in all places that when Israel hits them,
*  they're going to look really bad.
*  So after a while, Israel gets fed up and they start shelling Gaza,
*  and they're hitting these places.
*  A friend of mine, Nicole Benham, is hosting rooms on Clubhouse,
*  and she says, you got to come on.
*  The vitriol is killing me.
*  These are all turning into screaming matches.
*  Nobody's talking to anybody.
*  I said, all right, cool, we'll go on, we'll do it and watch.
*  We won't have a single argument.
*  We'll invite people on from both sides.
*  There was one rule before you started to describe what you thought of the other side,
*  you had to say, before I disagree with you, here's what I think your position is.
*  And you got to continue to state the other side's position until they agree that you've gotten it.
*  Now what happened?
*  No agreement and no arguments.
*  That was what we were really going for.
*  We wanted to show that people on both sides in one of their emotional timeframes,
*  if your only requirement was you had to state the other side's position first,
*  nobody got out of control.
*  Did it work?
*  That's exactly what happened.
*  We wanted to show people that you can have conversations that do not devolve into screaming matches
*  with vitriol, talking about how you're dedicated to the destruction of the other side.
*  Just first, see if you can outline where they're coming from.
*  That's really impressive because I've just having seen on Clubhouse people,
*  which part of the reason I liked Clubhouse, you get to hear voices from all sides.
*  They were emotionally intense.
*  I'm sweating just in the buildup of your story here.
*  I thought it's going to go to hell, but you're saying it kind of worked.
*  Not one person lost control.
*  Now of the two sides, the people that were speaking on behalf of the Israelis were a little better
*  at articulating supportive positions for the Palestinians.
*  Most of the people who want to speak up on behalf of the Palestinians,
*  they want to start doing like, you're doing this.
*  And I'd say, no, no, no, no, no, you can go there, just not yet.
*  Before you go there, you can say that all you want.
*  Before you go there, you've got to try to articulate to them where they're coming from.
*  They got to tell you, you got it right.
*  And what would consistently happen is there's a leveling out of a person
*  to try to see the other side's perspective and articulate it.
*  It's enormously beneficial to the person who's trying to do it,
*  which was really the point that we were trying to make.
*  It's a really interesting exercise.
*  I mean, by way of advice, so if it works at clubhouse,
*  for people who don't know, that's a voice app where you can be anonymous.
*  So it's really regular people, but regular people who can also be anonymous.
*  It's just, it could be chaos.
*  If it works there, that's really interesting.
*  For when you sit down for a conversation across the table from somebody,
*  don't have them even steel man the other side.
*  Have them just state the other side.
*  Explain your understanding of it.
*  Yeah. That's it.
*  And every now and then I would jump in.
*  Like, you know, somebody supporting Israel, you know, whoever the heck they were.
*  And they'd say a couple of things.
*  And the Palestinian guy would be like, our guy, or supportive of them,
*  would say, you know, you miss some stuff.
*  And I'd say, let me jump in.
*  First of all, I know what the Nakba is.
*  The Nakba is a catastrophe.
*  That's the day Israel was born.
*  You, you know, for the rest of the world's birth of Israel, for you, it's the Nakba.
*  I said, you've got members of your family that is still walking around
*  carrying keys to the front door of the house they abandoned.
*  And he'd be like, yeah.
*  And I'd say you feel bad that in point of fact, that in World War II,
*  the world stood back and watched while the Nazis threw the Jews off a building.
*  The only problem was they landed on you.
*  And they'd be like, yeah, that's where they're coming from.
*  So articulating, you know, deeply what the other side feels is transformative
*  for both people involved in the process.
*  What's the toughest negotiation you've ever been a part of or maybe observed or heard of?
*  What's a difficult case you just stands out to you?
*  Or maybe just one of many?
*  Well, the stuff we went through with Al-Qaeda in and around Iraq, Iraq and Saudi,
*  first one was in Saudi in 2004 timeframe.
*  The hardest part about that was working with family members
*  and not deceiving them about the possibility outcome.
*  Yeah. How do you talk to family members?
*  Is that part of the negotiation?
*  Yeah. Empathy, learning empathy the hard way.
*  And then being able to take it up to higher levels because at its base level,
*  a guy that we're working with now that's coaching us in US and is a business partner,
*  his name is Jonathan Smith.
*  He pointed out to us that there's kind of there's a shoe-harry concept.
*  Are you familiar shoe-harry? It's martial arts concept.
*  And shoe is do it exactly as the master is telling you to do it.
*  Wax on wax off, credit kid stuff.
*  A-ha is when you've done the repetition repetitions enough times,
*  you're getting a feel for it and you begin to see the same lessons coming from other masters.
*  You're seeing the same thing show up in other places.
*  And at the re-level, you're still in the discipline, but you're making up your own rules.
*  It's almost a flow state.
*  And you don't realize that you're making up your own rules.
*  And if somebody asks you where you learn that, you probably say,
*  I, you know, my my sensei taught it to me.
*  My master taught it to me.
*  This will come back around to negotiate with families pretty quick.
*  We did this once because there's a bunch of people that we coach,
*  business people that are scared of the amount of money that they're losing
*  if we're not coaching them regularly.
*  One of these guys, Michael, we're interviewing him for a social media posting about two years ago.
*  And Michael says, yeah, you know, you got to gather data with your eyes.
*  And I remember that and I went, I like that.
*  I said, where did you hear that before?
*  And he goes, you know, I don't know.
*  I heard it from you, I think.
*  And I was like, no, no, no, no, no.
*  I don't remember saying that.
*  Yeah.
*  For the first time I've heard that he's in re.
*  So what's this got to do with families?
*  Empathy at its base level in the shoe level.
*  I learned it on the suicide hotline is saying like you sound angry.
*  I'm just calling out the elephant in the room.
*  You your emotions, what's driving you?
*  I'm throwing a label on your affect and I'm saying you sound or it sounds like you are
*  because that's the basic karate kid wax on wax off approach.
*  Now, there are a lot of hostage negotiators that will tell you empathy doesn't work at home.
*  Not true.
*  They've never gotten out of shoe.
*  You're getting ready to talk to your significant other and you want to go someplace.
*  That you know, it's going to make her angry.
*  You want to go do something.
*  That's real negotiation right there.
*  You could say to her, you sound angry, in which case she's going to blow up because her reaction
*  is you made me angry, bozo.
*  How can you act like you're an innocent third party or that you were independent of how
*  I feel bad and you learn a little bit more and you say the high level is this probably
*  going to make you angry.
*  And then what I did with families.
*  I knew how they felt before I walked in the door.
*  I knew that they were scared to death.
*  You find out that your husband, your father, your brother has been grabbed by Al-Qaeda
*  who are in the business of chopping people's heads off.
*  You're going to be horrified.
*  I can't walk into them and go like you sound angry.
*  Of course I'm angry, you idiot.
*  But knowing what they are, I used to walk into family's houses.
*  And I'd say, I know you're angry.
*  Now, what are the circumstances dictate that they should also feel?
*  They're going to feel abandoned by their government.
*  They're going to feel totally alone.
*  They're going to be scared and they're going to be angry because they feel the government
*  abandoned them.
*  Now they're in point of fact, is this an accurate statement that their loved one voluntarily
*  went into a war zone and voluntarily went someplace their government told them not to
*  go?
*  Are the facts that the government abandoned them?
*  Absolutely not.
*  As a matter of fact, the government tried to get them to not go and they went anyway.
*  But that doesn't change how they felt in a moment.
*  And I'd walk into a house and I go, I know you're angry.
*  I know you feel abandoned and alone.
*  And I know you're horrified and I know you feel the United States government has abandoned
*  you.
*  And they would look at me and go like, yeah.
*  What do we do now?
*  Now we're ready to rock.
*  Is there with Al Qaeda or in general, is there a language barrier too?
*  It could be just barriers of different communication styles.
*  I mean, you got like a New Yorker way about it.
*  That might make somebody from like, I don't know, Laguna Beach uncomfortable.
*  Do you feel that language barrier in communication?
*  Is that language and communication style in itself creating a barrier?
*  You got a barrier when you think that your way is the way.
*  Sure.
*  That's the biggest barrier.
*  Yeah.
*  Like and that happens all the time.
*  When people talk about what about cross-cultural negotiations?
*  You know, what hand do I got to shake hands with?
*  So that I can get my way.
*  Well, if you strip it all down, we're all basically the same blank slate when we were born.
*  We got to everybody's got a limbic system.
*  Everybody's limbic system works pretty much the same way.
*  People are driven by the same sorts of decisions.
*  How does this affect my future?
*  What am I at risk of losing?
*  How does this affect my identity?
*  You know, kind of kidnapper, your New York City businessman, your tobacco farmer in the South.
*  All making those same same decisions based on those same things.
*  So as soon as I start to navigate that and I tailor my approach, which is what empathy is to what you think how you see things.
*  So I can be the biggest goofball ever from if you live in the South.
*  Yeah, maybe I'm in New York or I'm somebody from LA or somebody from Chicago.
*  But my geography is foreign to you.
*  But as soon as I start dialing in on how you see things, suddenly you're listening.
*  What about the three voices you talk about the different voices you can use in that communication?
*  Right.
*  The assertive voice, direct and honest.
*  I'm a natural born assertive.
*  Natural born.
*  I thought we're all blank slate.
*  Is your born?
*  Well, stop catching me on what I said.
*  How dare you throw, excuse me of what I've said.
*  To quote Bono, I stand accused of what I've said, the things I've said.
*  That's a good line.
*  He's got a few good lines.
*  Yeah.
*  So assertive voice, you're born that way.
*  Which one?
*  What are the other ones?
*  Analyst.
*  You're an analyst.
*  And I can tell you're assertive.
*  Yeah.
*  What's an analyst voice?
*  Well, an analyst is close to the smarter, more thoughtful.
*  No, as a matter of fact, look, you ever do a decision tree?
*  Yeah.
*  See you like it too, don't you?
*  So decision trees, you know, I'm a computer scientist.
*  So we have, I like mathematical systematic ways of seeing the world.
*  He's an analyst.
*  You think Donald Trump would ever say that?
*  Unlikely.
*  Well, is he more the assertive kind?
*  He's a natural born assertive.
*  Yeah.
*  Yeah.
*  Are all New Yorkers like this?
*  Is this somewhat something in the water?
*  No, that's the craziest thing.
*  I mean, there's an affect that a city can have.
*  Yeah.
*  And, you know, New York's Northeast, not just New York, but the Northeast
*  is a little more the affect of the area, of the culture of the area.
*  The individuals, individuals still boil down into the three types, cross aboard.
*  What's the third one?
*  Accommodator, smiling, optimistic, hopeful.
*  Yeah.
*  The, I'm a hundred, a thousand percent convinced that the phrase hope is
*  not a strategy is designed at people's frustration over a third of the
*  population being accommodators that are hope driven.
*  I hope this works out.
*  And they're very relationship.
*  They, on the surface, they're very relationship oriented.
*  They tend to appear to be very positive.
*  And they are, but it's really built around hope.
*  And the idea is you can adopt these three voices.
*  You can, yeah, you can learn them.
*  They're all learnable.
*  Analysts are often mistaken for accommodators because as you said
*  before, you know, analysts are more introspective, more analytical.
*  They're looking at the systems at work.
*  And if, um, if they like to learn, they notice that accommodators
*  make more deals than they make.
*  They also notice that there's a higher failure rate of the deals.
*  But since they notice stuff and they think about it, they catch on faster
*  than assertives do that the pleasant nature of an, of an accommodator
*  contributes strongly to them making deals.
*  Like my daughter-in-law is an analyst.
*  You know, another, another descriptor we have in that an analyst are
*  assassins, you know, an analyst will snipe you from a thousand yards
*  out in the middle of the night and you never know what hit you.
*  And they're really happy with that.
*  But, uh, has, how has assertiveness, the assertive voice
*  served you in negotiation?
*  Poorly.
*  That's the sort of voice is almost always counterproductive.
*  It feels like getting hit in the face with a brick and that's
*  almost always counterproductive.
*  So for me to be more effective, especially in a negotiation, I'll
*  need to slow, slow down and smile.
*  You know, I heard that, uh, Teddy Roosevelt was a good negotiator
*  and that he was extremely stubborn.
*  And perhaps the right term for that would be assertive, but he
*  picked his battles.
*  Is there some value to holding strong to principles?
*  So I don't even know if that's probably the opposite of empathy.
*  Are there times when you can just stick be extremely stubborn to
*  your principles to win a negotiation?
*  We do it all the time.
*  We just, you know, we're just nice about it.
*  Okay.
*  It helps to be nice.
*  You're saying, well, I think it helps to be nice.
*  Okay.
*  It helps to be nice.
*  You're saying, well, yes, because I need you to hear me and the
*  assertive tone of voice.
*  So when, when we do our training, typically we do an exercise
*  called 60 seconds or she dies and I play the bad guy bank robber
*  and I ask you to be the hostage negotiator.
*  And your job is to, I'll give you the four real world constraints.
*  And then you're going to try and negotiate me out of the bank.
*  Now we're doing this.
*  Now the first voice that I always use in that exercise is the
*  assertive voice, which is the commanding voice.
*  It's the voice that all police officers are taught to use in the
*  street issued loud and clear commands.
*  You know, it doesn't, it, to me, I don't feel like I'm attacking you.
*  I just feel like I'm being direct and honest and clear.
*  You on the other hand feel attacked.
*  Now we're doing this exercise in Austin a couple of years ago.
*  The first participant has an Apple watch on.
*  He tells us afterwards that sitting still, not even answering.
*  When he first gets hit in the face with the assertive voice, his
*  heart rate jumped to one 70, which is a typical fight or flight reaction.
*  I come at you like I'm fighting you.
*  Your, your fight flight mechanisms, all kick into gear, which clouds
*  your thinking you're automatically dumber in the moment.
*  So if I want to make a great long-term deal with you, highly profitable.
*  I'm agnostic to you being profitable.
*  Is it you'd be profitable?
*  That's fine.
*  I'm here to make money for me.
*  Me making you dumber will always hurt me.
*  Me making you feel attacked will always hurt me.
*  So there's never a value in being in you making me afraid.
*  There's never a long-term value in it.
*  That's, um, it's another thing that tall rise when we were writing a
*  book, brace me on, cause he said there's scientific data out there.
*  That's called strategic umbrage.
*  Cause he said there's scientific data out there that's called strategic
*  umbrage, well, there's data.
*  Well, whether or not it's scientific, I would call that into question, but
*  he said there's studies out there that show that strategic umbrage works.
*  And, uh, another thing that I also enjoy, uh, you probably get tired of
*  me saying wonderful things about Andrew.
*  He taught me.
*  There's never enough wonderful things to say about the great Andrew
*  Huberman, the host of the human lab podcast that everybody should subscribe to.
*  You should talk to Andrew.
*  You're funnier than he is though.
*  I'll give you that.
*  Hear that Andrew.
*  He's funny accidentally.
*  He makes me laugh all the time.
*  Not when he's trying to be funny.
*  He's a really, uh, he's one of the people in this world that's truly legit.
*  He's a really strong scientist and a really strong communicator and a good
*  human being and those, those together don't come often and it's nice to see.
*  Yeah.
*  He's a treasure national treasure.
*  Anyway, you were saying, well, he sort of taught me how to think about that
*  and studies and science and, and also from different books that he's turned
*  me onto is really helped me think about this stuff.
*  So the studies about strategic umbrage were done.
*  The ones that I've seen that show it's effective.
*  There were simulated negotiations with college students.
*  Now here's the problem with that.
*  A simulated negotiation with a college student, college students are going
*  to sit down as part of their assignment.
*  They're going to sit down one time.
*  They're going to sit down for 45 minutes and they're going to think that if they
*  didn't come to a deal at all that they failed and there's no ongoing implementation.
*  There's just a deal and then they walk away of a pretend situation.
*  So they got no actual real skin in the game.
*  There's no deal on earth.
*  Do you sit down and come to agreement 45 minutes and never see each other
*  again because there's the implementation of the deal.
*  If it, even if it's only payment.
*  So the data is flawed based on the way it was collected.
*  It's a highly flawed study and all data is flawed.
*  As you know, as a scientist, you just got to be aware what the flaws are and decide
*  whether or not that destroys the study or, or what do you think you take a look
*  at the data?
*  There's no such thing as perfect data.
*  Look at the data.
*  See what you think of it.
*  The data that says that strategic umbrage works is based on flawed circumstances.
*  Can you explain strategic umbrage?
*  Get mad, scaring the other side into a deal.
*  Getting mad at using anger strategically to bully the other side into an agreement.
*  That's nice to hear in some sense.
*  It's nice to hear that empathy is the right way in almost all situations.
*  It's night.
*  Best chance of success.
*  Not that it works every time, just it works more than anything else does.
*  What is the technique of mirroring?
*  There's a lot of cool stuff in your book.
*  There's just kind of jump around.
*  What's mirroring mirroring is is like it's it's it's one of the most fun skills
*  because it's the simplest to execute.
*  You just repeat one to three ish words of what somebody said.
*  Usually the last one to three words.
*  What I found about it is the people that really like mirroring love it because
*  it's so simple and so effortless and invisible.
*  They typically for lack of a better term tend to be both high IQ and high EQ.
*  Like I'm not a high IQ guy.
*  I'm an average dude.
*  I like to think that I can learn in EQ emotional intelligence is a skill you
*  can build and I'm always working on building it but a lot of really regular
*  average people we like mirroring that stupid.
*  I'm not doing that and I don't know why they don't like it.
*  But when I find somebody that loves to mirror, I'll always ask them, you know,
*  how'd you just go on IQ?
*  And typically their IQ is pretty high.
*  Now.
*  I don't know why that combination attracts people to mirroring because
*  there's nine skills eight from hostage negotiation and we then the ninth
*  really was tone of voice and we just define that as a skill and each one
*  is different and focuses on different components of the conversation.
*  And a lot of people don't like to mirror.
*  They found it so awkward.
*  Like I don't particularly I'm not particularly strong in mirroring.
*  I got to do it intentionally.
*  I'm good at labeling but this is almost always work.
*  Oh, yeah.
*  Yeah, it's it feels maybe awkward but there's it's true.
*  There's got to be ways to signal that you're truly listening.
*  That's part of I think you do body language.
*  You can yeah, there's a lot of ways to signal that but mirroring is
*  probably just this trivial little hack.
*  It kind of is.
*  You know, there's a situation I had a conversation with Stephen
*  Codkin.
*  He's this historian and he would say my name a lot throughout the conversation.
*  He'll be like we have to understand Lex is that and for some reason
*  that was making me feel really good.
*  I was like he cares about me and I wonder if that key if everyone
*  has that key that could be named just using people's name could be powerful
*  using the name is really context-driven.
*  It can be extremely powerful with someone who's genuine and it comes
*  across in their demeanor and it's used in a way that you can tell is
*  meant to encourage you.
*  Yeah, as opposed to explore you sure and the people that are really
*  into exploiting will also use it do the same thing.
*  So you have to be you have to avoid using the things that people that
*  are exploiters manipulators use because it's it might signal to others
*  that this person is trying to trick me.
*  It'll be very conscious of you.
*  What's labeling that you mentioned the thing you like, you know, I
*  said earlier that old progression from you sound angry to this is
*  probably going to make you angry to I know you're angry labeling is
*  hanging a label on an emotion or an affect and then just calling it up.
*  Is that almost always good?
*  Could it be a source of frustration when a person is being angry and
*  you kind of put a label on it?
*  Call out the elephant.
*  Is it possible that that will lead to escalation of that feeling
*  versus a resolution?
*  Well, the con what would make it bad like if I'm pointing out like
*  that blatantly obvious like if I say look I need you to get up and
*  go down to the bank and make the deposit.
*  Let's say I'm talking to my somebody works in my company.
*  I need you to get on the phone with this person and make the appointment
*  and they go sounds like you want me to talk to this person.
*  Yes, that would be annoying if it's just so absurdly obvious.
*  Yeah, that there's no insight in your label at all.
*  And as soon as you're demonstrating an awareness or a subtlety or
*  an insight either to you or to them.
*  Now we're making progress.
*  So the only time label could ever potentially be kind of productive
*  is like if you weren't actually listening and the label is indicates
*  that you're not listening, you know, I'm teaching USC and I'm teaching
*  labels and you know, one of the kids in a class he just wants to
*  take the skills and make his deals and just hustle him and he's
*  just looking for a hustle.
*  So he writes up a paper about you know, he goes there's some some
*  malls I think over by Palm Springs or someplace some outlet malls
*  a lot of people go to buy suits.
*  So he goes in there and he immediately starts the bargaining
*  that my book teaches with no empathy and he's like throws a price
*  to the guy and the guy's like no and he throws another price to the
*  guy and guy's like no and then then he says to the guy behind the
*  counter sounds like we can make a deal.
*  I know it doesn't I just shut down everything you just said if anything
*  it sounds like we're never going to make a deal.
*  Yeah, but he tried to use this label for manipulation.
*  Now the guy didn't get mad on the other side but it's like clearly
*  this dude is not listening to me and at the core of everything you
*  have a bunch of like, you know, almost like hacks like techniques
*  you can use but at the core of it is empathy at the core of his
*  empathy. Yeah, that's the main thing and be able to just sit
*  there and listen and perceive.
*  Yeah, look for insights.
*  You know what I like silence or like you're both sitting there
*  chilling with a drink looking up at the stars.
*  There's a moment.
*  The silence makes you kind of zoom out realize you're in this
*  together as opposed to playing a game.
*  I was some kind of like chess game of negotiation.
*  You're in it to get I don't know.
*  There's some intimacy to the silence and like if I I'll ask a
*  question.
*  And just let the other person sit there in silence before the
*  answer or the vice versa.
*  They asked me a question.
*  I sit there in silence.
*  That's a it's a big feels like a big intimate thing.
*  Yes, and the other two types until they've experienced that
*  or afraid of it.
*  And what I'm actually going to do is for whatever reason, I'm
*  really I'm really comfortable with silence.
*  I think because I've experienced its effectiveness and also my
*  son Brandon like he's a king of dynamic silence like he coaches
*  people.
*  He says you go silent count thousands to yourself.
*  Don't stop till you run out of numbers.
*  It's good line.
*  He's also good good for good lines is that is and so.
*  There's so much to it.
*  But the other two types are natural wiring against the white
*  until they've experienced it and you know, you got instant
*  instinct intuition is giving you data once you've experienced
*  it.
*  Yeah, but your amygdala is kicking into gear again.
*  Sorry.
*  I realized it's more complicated than that until you've
*  experienced it.
*  So a combinator is hope-based.
*  How do they signal fury the silent treatment?
*  Ah, so when you go silent, they're scared the death.
*  You're furious.
*  Yeah, because that's how they indicate it.
*  The assertive.
*  Thanks to use the analyst went silent because you wanted to
*  talk some more when a point of fact.
*  You're there.
*  You're thinking or and I love your description the feeling
*  of intimacy in silence and experiencing the moment.
*  So I'm actually going to factor that into trying to get the
*  comment is love shared intimacy.
*  They love would love to experience a moment and I can
*  see that being very compelling them be willing to cross that
*  chasm and experience silence and see how see how works for
*  him.
*  Yes, nerve-wracking, which is why it's intimate because you
*  start thinking what's the other person think we're actually
*  going to do this and we're going to sit here for 10 seconds
*  and go.
*  I mean, there's tricks to it.
*  I guess like Brandon says is to could just count it out and
*  realize through data that there's intimacy to it.
*  I had a friend of mine.
*  He lost his voice singing so he couldn't the doctor says he
*  can't talk for a week just to heal the voice.
*  Yeah, the vocal cords, but he he hung out with other people
*  with friends and didn't talk to them.
*  He just hung out and he said it was really intimate.
*  They both know they both didn't talk to each other.
*  They just sat there.
*  And you enjoy time together.
*  I don't know.
*  It's a wake-up call.
*  It's the thing to try maybe with with people in your life.
*  Just hang out and don't say anything like as an experiment.
*  Don't say anything the entire day, but it's Hank spent.
*  We're trying.
*  Yeah, definitely.
*  It's interesting.
*  I haven't tried it myself.
*  It seems it's kind of like a silent retreat but more active
*  as part of like regular everyday life.
*  Anyway, the is there other other interesting techniques
*  we can talk about here.
*  So for example, creating the illusion of control.
*  Yeah, it's principally, you know by asking what and how
*  questions because people love to tell others what to do
*  or how to do it.
*  It does a lot that was that was really the way when the book
*  was first written.
*  That we really thought about one how questions is given
*  the other side the illusion of control.
*  And there's a lot more to it than that that we've discovered.
*  I mean it triggers deep thinking it wears people down deep
*  thinking is could be exhausting and you want so what's the
*  what's the role of exhaustion and negotiation is that
*  ultimately what to be careful with that.
*  Some people exhaust intentionally.
*  One of my negotiation heroes a guy now who's unfortunately
*  suffering from dementia and Alzheimer's John Domenico
*  Pico is the UN hostage negotiators that got all the
*  Western hostages out of Beirut in the 80s.
*  And he wrote a book called man without a gun and I'm acquainted
*  with Johnny at this point in time.
*  I think I don't think he has any memory of who I am at all.
*  But he writes in his book one of the great secrets of
*  negotiations exhausting the other side political negotiations
*  that could be Johnny was very differential.
*  It was in the middle of in in the 80s leading up to about
*  1986 ish every negotiation involving warring parties in
*  the Middle East that you can imagine he was in Cyprus.
*  He was in Afghanistan Iraq and Iran the Iranian government
*  had tremendous trust in him as a Westerner a representative
*  of the UN got all the Westerners out of out of Beirut.
*  And he was just ridiculously patient.
*  And then which the other side found exhaust would often
*  find exhausting.
*  So exhaustion is a can't be a component of finding resolution
*  in negotiation.
*  If it's if it taps down the negative emotions often exhaustion
*  will tamp down negative emotions.
*  If a put you if it in getting the real trick is really getting
*  negative motions out of out of the way because you're
*  dumber in a negative frame of mind.
*  So the goals always positive emotion as you talk about that
*  way you're always chasing together.
*  I think I think so.
*  I think so.
*  And that's what the that's right.
*  It's about yes.
*  Like whatever you're triggering the whatever the chemistry
*  you're triggering your brain.
*  Like yeah, yeah, we're doing good here.
*  I think so long term for long-term success.
*  Absolutely.
*  How's the word fair used and the F-bomb the F-bomb as you
*  call it how's it used and abused in negotiation.
*  It's usually used it's most frequently used as a weapon.
*  It's abused as a point of manipulation.
*  It's what people say when they feel backed into a corner and
*  they can't come up with any legitimate reason as to why
*  they're being backed into a corner like nobody uses the
*  word F the F-bomb nobody uses the word fair when they've
*  got criteria to back them up.
*  So consequently when somebody start starts dropping out you
*  got to realize the other side's got no legitimate outside
*  criteria.
*  They're they're feeling very vulnerable.
*  They can't explain it, but they feel defensive and it saying
*  hey look, I've just I've given you a fair offer is a way for
*  me to knock you off your game.
*  If you're if you're not not aware of it.
*  So a lot of cutthroat negotiations negotiators are
*  going to use it on you to knock you off your game the the
*  NFL strike probably now it's been a good 10 years ago.
*  And maybe even longer than that.
*  One of this sticking points was the owners were not opening
*  their books to the players players want to see the numbers
*  and in order to not open their books.
*  They just sent a rep tell the press conference saying we've
*  given them players a fair offer.
*  Well, if it was fair you to open your books.
*  Yeah, if if you gave them a fair offer and it was justified
*  by what was in your books you'd open them to prove your point.
*  So what ends up happening though that was the owners gave
*  the players a fair offer starts to get picked up in the media
*  and then it starts getting repeated and now now that
*  different people on a player side are going like and maybe
*  they have given us a fair offer caused people to be insecure
*  about their own position.
*  It's an enormously powerful word that can be used and abused
*  and it almost always comes up in every negotiation.
*  It's shocking the number of times it comes up with people
*  who don't really understand how or why it's coming up.
*  So usually it's a signal of of a not a good place in
*  negotiation without question.
*  I'm completely convinced that if the person is using the
*  word as a means of getting what they want then either
*  accidentally on purpose either in their gut or they know
*  they got a bad position or their gut is afraid that they
*  are do I use the word what I'll say is I want you to feel
*  like I treated you fairly and if even any given point in time
*  you think I'm not treating you fairly.
*  I want you to stop me and we're going to address it.
*  Big ridiculous question, but how do you close the deal?
*  How do you take the negotiation to its end?
*  Is it implementation ultimately?
*  You got a pivot to agreed upon implementation to really
*  move out of the negotiation and I may say how do you want
*  to proceed?
*  And if you don't know I might say no more into question.
*  Is it a ridiculous idea if I share with you some ideas of
*  how to proceed?
*  And then you agree on the actual steps and that's the
*  implementation.
*  It's not just the philosophical agreement.
*  It's actual steps.
*  The big problem in all negotiations is a lack of discussion
*  of next steps.
*  It's deep.
*  Who is the best negotiator you've ever met?
*  Yeah, actually probably my son Brandon.
*  Yeah.
*  Yeah, he's ridiculously talented.
*  I mean he's ridiculously talented and he yeah, he's you
*  know, and what was it?
*  The coils book the culture the talent code says that, you
*  know, people just noticed it started getting good at it.
*  There's no such thing as a child prodigy.
*  He's just got interested when they were kid.
*  I mean Brandon started learning how to negotiate when he was
*  two years old and he's been in it and immersed in it, you
*  know, since he can make complete sentences even before
*  he can make complete sentences.
*  He's ridiculously talented.
*  What's what's his future?
*  What's he want to do?
*  He's going to he has been involved.
*  He's he run and built my company and now he's going to be
*  an affiliated licensee run his own operation.
*  He's pretty he's pretty much going to end up doing very
*  much.
*  It's going to open his entrepreneurial opportunities to
*  do whatever he wants and not have his dad say no and do a
*  better job than his dad.
*  Most likely.
*  Yeah.
*  Okay.
*  Do you see some of the techniques that you talk about
*  as manipulative?
*  Manipulation is whether or not I'm trying to explore you
*  hurt you.
*  Am I trying to manipulate a bank robber and to let me save
*  his life?
*  Yeah.
*  So manipulation is like what am I what am I trying to do to
*  you?
*  Yeah.
*  So but you don't see the negative connotation if you're
*  trying to bring a better future.
*  It's not manipulation.
*  Stop if I'm trying to bring a better future from being
*  genuine and honest like I compliment you.
*  Yeah, if my compliment is genuine.
*  That's not manipulation like better, but you know if I
*  think.
*  You know you're you got a pair of shoes that are the dumbest
*  looking things I've ever seen.
*  I go wow those great shoes.
*  Now that's manipulation.
*  So there's there's guys like Warren Buffett who are big on
*  integrity and honesty.
*  What's the role of?
*  Lying in effective.
*  Lying is a bad idea.
*  Lying is just a bad idea for a variety of reasons.
*  First of all, I think it's a bad idea.
*  First of all.
*  There's really good chance the other side is a better lie
*  than you are.
*  They're going to spot it right off the bat.
*  Yeah.
*  Secondly, they could be luring you into a trap to see if
*  you will lie.
*  Thirdly, the chances are they're going to find out that
*  you lied to him eventually is really high and then the
*  penalties and the taxes are going to be way higher than
*  what you had in the first place.
*  So long-term you want to have a reputation of somebody
*  with integrity and the more you lie the harder it is to
*  maintain that reputation.
*  Exactly and words going to get out.
*  Yeah.
*  So what's the we just returned that question.
*  What's the difference between a good conversation and
*  a good negotiation?
*  Can we because I think just reading your work listening
*  to you.
*  There's a sense I have that the thing we're doing now
*  and just conversation on podcasts and so on is
*  different than negotiation.
*  It feels like the purpose is different and yet having
*  some of the same awareness of the value of empathy is
*  extremely important, but it feels like the goals are
*  different or no really close fine line.
*  I mean, I you know, I ruled in here not having any
*  expectations not looking for anything other than
*  having an interesting conversation and to hear what
*  was behind the questions that you're asking me and
*  what interests you and then also your description of
*  silence and the power of silence something I'm going
*  to take away is a learning point and help learn to
*  teach others but in come in here.
*  I suppose the negotiation is when we're both aware of
*  a problem.
*  We're trying to solve right.
*  There's no problem in the room right just to solve
*  except maybe like the human condition and insight,
*  you know wisdom insight learn.
*  How do you train to become better negotiating?
*  In business in in life.
*  Yeah, just small-stakes practice for high-stakes
*  results.
*  I mean decide what what kind of negotiating resonates
*  with you.
*  I mean what's that mean small-stakes practice for
*  high-stakes or small-stakes the small little incremental
*  picking up girls at a bar.
*  What are we talking about?
*  Well, it can be for some people.
*  That's that's high-stakes practice.
*  Well, you know label labeling labeling mirrors.
*  What are the basic tools of great negotiation labeling
*  Miriam paraphrasing summarizing?
*  So you start you start labeling a mirror people that
*  you just have in regular interactions with just
*  to gain a feel for whether or not you can read
*  somebody's affect or how accurate your read is to
*  get better at it.
*  And so, you know label the the lift driver or the
*  grocery store clerk or person behind the airline
*  counter at the at the airport.
*  So putting a label on their affect or throwing
*  something at them that because negotiations a
*  parable perishable skill emotional intelligence is
*  perishable.
*  So seeing if you can indicate that you understand
*  our label one of my favorite labels to throw out
*  on somebody which you know, maybe re-level I might
*  look at somebody who looks distressed and I'll go
*  tough day.
*  So several years ago at the counter at LAX.
*  Well, I'm waiting the line to get to the counter
*  and a lady behind the counter is clearly making it
*  point to not meet my eyes so that I don't approach
*  and she looks and so like, you know, you know when
*  you're next in line and they're making sure that
*  you don't meet eyes and I'm thinking to myself.
*  All right, so they're having a bad day.
*  So I walk up and as soon as I approach the counter
*  I go tough day and she kind of snaps around and
*  she goes no, no, no, how can I help you?
*  It goes out of her way to help me.
*  Now I'm practicing but I also know it made her feel
*  better.
*  It relieves some of the stress.
*  So now I'm going to TSA want to look for people
*  having a tough day.
*  It's a good place to find a good place to find
*  and practice and I'm rolling through the line and
*  I realized I haven't tossed a label out on any one
*  of these guys and there's this guy watching the
*  bags come out of the x-ray machine.
*  He's just kind of got an indifferent look on his
*  face and I go tough day and he kind of goes I can
*  see from his body language like no.
*  And I go just another day, huh?
*  And he goes, yeah, just another day.
*  You know, he felt seen but I missed and I'm
*  practicing and I'm trying to stay sharp.
*  So these are the few words with just a few words.
*  You're trying to like quickly localize the affect
*  and live on it.
*  Very, very, very analytically said.
*  Thank you.
*  Not letting it go.
*  I love it.
*  Um, it does the same apply to just conversation
*  in general, just how to get better conversation.
*  I think a lot of people struggle.
*  They have insecurities.
*  They have anxiety about conversation.
*  I as funny as this to say, I have a lot of
*  anxiety about conversation is that it basically
*  do the same kind of practice practice.
*  Some of the techniques.
*  Yeah, genuinely.
*  Just trying to make sure you heard somebody out.
*  Yeah.
*  What's the best conversation you ever been in
*  except this one, of course.
*  Wow.
*  What?
*  What?
*  I mean, not the best conversation, but what
*  stands out to you as conversation that changed
*  you as a person maybe.
*  Well, there's probably been a lot of them along
*  the way.
*  I mean, but one that when that I remember on a
*  regular basis, there's actually there's two.
*  But when I was in the bureau, I'm at Quantico.
*  I'm there for an end services.
*  Another guy from New York, buddy, my name, Lionel.
*  And we're both trying to decide whether or not we
*  want to be trying to get into profiling or
*  negotiation because of both about human dynamics
*  and both of us really like human dynamics.
*  And we're sitting around talking about it and
*  we're talking about several things and any labels
*  me and I knew he didn't know what he was doing.
*  I think I think he was just he had picked it up
*  and I had been talking about my family quite a
*  few things.
*  And he said to me and I never said this directly
*  that we were close, but he said to me, it sounded
*  like your family's really close and I can
*  remember in a moment like this feeling just like
*  I felt great in the moment.
*  I mean what he said just drew together everything
*  that I'd been saying and nailed the essence of it.
*  And I have a very clear recollection of how good
*  that felt in a moment.
*  So a couple years later, I'm on a suicide highline
*  now.
*  I got this line the back of my head, you know,
*  line technique reaction read whatever you want
*  to call it guy calls in on a hotline and I could
*  tell the dude is rattled by his tone of voice.
*  I mean just just amped up and he goes, you know,
*  I just trying to put a little on the day.
*  I need I need you help putting a little on the
*  day.
*  I got I got to put a little on the day and I go
*  you sound.
*  Anxious.
*  And he goes he goes yeah and I and he came down
*  a little bit and he was a guy that was he was
*  telling me about he was battling the disease of
*  paranoia and he's going to go on a car trip with
*  his family the next day and he knew that on the
*  car trip he was going to you know twist himself
*  in the knots and so the night before he's
*  twisting himself in the knots.
*  He's laying out everything that he's done to try
*  to beat.
*  Paranoia and how much his family's helping him
*  and and he's going on a car trip with the family
*  because they're going to take him to see a doctor
*  and so I hit him with the same thing that my
*  buddy Lionel said I said sounds like your family's
*  close.
*  He goes yeah, we are close and he leveled out a
*  little bit more and then he started ticking off
*  all the things that he was doing to try to beat
*  paranoia and he sounded determined.
*  And so I said you sound determined and he goes
*  yeah, I am determined.
*  I'll be fine tomorrow.
*  Thanks.
*  And that was all I said so those two conversations
*  which are overlapping conversations those two
*  things really stick out of my mind.
*  Do those things like through all the different
*  negotiations and conversations you've had.
*  Do you do they kind of echo throughout like you
*  basically?
*  Because when you empathize with other human beings
*  you start to realize we're all the same.
*  And so you can start to pick little phrases here
*  and there you've heard from others little experiences
*  that were all about like we all want to be to be
*  close with other human beings.
*  We all want love the world.
*  I think we're all deeply lonely inside looking for
*  connection.
*  We're just if we're if we're honest about it.
*  We're just we're just we're just we're just we're
*  just if we're if we're honest about it.
*  And so all humans have that same all the same
*  different components of.
*  Or it makes them tick.
*  So you you kind of see yourself basically just
*  saying the same things to connect with another
*  human being.
*  Yeah, there aren't there aren't that many different
*  things that we're looking for understanding on
*  or connection on or satisfaction of they just
*  aren't that many of them regardless.
*  And so yeah, you got you're looking forward.
*  To manifest itself.
*  In some form another and you're willing to take a
*  guess on whether or not that's what you see in
*  or hear what advice would you give to me to be
*  better at these conversations?
*  To me and to other people that do kind of interviews
*  and podcasts and so on.
*  Wow.
*  That I really care about empathy is as well.
*  Is there kind of as a lifelong journey in this
*  process?
*  Yeah, well, I think I would advise you to take
*  that approach which is the approach you're taking
*  you care about it.
*  You're very curious about it.
*  You see it as a lifelong journey.
*  You're fascinated by it.
*  You enjoy learning about it.
*  And you definitely do see it as a lifelong journey
*  as opposed to this is what I can if I can acquire
*  this and I can manipulate people know.
*  I mean I I fall in love with people I talked to
*  there's a kind of deep connection and it lingers
*  with you, especially when I'm preparing.
*  The more material there is in a person the more
*  you get to fall in love with them ahead of time.
*  They think you get to really understand not
*  understand but
*  what I mean by fall in love is appreciate appreciate
*  but also become deeply curious.
*  That's what I mean by fall of like yeah, you
*  appreciate the things, you know, but you start to
*  see like Alice in Wonderland.
*  You start to see that there's all this cool stuff
*  you can learn if you keep interactive with them.
*  And then when you show up and you actually meet
*  you realize it's like more and more and more and
*  more it's like in physics the more you learn the
*  more you realize you don't know and it's like it's
*  really exciting and then it could also be heartbreaking
*  because you have to say goodbye.
*  Goodbye.
*  I hate goodbyes.
*  I hate goodbyes.
*  Same story, right?
*  Yeah, it makes it reminds me that I'm going to die
*  one day.
*  Like things and good things and it sucks, but then
*  it makes the the moment more delicious, you know
*  that you do get to spend together.
*  Yeah.
*  Okay.
*  I just want to completely forgot.
*  I want to ask you about this the 738 55% rule.
*  It's really interesting.
*  This is is there an all truth to it that 7% of a
*  message is conveyed from the words used 38% from
*  the tone of voice and 55% for body language.
*  Is that really true to that?
*  All right.
*  So Albert Moravian I think is the name of the UCLA
*  professor that originally proposed the 738 55 ratio
*  and discussed it in terms of that.
*  Wasn't the message but how much he called it liking
*  like are you not that you're the meaning is coming
*  across but you're liking of the message and so
*  that's been extrapolated heavily by people like me.
*  To this meaning of the meaning in 738 55 from liking
*  to the meaning.
*  What I've seen regularly is people that communicate
*  verbally if their speakers Tony Robbins 738 55 guy
*  he throws a ratio out there go.
*  That's it.
*  Exactly.
*  That's exactly how the message comes across.
*  This is how we got to balance it.
*  This is how we got to do it.
*  Those that communicate principally in writing.
*  The meaning of the words are much more important to
*  them.
*  So they're deeply uncomfortable with 7 being the
*  words because the content the words the meaning of
*  the words when you're writing it's so important that
*  you hate to poo poo it that way.
*  So I first of all a thousand percent believe it's
*  an accurate ratio, but the real critical issue is not
*  what the ratio of those three things are.
*  It's what's what's the message when they're out of
*  line.
*  Like what's the message when the tone of voice is
*  out of line with the words like it don't matter what
*  your ratio is you got a problem if their tone does
*  not match their words.
*  And that's that's hard to really put put a measure on
*  exactly even in writing.
*  There's a tone.
*  I mean, it's not just even in writing.
*  It's not just the words.
*  There's the words, but there's like a style underneath
*  the whole thing, right?
*  And there's something like body language the presentation
*  of the whole thing.
*  I mean there.
*  Yeah, I'm a big fan of constraint mediums of communication
*  which writing is or voice like Clubhouse.
*  There's a personality to human being when you just
*  hear their voice.
*  The there's it's not just you could say it's the tone
*  of voice, but there's a you can like what is it the
*  imagination fills in the rest like when I'm listening
*  to somebody I'm like I'm imagining some amorphous
*  being right doing things when they get angry.
*  I'm imagining anger.
*  I don't know what exactly I'm visualizing if you well
*  and so you may think of a funny story because we
*  were talking about your buddy Elon before yeah, and
*  I told you, you know about you know that I'd interacted
*  with some of the senior executives.
*  So I know that they that they that that they love
*  working with him and I think he's an interesting guy
*  and they realized that he could be funny and he
*  jokes around.
*  Yeah, so that they tell me during this conference
*  call just words and a guy on the other end of the
*  line says something, you know that wasn't wasn't
*  was wrong, but wasn't bad.
*  Yeah, and so they said they're on a phone and Elon
*  goes you're fired and then everybody in the room with
*  them can see that he's joking.
*  Yeah, but the person on the other side and they're
*  all going away.
*  Wait, wait, wait, wait.
*  They can't see your look on your face right now.
*  You got to stop you got to stop because the guy on
*  the other side is dying right now.
*  He doesn't realize you're joking.
*  So there was you know, there were the words and the
*  tone of voice and but it lacked the visual to go
*  with it.
*  Nevertheless, it's probably funny.
*  I'm sure it was very funny.
*  Maybe not to him.
*  Just as a interesting task.
*  I don't know if you're following along the
*  developments of large language models.
*  There's been something called Chad GPT.
*  There's just more.
*  More and more sophisticated and effective and
*  impressive chat bots essentially they can they
*  can talk and they're becoming more and more
*  human like right.
*  Do you think it's possible in the future that AI
*  will be able to be better negotiators?
*  And humans do you think about that kind of stuff?
*  Well, so definition of better or versus less
*  flawed like they're you know, the chat bots have
*  been out there for a long time and probably about
*  five years ago now.
*  Company approached us because they were doing a
*  negotiation chat bot.
*  And they said two things first.
*  First of all, I said, you know, why are you
*  talking to us?
*  So well in point of fact, we're already
*  spoke to the people that are teaching quote the
*  Harvard methodology and you know, the rational
*  approach to negotiation just doesn't work.
*  Rational approach just does not work.
*  It's our chat bots are not getting anywhere.
*  But we're showing in in around about 80% of the
*  interactions.
*  A higher success outcome with these chat bots and
*  they showed me what they were doing and it was
*  still a lot deeply flawed emotional intelligence
*  wise.
*  But the reason why that they were having higher
*  success rates is the chat bots were never in a
*  bad mood.
*  And you could reach out for chat box in the middle
*  of the night.
*  So if you're talking to somebody that was never
*  upset and was always available, then you're going
*  to have a higher success rate negotiations go bad
*  when people are in a negative frame of mind.
*  So the pot then the natural ability of a chat bot
*  to be positive is just going to give you a
*  higher success rate.
*  Yeah.
*  And and then they're not going to get mad and
*  argue with you.
*  You know, you say you say to a chat bot, you know,
*  your price is too high chat bot is designed to
*  come back with a smiley face.
*  Yeah, you say to a person your price is too high
*  to go.
*  How dare you?
*  I'm trying to make a living, you know, they go
*  off the deep end.
*  Unfortunately, or fortunately, I think the way
*  chat bots are going now they will come back
*  negative because they're becoming more human more
*  and more human like that's the whole point to be
*  able to pass the towing test.
*  You have to be negative.
*  You have to be an asshole.
*  You have to have boundaries.
*  You have to be insecure.
*  You have to have some uncertainty.
*  Well, it's them between being having boundaries
*  and being negative.
*  Like I can you throw a proposal to me.
*  You know, before I say no, I'm going to say look,
*  I'm sorry.
*  That just doesn't work for me.
*  I'm going to set up a real clear boundary without
*  being negative.
*  Sure.
*  So then a lot of people really struggle with
*  setting boundaries without being negative without
*  name-calling without indignation without getting upset.
*  But see there's a when you are when you show that
*  you're not getting upset.
*  I'm not just seeing that I'm see the flaw.
*  I'm seeing a flawed human that has underneath it
*  temper underneath it the ability to get upset,
*  but chooses not to get upset and a chatbot has to
*  demonstrate that so it's not just going to be cold
*  and and you know be this kind of corporate blank
*  empty sort of like vapid creature that just says
*  oh, thank you.
*  Thank you for saying that.
*  No, it's basically you have to be the chatbot has
*  to be able to be mean and choose not to be interesting.
*  I don't know.
*  Maybe I'd be I'd be willing to to see that play out
*  and see how see how it plays out.
*  But I guess what I'm saying is to be a good negotiator.
*  You have to be have the capacity to be a bad person
*  and choose not really I think so.
*  See, I think you just got to have the capacity to
*  set a boundary and stick to it.
*  Interesting I because I think it's hard for me to
*  trust the person who's not aware of their own demons.
*  Because if you say you don't have any demons if you
*  don't have any flaws, I can't trust you.
*  Yeah, well, it's first of all, it's a lie, right?
*  So somebody's lunch, right?
*  This is gives back the line.
*  Yes.
*  So you have to have a self-awareness about that.
*  But he'd be able to control it demonstrate the able to
*  control it.
*  I mean, this is humans.
*  I just think humans intelligent effective humans
*  are able to do this.
*  Well and chatbots are not yet and they're moving that
*  direction.
*  So it makes me think about what is actually required
*  for effective negotiation.
*  That's what AI systems do is they make you ask yourself
*  what is it that makes humans special any discipline?
*  What is it that makes humans special at chess and go
*  games which AI systems are able to beat humans at now?
*  What is it that makes them effective at negotiation?
*  What does it make them effective at?
*  Something that's extremely difficult, which is navigating
*  physical spaces.
*  So doing things that we take for granted and like making
*  yourself a cup of coffee is exceptionally difficult problem
*  for robots.
*  Yeah, because of all the complexities involved in
*  navigating physical reality.
*  We have so much common sense reasoning built in just about
*  how gravity works about how objects move the what kind of
*  objects there are in the world.
*  It's a it's it's really difficult to describe because it
*  all seems so damn trivial, but it's not trivial right because
*  a lot of that we just learn as babies.
*  We keep running into things and we'll learn about that.
*  So AI systems help us understand what is it that makes
*  humans release?
*  What is the wisdom we have in our heads and negotiation to
*  me is super interesting because negotiation is not it's
*  about business.
*  It's about geopolitics.
*  It's about running government is basically negotiating.
*  How do we have the different policies different bills and
*  programs and so on?
*  How do we allocate money?
*  How do we reallocate resources all that kind of stuff that
*  seems like AI in the future could be better at that.
*  But maybe not maybe you have to be a messy weird insecure
*  uncertain human and debate each other and yell at each other
*  on Twitter.
*  Maybe you have to have the red and the blue teams.
*  They yell at each other in in the process of figuring out
*  what is true.
*  Maybe I systems will not be able to do that.
*  I figure out the full mess of human of human civilization.
*  Yeah, interesting.
*  Well, I mean the two thoughts that I had along the way was
*  I mean is it any time you're talking about systems or
*  scaling?
*  You know, yeah, you're talking my belief is chat bot systems
*  things that don't require decision-making just following
*  the instructions.
*  At least 80% of what's going on now the remaining percentage
*  whatever it is does it does it require the human interaction
*  and what's required like I'm not I'm not I'm not like I am
*  not pro-conflict and I also know that there's a case to be
*  made in the creative world that some of the best thinking
*  came out of conflict.
*  I'm reading interviews of Bono you to you know, their
*  admiration for some of the Beatles best music came when
*  they were fighting with each other and the song one octoon
*  but which is I believe from the album Octoom Baby those guys
*  were fighting.
*  I mean they were on a verge of breaking up and their appreciation
*  the conflict could create something beautiful.
*  And then when I was in a crisis negotiation unit, you know my
*  last seven years in the FBI.
*  There was a guy that name Vince Bryant dude, Brent bring
*  negotiator and he and I used to argue all the time.
*  And then when we had a change in the guy who was in charge.
*  The guy was in charge took me off to the side.
*  He's like, you know, I can't take you and Vince fighting
*  all the time.
*  And I said, well, I got news for you.
*  I think we come up with much better stuff as a result of
*  our battles and he said, you know Vince said the same thing
*  to me.
*  And I like so if we don't have a problem fighting why do you
*  have a problem?
*  But you know something there is there is something there that
*  sometimes the most difficult insights you rack your brains
*  as to why someone is so dug in on something that so you think
*  is so wrong.
*  Yeah, maybe there's something to it.
*  I think there's something to it.
*  There's something about conflict even drama that might
*  be a feature not a bug of our society.
*  I had to think do you think there will always be war in
*  the world?
*  Yeah.
*  So there will always be a need for negotiators and negotiating
*  well as it turns out.
*  Why do you think there will always be war is it what's your
*  intuition about human nature there?
*  Yeah, just because we're basically 75% negative and then
*  for lack of a better term I call it two lines of code like
*  somewhere when you everybody when we were little somebody
*  planted in two lines into our head.
*  We don't know when it got in there.
*  But somebody said something to us it stuck and there are a lot
*  of people that had some really negative garbage dumped in
*  their brain when they were little and just based on the
*  numbers.
*  What kind of opportunity they were given afterwards did they
*  ever have an epiphany moment when they genuinely believe
*  they can get get themselves out of it.
*  Like what is it?
*  One of Joe dispenses book is breaking the habit of being
*  yourself.
*  Yeah, you know like how do you get it that two lines of code
*  that that that either mean or well intentioned but stupidly
*  speaking adults said to you at the wrong moment and planted
*  in your brain like hot the chances of everybody on Earth
*  getting out of getting that out even the majority of people
*  on Earth getting that out of their heads is is really small.
*  What advice would you give to a young person today about how
*  to have a career that could be proud of or a life maybe
*  somebody in high school college trying to figure out their
*  way in this world.
*  It's probably a take on a cliche of do what you love but
*  if you if you figure out your ideals and pursue your ideals
*  and stick to them.
*  When it costs you like a guy admire very much Michael
*  Mowgill runs this or operation crisp video in Atlanta and
*  one of his talks he was said core values are what you stick
*  to that cost you money.
*  It's not a value that really matters to you unless it's
*  costing you.
*  And stick to your values now when I was in the FBI I worked
*  really hard at you know the number one core mission of the
*  FBI is protect and defend the American people.
*  So I could pursue that value at all times which I did or
*  I could follow the rules.
*  You don't have time to do both.
*  When did you know you you found what you love?
*  When did you fall in love with whatever this process is that
*  is negotiating.
*  I think it was in a conversation on the suicide hotline
*  that I was telling you about earlier with the guy who was
*  paranoid when I thought I can have that significant of an
*  impact on another human being in the same way that I was
*  human being in this short of a period of time.
*  That's really cool.
*  How hard is it to talk somebody off the ledge?
*  So this question is a big question.
*  Why why the hell live at all?
*  How do you have that kind of deeply philosophical deeply
*  psychological and also practical conversation with
*  somebody and convince them that they should stick around?
*  Well, it's more clearing clearing the clutter in their
*  head and let them make up their own mind.
*  That was what volunteering on Suicide Island was really
*  about.
*  Just let me help.
*  Let me let me see how quickly I can clear out the clutter in
*  your head.
*  If you're willing to have it cleared out.
*  Like I did.
*  Did you call here because you're actually looking for out
*  or did you call here to fulfill some other?
*  Agenda.
*  So are you you know, are you are you willing to have are
*  you willing to clear the clutter in your head?
*  Not everybody is so once you clear the clutter as it is
*  at least somewhat hopeful chance that you'll you'll
*  continue for another day.
*  Yeah, and and like if you step back like very few people
*  that commit suicide.
*  Physically are up against it that hard.
*  Like most of them by and large are pretty intact physically
*  human beings.
*  They're struggling with emotional stuff.
*  But that it's an it's an emotional issue.
*  It's not a physical issue.
*  So if you would be a complete mercenary like I got him
*  a very big fan of guy named Mark Pollock.
*  Born great athlete lost his eyesight and then became
*  paralyzed.
*  Like he's an emotional
*  leader.
*  He's about helping people thrive and live great lives.
*  Like Mark was born.
*  He was a spectacular athlete.
*  And first he lost his sight in one eye.
*  Then he lost his sight in the other eye and then he fell
*  out a window in a tragic experience like if there was
*  ever a dude that was saying like living sucks.
*  You know, and if there's any doubt in my mind something
*  worse happens to me every few years, but marks about being
*  alive and inspiring other people.
*  So the hard part with navigate with somebody who's tossing
*  it in because they there is a chemical imbalance or they're
*  it's the way they're interpreting the world.
*  There's clutter in their head.
*  Like how can you how can you help clear that clutter in
*  their head and help them by themselves inspire them to
*  reinterpret that world?
*  Yeah, as one worth living in.
*  Yeah.
*  What do you think is the meaning of life?
*  Why was lost?
*  Why live?
*  What's what's the why?
*  What's what's the good reason?
*  Well, I have I have I have very strong religious beliefs.
*  Spiritual, you know, I don't a thousand percent if you were
*  to try to confine me in a box.
*  I'd be a Christian.
*  I have tremendous respect for the Jewish.
*  I don't think any religions got it nailed exactly.
*  I'm again, you know, I keep mentioning them.
*  I'm kind of a Bono Christian.
*  I think Bono's lazy like what?
*  And I'm going to butcher but you know, my belief in Jesus
*  is what I've got after Christianity leaves a room, you
*  know, the dogma man's application of spiritual beliefs.
*  So but that being said, I truly believe that my life was a
*  gift and there's there's a purpose here and you know, for
*  my creator decided that I woke up in the morning because he
*  still had some cool interesting things for me to do.
*  And you have gratitude for having the opportunity to live
*  that day.
*  Yeah.
*  Well, you do one heck of a good job at living those days.
*  I really appreciate your work.
*  I appreciate the person you are.
*  Thank you for just everything you've done today for just
*  being empathic.
*  Honestly, you're a great listener.
*  You're great conversationalist.
*  It's just an honor to meet you and to talk to you.
*  This was really awesome Chris pleasure.
*  Thanks for listening to this conversation with Chris Voss to
*  support this podcast.
*  Please check out our sponsors in the description and now let
*  me leave you some words from John F Kennedy.
*  Let us never negotiate out of fear, but let us never fear to
*  negotiate.
*  Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
