---
Date Generated: April 09, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 8266s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'antarctica', 'artificial intelligence', 'artificial intelligence podcast', 'creator', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex podcast', 'mit ai', 'mrbeast', 'social media', 'tiktok', 'twitter', 'video production', 'youtube']
Video Views: 4875234
Video Rating: None
---

# MrBeast: Future of YouTube, Twitter, TikTok, and Instagram | Lex Fridman Podcast #351
**Lex Fridman:** [January 11, 2023](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z3_PwvvfxIU)
*  I'm here with Mr. Beast, the brilliant mastermind behind some of the most popular videos ever created.
*  Do you think you'll ever make a video that gets one billion views?
*  I think maybe one of the videos we've already made might get a billion views.
*  Which one do you think?
*  Probably like the squid game video with enough time. I mean, it's only a year old and it's already on
*  300 million or some of the newer ones we've done have gotten like 100 million views in a month.
*  So those four projected over 10 years because YouTube's not going anywhere. Probably one of those.
*  So over time they don't necessarily plateau.
*  What's interesting, we're literally jumping right in. I love it. It's good.
*  So I'm a firm believer that it's much easier to hypothetically get 10 million views on one video
*  than 100,000 on 100. And part of why it's much easier in my opinion is like if you make a really
*  good video, it's just so evergreen and it never dies. Because YouTube, when you open up YouTube
*  and look at the videos, they're just serving you whatever they think you'll like the best,
*  and so if you just make a great video and it's constantly just above every other video,
*  even two years down the road, then they'll just keep serving it and never stop.
*  Which is why it's much easier to make one great video than a bunch of mediocre ones.
*  What about one billion subscribers? You've passed PewDiePie's most subscribed to YouTube channel.
*  When do you think you get a billion?
*  Let me do some math real quick. So we're on 120.
*  So you think about this.
*  No, I don't, honestly. Because one thing you'll find if you want to gain subscribers,
*  if you want to get views, if you want to make money, almost any metric in this video creation
*  space, if you want something, it all comes back to, okay, well then just make great videos.
*  So instead of focusing on all these arbitrary vanity metrics, I just kind of focus on the one
*  thing that gets me all that, which is make good videos. And I do think we will one day hit a
*  billion subscribers. I don't have a plan on going anywhere. Even though we're only on 120 million
*  right now on the main channel. I think we're doing around 10 million a month now and YouTube
*  just, yeah, I just don't see it going anywhere. And I don't see any reason why I'd ever get
*  burnt out or quit. So I think with enough time, yes.
*  I wanted to ask you those family friendly questions before I go to the dark questions.
*  So now-
*  We have dark questions. But if you wanted to hook them, you would start off with the dark
*  questions. That's how you get them.
*  Okay. Well, let me ask you about a Twitter poll you posted, a $10,000 death poll. You tweeted,
*  if someone offered you $10,000, but if you take it, a random person on earth dies,
*  would you take the $10,000? And 45% of people said yes. That's at least at the time I checked
*  850,000 people committing murder for just $8.5 billion in total. So what do you learn
*  about human nature from that?
*  That's a good question. Honestly, this is like late at night when I threw that up too. I was
*  just like, huh, this will be a funny thing. I assumed it'd be 90% no and like 10% yes.
*  But there are a lot of serious people. For you guys listening, I just did this random Twitter
*  poll. I was like, would you take 10 grand if it meant someone random in the world died? And a lot
*  of the replies on the tweet were like, hell yeah, why not? And I was just not expecting that.
*  And so I don't really know. I mean, I feel like your take would be better than mine.
*  Was it disturbing to you, surprising to you?
*  A little bit, yeah. But obviously a lot of people were trolling, but I actually,
*  you read through those replies, I do think like 10% of them were like dead serious.
*  Well, I think sometimes the trolling and the lulls reveal a thing we're too embarrassed to
*  admit about the darker aspects of our nature. So I don't know if you listen to Dan Carlin's
*  Hardcore History podcast. He has an episode on painful tainment, which he describes throughout
*  history, how humans have been really attracted to watching the suffering of others. So public
*  executions, all that kind of stuff. And he believes that's in all of us. That for example,
*  if something like a YouTube or a different platform streamed a public execution or streamed the
*  torture of another human being, a lot of people would say that's deeply unethical, but they will
*  still tune in and watch. And that we're attracted to that drama, and especially the most extreme
*  versions of that drama. And so I think part of the lulls reveal something that's actually true
*  in that poll. Your answer is so much better than mine. Do you think about that, maybe even with
*  the squid game? So I think, how many views does the squid game currently have? 300 million? Yeah.
*  Something like this. So just imagine, thought experiment, how many views that video would get
*  if it was real? Yeah, assuming YouTube was like, we'll turn a blind eye, we won't take it down.
*  Yeah, I mean, obviously it'd probably have billions of views. How do you think you'll die?
*  And do you think it'll be during a video? Probably doing something dumb like going to space when I'm
*  older, trying to go to Mars or something like that. I know for a fact it won't be on a video.
*  Every video we do, we'd safety experts and stuff like that. So it's not really risk, but
*  I could see myself after a million people go to Mars or something like that, I'd probably be like,
*  let's go. And something like that, maybe. So not in the name of a video, just for the holiday? No.
*  Heck no. Are you open to taking risks when you shoot videos? You just went to Antarctica. I mean,
*  you're putting yourself in the line a little bit, right? Of course. But we've had that video in the
*  works for three years and then we consult with tons of experts, radar the entire path, we're
*  going to walk beforehand to see if there's crevasses. So we know there's no crevasses,
*  we do training, we consult with experts and we have survival guides there with us and monitor
*  the weather and everything. So it's like any variable where we could get harmed,
*  we just pre-plan for it. Same thing with buried alive. David Blaine spent a week underground.
*  And so I consulted with him and consulted with basically anyone who ever buried themselves alive.
*  You know, the coffin we used to bury me, we did so many tests. That coffin was buried 10 times
*  before I was, you know, for way longer than 50 hours. It tested the airflow and everything,
*  to the point where I was safer in that coffin underground than I was above ground. So we just
*  tend to just not leave anything up to chance, you know. Another strange question then. So you
*  recorded these videos to yourself, you know, five years, 10 years from now. Have you recorded a
*  video that's to be released once you die? Well, first off, I am just glad that not every one of
*  your questions have to do with like views or things like that. It's nice getting different
*  questions. So this is good. No, seriously. It's a little dark. No, but it's fine because a lot of
*  people just be like, how much money do you make? You know, it's just something I just, everything's
*  always about money now for when people talk to me. So it's nice. But for the videos I made,
*  for you guys who probably don't follow me too closely, when I had 8,000 subscribers and I was
*  a teenager, I filmed a bunch of videos and scheduled them years in the future. And I said,
*  I filmed one where I was like, hi me in a year. And the video went up a year later and it was
*  like, hey, I think you'll have 100,000 subscribers. And then I did one where I was like, hi me in five
*  years. I was like, hey, in five years, I think you'll have a million. And then one that hasn't
*  come out yet, but comes out in two years, was hi me in 10 years. And I tried to predict 10 years
*  later how many subs I'd have. That's what he's referring to. And yes, there are some that are
*  scheduled like 20 years in the future. And so if I don't die, I'll just move them up. And I remember,
*  because I filmed these though like seven years ago, but it was, I remember saying a line like,
*  you know, if I'm dead, then I'm currently just in a coffin and like, whatever, blah, blah, blah.
*  Because the only way the video would go up is if I'm not alive. And if I'm not alive,
*  then I won't be able to push back the schedule upload date. So it will go public automatically.
*  And so yeah, I have a couple of those. Like if I knew I was going to die of like cancer or something,
*  and I had like three months to live, I would vlog every day. I filmed so many videos. And then I
*  would just schedule upload a video a week for like the next five years. So it's like, I'm still alive
*  and I would completely act like I'm still alive and everything. And I think something like that
*  would be cool. I don't know why, but I've fantasized about not fantasized, but I've
*  dreamt about that a lot. Like, I don't know, if I only had 30 days to live, what would I do?
*  And for me, I would try to make like a decade's worth of content and schedule upload it. So they
*  automatically go public in the future. And so it's just like, I never died. I'm just there.
*  Yeah, it's a kind of immortality, but it's also kind of troll on the concept of time. Yeah,
*  you can die in the physical space, but persist in the digital space. I actually, I recorded a video
*  like that because I had some concerns and I just thought it's also a good exercise to do a video
*  with like to be released if I die. And it was actually a really interesting exercise. It's cool.
*  Like it shows like what you really care about. I guess it's like writing a will. Well, when you're
*  younger, you don't think about that kind of stuff. But exactly. Mine was just dumb. Yeah. I'm bones
*  in a coffin. Yeah. Yours was probably so serious. No, it's fun. Actually, what you realize is like,
*  there's no point to be serious at this point. It's a weird thing. I guess you've done this,
*  but it's a weird thing to address the world when you, the physical use no longer there. So like,
*  you know, this would only be released if you're no longer there. Exactly. That's a weird exercise.
*  You know, it's funny of all the people listening to this, you know, we're probably the only two
*  people that have made videos for when we die. It's like such a niche thing. And the fact that
*  we're bonding over, it's kind of funny. I think people should think about doing that. It's not
*  just about YouTube. It's also social media. Just think about it. Like there's going to be a last
*  tweet and the last, I don't know, Facebook posts, the last Instagram post. And yeah, I feel like
*  there's some aspect that's meditative to just even considering making a post like that. And also it's
*  a way for your, the people that love you to kind of like celebrate. Do you think that would help
*  them cope or not? Like if someone randomly watching this did film a video, you know, for if they
*  accidentally died in some freak accident to be given to their family, do you think that would,
*  and it was like a genuine, I think it would really help. I mean, it depends because like,
*  how would you even intro that? Like, Hey mom, if you're seeing this, you know, it means I'm
*  probably dead. Yeah, exactly. That's how you intro it. That's the opener. I just wanted you to know.
*  Yeah, I guess. Yeah. And I guess you could say it in a kind of funny way, but, and just talk about
*  the things that mean a lot to you. Cause otherwise you're at the risk of the last post you have is
*  like, like, I don't know, talking shit about McDonald's. And then you're dead. That's it.
*  A hundred years. I don't know. This I do recommend it's, it's like the Stoics meditate on death every
*  day in the same way you kind of meditate on your death when you make a video like that.
*  Cause it's actually not just even talking to yourself. It's talking to the world. And it like,
*  for some reason, at least for me, they made it very concrete that there's going to be an end.
*  And I'm like, it's almost, it's over for me. If I'm making the video, it's over for me. It's
*  just an interesting thought experiment. I recommend people try it. Okay. Are you afraid of death by
*  the way? Yes. I, I, it's hard because like, what if you just die and then you just see nothing
*  forever? You know, it just fades to blackness and you're just like that for trillions upon trillions
*  to billion squared years. And it's just, it's scary. But also before you're born,
*  you don't remember those X amount of years either. So that gives me a little comfort,
*  but it's definitely very scary. Something I'd rather not think about until I'm like 80. I'll
*  deal with that problem then. I don't know if I told you this, but I'm kind of hopeful that
*  someone like Elon or one of these like freak smart people will just like be like, you know what,
*  screw it. I'm going to figure out a way where we can slow down aging, get it where, you know,
*  we can live to be two, 300 years old and just like set their sights on that and then just kind
*  of save us. So it'd be really nice. Like it's, it's almost absurd to think that in our lifetime,
*  they won't figure out a way to just even slightly slow down aging where we could live to be like 120,
*  130. And then in that extra time, they won't figure out somewhere where we could live to be 200. Like
*  obviously not immortal, but I don't, I don't see how in my lifetime, the life expectancy doesn't
*  just expand. Well, it also could be that the immortality is achieved in the digital realm,
*  like it could be long, long after you're gone as a Mr. Beast run by Chad GPT type system.
*  Exactly. Yeah. That consumes everything I ever said, everything I ever wrote and I don't want
*  that. I want to live. What are you smart people out there? Figure it out. I'll keep you entertained,
*  but I need you to figure out how to keep me alive. Give me until 200. That will make me happy.
*  Well, that's, that's funny. Who owns the identity of, of Mr. Beast once the physical body is gone,
*  like, is it illegal to create another Mr. Beast that's Chad GPT based? I don't know what the laws
*  are around that. Yeah. Like once I'm done, I don't care. Well, you just said you did care. I mean,
*  there could be a AI, like many Mr. Beasts that are created after you're, after you're gone.
*  Yeah. I mean, that'd be cool to be able to like train up a model and, and let them loose. So my
*  content lives on, I guess. Yeah. Yeah. But it somehow feels like it diminishes the value you
*  contribute. Yeah. Yeah. It's an inauthentic, but it's also, there's, there's some aspect to the
*  finiteness of the art being necessary for its greatness. Yeah. The second that thing starts
*  spamming out videos, the videos lose all meaning and it's pointless. It's a money grab.
*  If you were on YouTube for, how long did you run it? For a year. How would you change it? How would
*  you improve it? It's hard because, you know, obviously I'm biased because we're doing really
*  well, but I feel like when I open up YouTube on my television, I get the videos I want to watch.
*  I don't, I don't know. I don't, I don't ever open it and wonder like, what are these? What are these
*  10 videos on my homepage? When I click on a video, I'm like, I don't ever wonder what these are. Like,
*  I, I, and maybe it's cause I'm very adamant about like the kind of videos I watch and I try not to
*  watch videos that I don't want to get recommended more because I just, that's how I think. But
*  I'm very happy with how it is at the moment. I think one thing though, that I just hate with
*  the passion is the comment section on YouTube. It's just so bad. But that, I know that's not
*  something that's going to 10x the growth of the platform, but if you think about it, you go to
*  Reddit to read comments and somehow like the, you know, usually the top 20 posts on a popular
*  Reddit post are not spam. You know what I mean? Like, have you ever clicked on something on the
*  front page of Reddit and then most of voted reply to it is like, go check out my site right here.
*  And it's like trying to scam you out of a thousand dollars. Yeah. I can't even think of one instance
*  I've ever had that happen. So like Reddit, it's so nice to click on posts and just see what people
*  have to say. And I almost wish like you had that same feeling when you read the comments on a
*  YouTube video. Instead it's like, it's so many people just copy and pasting so many bots that
*  just grabbed the top comment for your previous video and pasted over. So the top comments on
*  every videos are the same. And the things that break through that are just scammers trying to
*  get you to give them a thousand dollars for a free, you know, fake ad. That comment section is one of
*  the most lively on the internet. So it'd be amazing if YouTube invested in creating an actual
*  community, like where people could do high effort comments and be rewarded for it. Like on Reddit.
*  Yeah. Like actually right out of long. That would make me so happy. Cause like when I upload a video,
*  I usually go to Twitter to see feedback. Like I read my comments and I'll flip through newest,
*  but it's just, I feel like Reddit and Twitter just give me so much better filtered feedback,
*  especially now that with Twitter blue, because people pay $8 a month. I've noticed like any
*  tweets I get from verified users now, they're usually not just garbage troll takes. Like these
*  are people paying $8 a month. Like they're usually relatively sensible. And so it's been pretty nice.
*  Like after I upload a video, I just go on the verified tab on Twitter and just see what people
*  have to say. And anyways, I live for the day that YouTube's like that. What do you think about
*  Twitter? What do you think about all the fun activity happening recently since Elon bought
*  Twitter? I think he should make me CEO. Like I tweeted.
*  Well, I should say sort of we had, we just like a couple hours ago had a conversation with Elon and
*  you guys sent an exchange of some excellent ideas. So yeah, I legitimately think obviously you're
*  exceptionally busy, but I legitimately think it would be awesome if you somehow participate
*  in the future of Twitter. Yeah, it would be fun. Cause there's so much possibility of different
*  ideas. First in the sort of the content, like dissemination, hosting, and all the different
*  recommendations, like the search and discovery, all the things that YouTube does well.
*  I think the most exciting thing is he's willing to move fast. And so I think there's going to be a
*  lot of interesting things that come out of it because he's just moving quick and a lot of these
*  more mature platforms just take years to do the simplest stuff and they're very bureaucratic. And
*  so it's gonna, I mean, it'll be interesting to see which way it goes when you just kind of take a
*  move quick, break things, whatever type approach to social media. I'm actually pretty curious to
*  see what features he rolls out. So what would be your first act as Twitter CEO? I can't spoil it.
*  Okay. I gotta get hired. What do you think about video on the platform? On Twitter? Yeah. Do you
*  think that's an interesting, or is it like messing with the medium, the nature of the platform? I
*  think Twitter will always be closer to TikTok than it is to YouTube. Like at least in its current
*  form. I don't see 20 minute, one hour long videos or whatever, even 15 minute videos being watched
*  over there. I see it more as like the short and snappy stuff closer to TikTok. But at the same
*  time, Twitter is a really good comment section for the internet. I mean, it's almost weird why
*  doesn't Twitter allow you to embed YouTube videos? Like why does that, you should just ask Elon that.
*  Like I don't know if that's a YouTube thing, but when a YouTuber posts a video, why do they have to
*  link to YouTube? Why can't they just embed it on Twitter and just play it there? I mean, wouldn't
*  that just solve a lot of problems? Yeah. But then the two companies have to agree to integrate each
*  other's content. I don't know, but it seems like a win-win. I mean, well, it's more of a win for
*  Twitter because then people don't have to leave the platform. I mean, that'd be the easiest. But who
*  gets, like when you watch the ads on a YouTube video that's embedded in Twitter, who gets the
*  money? It would still be YouTube. But at least then right now people just post the link and it
*  takes you off Twitter and it just kills your session time on Twitter. That's really interesting.
*  Yeah. Because the Twitter, whatever the dynamics of the comments, especially once the spam bots are
*  taken care of, Twitter just works. It's really nice. So Reddit is a nice comment section for
*  the internet. It's like slower pace, more deliberate, like higher effort. Twitter is like this high pace,
*  like ephemeral kind of stream. But there's the vote, the up voting and the down voting works
*  much better because you can do retweeting, right? Because the social network is much stronger than
*  it is on YouTube. Like the interconnectivity. Yeah. On Reddit, you're going to get the top
*  replies are going to be the most refined ones whereas Twitter, stuff flows to the top that's
*  not super refined. But like you're saying, it's more off the cuff stream of consciousness, which
*  a lot of people prefer because it's a little more personal. How do you think Twitter compares to
*  YouTube in terms of how you see its future on roll in 2023? I mean, I think YouTube is going to be
*  YouTube and not much is really going to change, but it's going to keep growing just because,
*  you know, that's just what it does because it's owned by Google. But Twitter, I don't know. I mean,
*  it's one of those things like you can't predict if a year from now an economy is going to be in a
*  recession or booming. And I think Twitter is kind of the same thing. One thing is for certain,
*  a lot of things are going to be rolled out, but who knows? Honestly. You responded to Elon saying
*  Twitter is unlikely to be able to pay creators more money than YouTube. What do you think that is?
*  Well, yeah, because I think the tweet I responded to is one where he was saying that users will jump
*  over if Twitter can potentially pay more than other platforms. And I was just saying, obviously,
*  because Google has Google AdWords and that's Google's whole thing. It's putting ads on stuff.
*  They've been doing it better than anyone else in the world for a very long time. It's very unlikely
*  in the next few years that Twitter is going to just magically or any platform, you know, give a
*  creator the ability to make higher CPMs than on YouTube. It's kind of crazy. Like some creators
*  in December, you know, Q4 because ad rates are higher because of Christmas and everything. Some
*  creators literally make like $30, $40 per thousand views. That's after YouTube's cut. Like it's almost
*  like hard to think about like how high the RPMs get. And even then, once you pull out of finance
*  and cars, the high CPM niches and you move into just normal stuff, it's still just crazy. There's
*  sheer volume of creators and the fact that all of them get these multi-dollar CPMs at scale.
*  It's pretty beautiful. So you do, I don't know what you would call them, but like integrated ads
*  in your videos and you do, I would say masterfully. It's like part of the- Are you talking about brand
*  deals? Brand deals. Is that what you would call that? Yep. So it's a brand deal. It's part of the video.
*  It's still really exciting to watch. And yet there's a plug for the brand. In general,
*  just brand deals since you brought it up, integrating them well. I think that's something a
*  lot of creators don't do. Like they'll just do a brand deal out of the blue. They'll just be
*  filming a video and then around the three minute mark, just start talking about a random company.
*  I feel like if you don't want viewers to click away and you want people to not get pissed off
*  and call you to sell out, you got to find a way to integrate into the content. And ideally,
*  use the money in the video to make it better. The easiest thing you do when you do a brand deal is
*  just tell people how you're using money from the brand deal to make your content better.
*  And if you do that, like no one cares. Now they're supporting you for it. And you go from being a
*  sellout to like, oh, I'm doing this to make better videos for you guys. I don't know if you can share,
*  but with those brands, when you have discussions with them, are they strict about how long you need
*  to be talking about it? Or is it more about they're leaving control to you about the artistic element
*  of it? The problem is the ones who don't give us artistic element, we just don't really work
*  with anymore because it's just, you know, we get a hundred million views a video now and I can
*  confidently say I know how to entertain them and convert them better than these random brands. So
*  yeah, if they don't give us that freedom, I just won't work with them.
*  So you have that leverage, but for smaller creators,
*  it's a lot harder. Yeah. And they're going to just say 45 seconds, here's what you say, take it or
*  leave it. And it's like pretty brutal because I think just in general, if brands were more
*  accommodating to let creators tell their story of the brand and talk about the brand in a way that
*  felt a little more natural, I think it would be less cringe. People would be less likely to go,
*  you know, tap, tap, tap, skip. And obviously it would convert better, but they're just so afraid
*  and they want this standardized thing. Say these words and 45 seconds right here at this three
*  minute mark. Yeah. I often think about how to resist that. You just don't do them though, right?
*  Not on YouTube, right? On audio, I do ads in the very beginning and I say you can skip them if you
*  want. The brand loves that. I don't like the point is they, so the funny thing about podcasts is
*  different than YouTube videos. Podcast people actually do listen to ads a lot because they,
*  it's slower paced and they like the creator voice, like talking about the thing. But in general,
*  I just don't believe you should be talking about a thing for a minute exactly. And that's going to
*  be effective. I want to see the data for that. I think what's much more effective is the way you
*  do ads, which is like integrating into the content, like put a lot of effort into making a part of
*  that, like doing the brand deals. And I just, it's difficult to have that conversation. It's like a
*  very strenuous conversation you have to have with brands. You have to have each one at a time. And
*  I just wish there was more of a culture to say like the quality of the ad read matters a lot more
*  than the silly parameters, like the timing of it, like how long it is, the placement of it,
*  all that kind of stuff. What percentage of your viewers do you think have seen one of my videos
*  before? What percentage of the viewers on YouTube, right? Of your viewers. Of the viewers on YouTube
*  though? Yeah. Okay, sure. Or all of them. It's just interesting because you're speaking very
*  specifically like about my brand deal process. And so in my head, I'm like, I wonder what percentage
*  of these people even have any idea what he's talking about. That's interesting. I love the
*  thinking about numbers. The whole time we were having this conversation, it's all I could think
*  about. God damn it. He's, there's probably like 50% of these people have no fucking clue what he's
*  saying. And we're about to torture him for five minutes. Yeah. Yeah. Probably. But that's something
*  I can't turn off in my brain. Less than 50%. Is that a good thing or a bad thing? Is that exciting
*  to you that there's like 50% of people don't have not watched the MrBeast video? Isn't that an
*  opportunity? Yeah, I guess there's an opportunity, girl. I don't know. Honestly, I was just kind of
*  excited to hang out with you. Yeah, me too. It was a lot of fun. Who cares that there's mics?
*  Yeah. So it was kind of like having a buddy to go along the journey as I'm just kind of eating shit
*  and doing my normal grind. It was like kind of fun. And also you just say really wise stuff
*  constantly. So honestly, no, I never even put any thought into like the demographics or what I could
*  gain. It's just interesting because like my retention brain, when you talk about something,
*  I'm instantly like, hmm, what value are they going to get? How many of them are going to be
*  interested? What percentage of people do I think will lose? And I'm like running all those calculations
*  in the background and that whole conversation like the lot. It's just something I can't turn
*  off. My like bells are like error, error. This is bad. What are the different strategies for high
*  retention for your videos and in general? It's like how do you cook good food? You know what I
*  mean? That's like the same kind of question. I see. So there's so many different ways that you
*  see it boils down to, I mean, do you think at the level of a story or do you think like literally
*  watching five seconds at a time, am I going to tune out here? Am I going to tune out here?
*  Am I going to tune out here? It's all of it. You need the overarching narrative and then you also
*  need the micro where every second, you know, needs to be entertaining. And you basically,
*  what's interesting is the longer people watch something, the more likely they are to keep
*  watching. So you don't have to try as hard in the hypothetically back half of a video as you do in
*  the front. Like even right now, we're so deep into this where a lot of people listening are probably
*  just going to keep listening relatively close to the analysts. We just have a really boring part
*  of this conversation because they're just saying it. They're immersed. And so a big, like to really
*  boil it down to a simple level, you just want to get people where they're immersed in the content
*  and then just kind of hold them there. We had this discussion offline. And by the way, I should
*  mention that this is like late at night. It is. What time is it? It's nine o'clock. And I only
*  slept one hour last night because I'm an idiot and I flew to the wrong location. Well here we're like,
*  hey, let's just book you a hotel to fly. He's like, no, I got it. We're like, you sure we just do it.
*  We always do this. He's like, no, I got it. I got it. He's going to have to rub it in. I know. And
*  then today come to find out he flew to the wrong airport, airport with the city with a similar name
*  to ours. Just same name, same name in a different state. And I was like, that's why he should let
*  us book it. And so he's on one hour of sleep and he's literally been dying all day before this
*  podcast. He downed like two things of coffee. We've been going all day hard. Yeah. I've been,
*  got to interact with you. I should say that this gave me an opportunity to, I got a
*  ride from a stranger and it was an incredible person that got to interact with him. So it's like,
*  there's so many kind people around here, just like this kind of Southern energy. And then I got to
*  go to a diner because I could, you know, there's only one hour between me arriving and having to
*  fly out. So I went to a diner. There's a really kind waitress that called me a honey. So that's
*  a beautiful moment. You know, I was so confused. You tweeted about that and like steals, like Lex,
*  my assistant was like, uh, Lex isn't here yet. And I saw your tweet and I was like, he's here.
*  It feels like, no, he's still flying. I was like, for like an hour ago, he just tweeted about a nice
*  diner. Yeah, it was a diner. It was a diner in a different state. And then you had to fly over
*  here. And then I called you and you didn't answer. I was like, hmm, something's not adding up.
*  Yeah. I feel like it's such an idiot because apparently the world has cities like Springfield,
*  right? There's like every single state has a Springfield. Oh, really? I think so. I think
*  that's like a Simpsons joke, right? That like it's the city and the Simpsons is Springfield. And I
*  think every single state or most of them have a Springfield and the same is true for like, uh,
*  Georgetown. I think the most popular, I forget what the most popular one was, but there's like a list
*  of these people get when they run out of ideas, they just keep using the same thing.
*  They're your Achilles heel.
*  Anyway, I got to, I got to meet a bunch of people from, uh, from your team. It's just an incredible
*  human being set. So let me just ask on that topic, how do you hire a great team? Like what have you
*  learned about hiring for, um, everything for it, for the main channel that you do, uh, for the,
*  the react, the game, uh, the, the gaming channel to, um, mr. B's burger to, uh, feastables, all that.
*  The big thing is, especially in this content creation, cause it's not like anything that's
*  done on Netflix or, or different content medians. I really need people who are coachable and like
*  really see the value in what I care about because it's a very specific way of going about things.
*  Like a thing, there's no one like plug and play. Like if Netflix wanted to hire someone to do a
*  documentary, there's probably tens of thousands of people you could hire that have worked on
*  documentaries before. But if you want to hire someone to make super viral YouTube videos,
*  you know, like we do, there's just no one you can really pull from. Like sometimes I'll hire people
*  from a game shows, right? And they have all these preconceived notions about pacing and how a video
*  should be. And you have to spend like the first year, like breaking all these habits and, you know,
*  and they think they're better than you. Like a lot of people in traditional think they're better
*  and they think their way is better than what we do. And so for me, it's almost easier to hire people
*  that are just hard workers that are obsessed and really coachable and just train them how to like
*  be good at content creation and production than to hire someone from like traditional,
*  which is the only way to really do it. Cause there's not that many YouTube channels that
*  have scaled up. So it's not like there's a huge talent pool of people who've worked on YouTube
*  channels. So it's easier just to train someone than just pull them from traditional. Cause
*  traditional people just, I don't know, they have all these opinions and things and they just think
*  our way of going about things is dumb. Yeah. So you want people who have the humility to have
*  a beginner's mind, even if they have experience. And see the value. Like actually you'll still get
*  it. It's so crazy. Like, especially some of my other friends that are scaling up their YouTube
*  channels, there's people that will come on and you'll ask them like, what do you want to be doing in
*  five years? And instead of saying, Oh, I want to be working on the channel. They'll be like, Oh,
*  I hope to be working on movies or this or that. And they see like working on a YouTube channel
*  as a launch pad to go into traditional. And it's like, no, like you just don't get it. This is the
*  end goal. This is your career. And so I'm just so tired of having those kinds of conversations.
*  Like I feel like people really should be coming around. Are there like recurring interview
*  questions that you ask? Is there, is there ways to get? Yeah. But the biggest thing is like,
*  what do you want to be doing in 10 years? And if their answer isn't, you know, making content on
*  YouTube or, you know, if their answer is anything like movies or traditional stuff like that,
*  it's like just a hell no. Like it just won't even remotely work. So you really want people
*  to believe in the vision of YouTube. Yeah. I mean, ideally it's like, oh, working here. You know what
*  I mean? So it's less about the medium and more about just being on a great team that's doing epic
*  stuff. Yeah. Well, and yeah, the media as well, because those, it's just, it's hard to put it
*  into words, but there's, it's just two completely different ways of going about things. You know,
*  our videos aren't scripted and you know, it's a lot more run and gun. And when we, if we hypothetically
*  blow up a giant car or whatever, like you only have one take, you know what I mean? So,
*  and it's not scripted. And so you have to over film, overshoot things, overcompensate for like
*  the dumb way of going about it. A lot of traditional people would be like, well, just
*  plan what you're going to say and just plan the angles. You can cut the cameras in half. You can
*  save 50 grand here. You can save, you know, $75,000 editing this and that. And it's like, yeah, but
*  that's not authentic. Like that's, you know, blah, blah. You get it. It's almost so obvious
*  that it hurts that I have to like constantly have these conversations, but it's what we live in.
*  But there's also a detail, like there's a taste. Like I've watched a bunch of videos with you
*  and it's clear to you that you've gotten really good. I don't know what the right word is,
*  style or taste to be able to know what's good and not in terms of retention, in terms of,
*  yeah, just stylistically visually. I don't have to think. I can just watch a video and it just,
*  it just screams in my head like this is what, this is what should change based on the, you know,
*  million videos I've watched and all these viral videos I've consumed. Like this is blah, blah,
*  what's optimal and things like that. It's almost like your brain's like a, you know, like a neural
*  net. And like if you consume enough viral videos and enough good content that you just kind of
*  start to like train your brain to like see it and see these patterns that happen in all these viral
*  videos. And so that anytime I watch a video or a movie or anything, I just can't stop thinking
*  about what is optimal. And so it's like, it gives me a headache sometimes when I watch something
*  too slow or I don't think it's optimal. Obviously my taste is the end all be all. But that's
*  something that kind of torments me if that makes any sense. Oh, you can't enjoy a slow moving movie.
*  No, I can't. And that's not to say there's no- The retention on Godfather is horrible.
*  Yeah, no, exactly. I've tried to watch that movie like three times, but that's not to say slow
*  movies are bad. Like there's an audience for it. It's just obviously not what I've trained my brain
*  to like and social media and YouTube right now. Like that's just not the meta. And in general,
*  like you said, in neural network, you're training your brain in part on actual data,
*  right? So you're actually data driven. So you're looking at like in terms of thumbnails and titles
*  and different aspects of the first five, 10 seconds, and then throughout the video, the
*  retention, all that you're looking at all that for your own videos to understand how to do it
*  better. So that's where the neural network is training. Yeah. Basically, there are ways you can
*  kind of see like the most few videos on YouTube every day and stuff like that. And I just kind
*  of consume those every single day. And I've been doing that for way too many years. And then you
*  just start to notice patterns like the thumbnails on the most few videos or videos that go super
*  viral tend to be clear, tend to not have much clutter, tend to be pretty simple titles tend
*  to be less than 50 characters, intros tend to be this, stories tend to be this. And you just kind
*  of like after you see those thousands and then tens of thousands of time, it just starts to click
*  in your head like this is what it looks like, you know? So how are you able to transfer that
*  taste that you've developed to the team? So for like, because you said like broad things,
*  but I'm sure there's a million detailed things, like what zoom to use on the face to use in the
*  thumbnail, right? Like the answer is whatever makes the best video. Because the problem is the more,
*  I have so many friends who are like this, they'll make like checklists for their editors. They'll
*  make, you know, this be and this be and you need to have like a three part arc and then this. But
*  the problem is that's how you, the more constraints you put on the team, the more repetitive and less
*  innovation you get. And the more like, you know, after 10 videos, people are gonna be like, all
*  right, I've already seen this. So to me, and I'm 24, and you know, I'm probably my mindset will
*  change over the next 10 years. I just haven't been in this industry too long. But the only way to like
*  really make innovative content and keep things fresh is to not put constraints on or put as little
*  as possible. And so that's why I'm very hesitant on all that stuff. Because the more I say, the more
*  they're gonna be like, oh, then that's what we do. And then, you know, I'll say one time like, oh,
*  you know, ideally there's a cut every three seconds. And then next thing you know, every video,
*  there's like cut every three seconds or whatever. So it's hard because I try to give as little
*  train, not training, but as little facts or as possible and more just make suggestions,
*  if that makes any sense. You mean publicly or to your team? To my team. Yeah. So you talked about
*  sort of teaching your voice or your style, whatever we want to call it to other people on the team,
*  so they can be kind of a Mr. Beast replacement. So what's the process of teaching that? So you
*  don't want to... No, I got you. You're more talking about like, what I would call almost like cloning,
*  right? Like Tyler and other people like that. Yeah. So when we were hanging out today, I was
*  showing him how we have multiple people and it's almost like talking to the camera. It's a habit.
*  Yeah. You turn slowly to the camera. I was like, it is a habit. Is it weird to you to not be looking
*  at the camera? This whole interview, I constantly have been turning towards the camera. I'm talking
*  to him. It's a habit. Because my whole life, I've just been talking to a camera. Who are you thinking
*  about when you're looking at the camera? Do you like imagine somebody? I'm fully thinking about
*  the person just sitting watching it. And I almost, it's weird when I'm looking at the camera, I don't
*  see a camera. I'm like in a haze picturing what the viewer is seeing when they watch it.
*  Yeah. If that makes sense. And that's where I'll be saying things and I'll or doing something. And
*  then like when I'm watching, I'm like, that's not what I want. And then I'll freeze up. It's very
*  weird when I'm filming. And then for people who haven't worked with me too much, they'll think
*  like, I don't know, it's very weird. Like how I go about it. Because I'll just be doing whatever,
*  like lighting a firework. All right, this is a thousand dollar firework. And I'll go to light it
*  and I'll like freeze. Because in my head, I'm like, this, I don't know, I don't like how that
*  flow or how that shot looked. Because it's weird. I can perfectly picture what I'm filming by just
*  looking at the camera and then putting myself through the lens of the camera while making content.
*  I can do it at the same time. So you're like real time editing.
*  In my head. Yeah, that's something that didn't at the start come natural to me. But in the last,
*  probably like five years, it's happened. And so I would say it's one of my greatest strengths,
*  but I don't know how I developed it. But anytime I'm filming anything, like it's almost like
*  like right side of my brain, I just can just look at it and I see exactly what I'm filming
*  and I can just picture it. Well, that's probably recording the video, being the talent for the
*  video and then watching the editing and like analyzing it carefully and do that over and over
*  and over and over and over. Yeah, you do that 10,000 times. Yeah. You do the editing more than the
*  being in front of the camera. So like you start to see yourself from that third person perspective.
*  Exactly. And then maybe that actually helps with the nerves of it too. Like you see it as creating
*  a video versus performing. Right? Yeah, yeah, I think so. You know, it's weird. I've never
*  been nervous talking to a camera. It's harder for me to talk to a person than it is to talk to a
*  camera, which I feel like a lot of people say that though, that are whatever make content, right?
*  Interesting. I've heard that so many times. Or maybe not. Maybe I'm just awkward and dumb.
*  Maybe they're practiced. To me, it's both terrifying, but being in front of the camera by yourself
*  is so much easier. Really? Yeah, so much easier. I prefer it a million times over.
*  But that's my whole life. So that's why it's interesting. Like you've spent more of your time
*  talking to people. It comes natural. And I talk to a piece of plastic. Oh, yeah. I guess you're
*  talking to a person too. There's just on the other side of the camera. Yeah, there's just a pixel on
*  the screen. So cloning, how do you achieve that? Oh, yeah, that's right. That's the whole rabbit
*  trail. So I was showing him that I have a lot of people in the company who are able to think like
*  me and basically make decisions like I would make if I was like, if you were asked, hey, in this video,
*  should we climb a mountain or should we dig a hole? And like, you know, they would pick the same
*  answer I'd pick 90 plus percent of the times. And so one example is Tyler, who I was showing you,
*  and he was pitching some content. And you can see, like this, he was on point. And basically, for
*  just four or five years, we just spent an absurd amount of time together and worked on every single
*  video together. And we worked side by side. And same thing with my CEO, James, he literally lived
*  with me for a couple years. I'm a big fan of just like finding people who are super obsessed and
*  all in and a players that, you know, they really just want to be great. And they're just dumping
*  everything I have in them. And like you were saying, because I'd love to find that and develop
*  that you're saying you're basically for a long time, just said everything you were thinking to
*  them. Exactly. Like James, the guy who's basically my right hand man right now. For two years, he
*  lived with me and we probably talked on average over those two years, seven hours a day. I mean,
*  anytime I had a phone call, I'd throw it on speaker, and I'd let him listen to anything I was reading,
*  any content I was consuming, like really just training his brain to think like me. So that way,
*  he could just do things without my input without me having to constantly watch over him or give
*  him advice. And, and that's where we've gotten like so for the first six months, he didn't do
*  anything. He just studied me and studied everything I cared about and how I spoke and
*  blah, blah. And then the next six months, he started taking on some responsibilities. And now
*  he can just run the company and you know, I don't ever really have to check in on him. Like most of
*  the decisions he makes are exactly what I would do. And so I, I call that cloning, I don't know
*  what other people would, but it's just like finding people that are really obsessed and they just kind
*  of really want it and just being like giving them an avenue to like get it if that makes any sense.
*  Another way to see it is you're converging towards a common vision and that makes like
*  brainstorming much more productive. Yeah, it just makes it where I don't have to be so involved in
*  everything because I just have these people I know will think like I will, at least relatively
*  close to it. So I can kind of almost be in multiple places at once per se. And so these things that,
*  you know, I still approve every idea we film and you know, everything before we film and all the
*  creative, I approve it. But I don't have to like be in the weeds and nuances and do all this minor
*  stuff. I can just let them handle it. I can just do the more macro things. I got a chance to sit in
*  to a lengthy brainstorming session with Tyler and others. That was really cool. Can you talk about
*  the process of that? Of people pitching ideas and you pitching alternatives or shutting down ideas
*  and just going like plowing through ideas. I mean, you kind of just described exactly what we did.
*  Yeah, I mean, but the ideas are really, really good. It's just tossing out like different
*  categories of ideas and then also fine tuning them to see like, how do I change like thinking
*  about the titles and the thumbnails. I work so well off of inspiration. It's like, that's something
*  like give me anywhere. I don't know. Space. Yeah, like I went to space, you know, what happens if
*  you blow up a nuke in space or I went to the moon, I went to Mars, right? Because you said that one
*  word, it was able to inspire me to come up with four ideas. And so that's just, it's for me,
*  the way to get 100 million views on videos, you need something original, creative, something people
*  really need to see, ideally never been done before, all these like things. And so you need like,
*  if you want to consistently go super viral, you need just a constant stream of ideas. And the only
*  way I've really found that I can consistently come up with 100 million view videos is to intake
*  inspiration and then see what my brain outputs. And so that's kind of at its core foundation,
*  what I'm doing there. It's just like, in taking a lot of random inspiration to see what spawns in
*  my mind so I can output it. But the neural network of your brain is generating the video, the title,
*  the thumbnail, all like jointly. Exactly. And that only comes because I spent 10 years of my life
*  just obsessively studying all that stuff. Because you, I mean, it seems like you would literally
*  potentially shut down a video just because you can't come up with a good title.
*  Yeah, 100% or thumbnail. Yeah, I mean, that's what happened to 70% of those in that pitch session.
*  I was just like, oh, what was one of them? Genius versus 100 people or?
*  Yeah, like maybe average intelligence versus genius or something like that.
*  Yeah, I was like, what the heck is the thumbnail, even if the title was good? Yeah.
*  Yeah. I mean, there's so many, but yeah, people don't click, they don't watch.
*  That's so interesting. But you developed over time the ability to kind of
*  give it what? What makes for a good title? Short?
*  Not just short. It's also, I mean, if someone reads it, are they like, do they have to watch it?
*  Is it just so intrinsically interesting that it's just going to fuck with them if they don't click
*  on it? You know what I mean? So it doesn't have to be short, but it has to be like, you almost
*  want to have a retention to word by word reading. Ideally, it's a title also that, you know, because
*  the titles don't live in a vacuum, right? So it has to lead into the content. So ideally,
*  the title represents content that you would want to watch for 20 minutes. So if it's a 20 minute
*  video and the title is I stepped on a bug, it's not going to, because it's all of it combined.
*  The click through rate is going to be much lower than if it was like a five second video,
*  people might click it. So you got to, like even nuances of the length of the video based against
*  the title will affect whether people want to click it because sometimes they just all add up.
*  I mean, it's that, yes, ideally you want to blow 50 characters because above 50 characters on
*  certain devices, you run the chance of it going dot dot dot. So like I took a light pole and I
*  saw how many dollar bills I could stack on top and they would just go dot dot dot because it's
*  too long and it can't finish it. And that's the worst thing because then people don't even know
*  what they're clicking on. And so it's going to do even worse. Short, simple, ideally, and just so
*  freaking interesting. They have to click and it is a good segue into the content and it represents
*  the length of the content. And there's probably stuff it's hard to convert into words for you.
*  I stepped on a bug versus stepping on a bug versus Mr. Beast stepped on a bug.
*  Yes, the more extreme the opinion, typically the higher the click through rate. If you can
*  pay it off in the content, then it just supercharges it.
*  So you have a kind of estimate of the extreme.
*  Here, like this water, right? If you're like,
*  Fiji water sucks. That would do fine. But if you said Fiji water is the worst water bottle,
*  or the worst water I've ever drank in my life, way more extreme opinion would do way better.
*  But you have to deliver.
*  Yeah, but then you have to deliver because the more extreme you are,
*  the more extreme you have to be in the video.
*  Yeah, that's almost inspiration for you to step up.
*  Yeah, but you can be more extreme in a positive way. A lot of people, it's easier though.
*  Negative clickbait is much easier than positive clickbait. It just is. It's so much easier to get
*  negative clicks. And so a lot of people are just, in my opinion, a little bit lazier and
*  they just take the route like, oh, well, this one gets the same amount of clicks and it's easier,
*  less effort.
*  The positive one is doing a large number of numbers of something.
*  Like I spent this number of hours doing this.
*  Or whatever. If you just wanted to help people or, right, it's just harder to get 10 million
*  views on a video helping people than it is to get 10 million views on a video tearing down a celebrity,
*  whatever negative video you want to insert there.
*  Well, that said, most of your videos are pretty positive.
*  But not a lot of people do those kinds of videos because they're hard.
*  Yeah, they're hard. Some of that is giving away money, right?
*  What's the secret to that? How do you do that right?
*  Give away money or?
*  In a video to make it compelling.
*  So there's a number that is better than another number, right?
*  The higher number is always better than the lower number.
*  Yeah, for the most part. And you know, it's interesting,
*  like some videos will give away a million dollars, some videos will give away half a million.
*  There's not really, I guess so. I'm retracting what I just said.
*  I was more joking with that, but there's no difference whether I put 500k or a million.
*  There's probably not even really a difference between 100k or a million.
*  I haven't really looked into it.
*  Like some of our most of your videos are not us giving away a million dollars.
*  And sometimes the million dollar videos just don't do as well as the other ones.
*  So there is a certain point where a dollar amount is just a large dollar amount to an average human.
*  And so I think that point is 100k.
*  Anything above 100k, the average human is just like, that's a lot of money.
*  100k and a million doesn't really move the needle, if that makes sense.
*  Which that's a very nuanced piece of information that applies to very few people.
*  No, I think it applies. It's fascinating.
*  Our relationship with money is fascinating.
*  Like why is it so exciting to get...
*  The times I've found like 20 bucks on the ground are like incredible.
*  Really?
*  I don't know why. Why? Why are you so happy?
*  What exactly is so joyful about that?
*  I mean it depends where you are in life, what the situation is.
*  Yeah, I don't know.
*  There's also a gamified aspect to it.
*  It's exciting.
*  Yeah, I get it.
*  Like why people want to see people win money.
*  It's just interesting that past 100k, it doesn't really seem to make a difference.
*  Like it's the same basically.
*  So you found that to be true with all the money you've given away?
*  Just in click through rate.
*  Obviously in terms of someone receiving it, yeah.
*  Million dollars changes their life drastically more.
*  Like that's the difference.
*  Like oh, if you wanted to, you could really quit your job.
*  I suppose 100k is like not really.
*  You probably do like a scientific study, like a formula, giving away money to click through rate.
*  Yeah.
*  There could be some kind of...
*  I got it.
*  It definitely... The returns level off dramatically after 100k.
*  That's basically the premise.
*  What about 10,000?
*  No, there's 10... 100,000.
*  It's funny because this is such a small niche thing.
*  100,000 does, from what I see in our videos, get more clicks than 10,000.
*  But the difference between 100,000 and a million is just so little.
*  I just think big number, big number to a lot of people past that point.
*  Yeah.
*  So for 100,000, you can like given average salary, you can probably live for a year.
*  Given what they have average salaries in America.
*  So that's like a big...
*  That feels...
*  Yeah.
*  I think it's also just more when they read the title.
*  It's just like, it's a lot of zeros.
*  It's like once, fuck loads of zeros, okay, click.
*  Oh man, that's fascinating.
*  So on the thumbnail side, again, that's gonna be much harder to say probably.
*  But offline, I got a chance to look at a bunch of thumbnails
*  and it's fascinating which ones do well and which ones don't.
*  Is there something you could say about what are the elements of a thumbnail that work well?
*  Yeah.
*  Is this also deeply instinctive?
*  Well, that's where... Yeah, it's the same thing.
*  How do you cook good food?
*  But it's easier if you pull up a thumbnail and I could be like,
*  that's why that's good.
*  That's why that's bad.
*  Like an example would be like one of my friends,
*  he just uploaded a video recently and I called him.
*  I was like, what is this?
*  Because he's a very, very smart guy.
*  And in the thumbnail, he's getting chased by cops,
*  but the cops were wearing yellow vests so they didn't look at cops.
*  I was like, oh, why are the cops in your thumbnail wearing yellow vests?
*  It's like that makes it so much more boring.
*  And he was like carrying a flag,
*  but the pole and the color of the flag were the same color.
*  So I was like, it's a lot harder to see the flag.
*  I was like, also you're wearing like a shirt with like five different colors.
*  It's hard to tell what even what your outline is.
*  And then in the background, there are cars.
*  And I was like, well, if you have cops chasing you,
*  why not make the cars cop cars?
*  Because in my head, I'm like, dang, if he just did those like four or five things,
*  the video probably would have got like seven X the views.
*  How much iteration?
*  Because I also got a chance to see the number of iterations you do on a,
*  I don't know, just a thumbnail.
*  It's a problem now.
*  It's an addiction.
*  Is it?
*  So you kind of, there's a lot of the versions are really good.
*  How do you know what to like?
*  I love how you, when we pulled up that, the burger one and we were flipping through them,
*  you're like, that's really good.
*  I was like, oh, that's version like one of like a thousand.
*  But even the sketch, the idea was good.
*  Like already even the original idea is strong.
*  Yeah. So we, one of our coming up videos, we made the world's largest plant-based burger
*  and the thumbnail we were thinking is like me standing beside the burger
*  because it's six feet tall.
*  That's, that's what he's talking about.
*  So like just picture a giant six foot tall burger, super wide,
*  thousands of pounds.
*  And then I'm beside it.
*  And then it's like eating the world's largest burger.
*  Like you, that's just something you have to click.
*  Like, so you were saying like, how would you describe a good thumbnail?
*  Like that, you know what I mean?
*  Like, but I think you said the one I noticed first, that was good.
*  Where you were very small in it relative to the, and you didn't like that one.
*  I think I needed to come forward a little bit.
*  And also the photo we took was just my upper body.
*  So they photo-manipulated and created my legs Photoshop.
*  And that's why I said I didn't like it because my right leg was a little like
*  off. It was like bent the wrong way.
*  Cause they had to build those legs in Photoshop.
*  Well, I mean, does the physics of the thumbnail have to even make sense?
*  I mean, you can just like exaggerate the head size and all that kind of stuff.
*  Yeah, 100%.
*  Yeah. Things don't have to be relative.
*  Yeah.
*  You can have a car in the background and be three times the size.
*  Cause yeah, every one of my thumbnails, my face is in the, you know, left side, very big.
*  So brand recognition.
*  So just people know, oh, especially cause now that a lot of people copy our videos,
*  it's just nice to like, you know, everyone else might make thumbnails like this,
*  but this is mine. And obviously we usually over-deliver and do bigger stuff.
*  Would you recommend to other creators that want to, that want to make it big to,
*  and they see Mr. Beast and they look up to you to copy some elements of you
*  or to really try to be unique?
*  Unique, 100% unique. You're not the next Mr. Beast, quote unquote,
*  it's weird saying that third person, but whatever,
*  is not going to do what I'm doing better. They're going to just invent their own leg.
*  Like you're just not going to do what I do better than me.
*  You know, I have so many, I literally have the best people in the world working here.
*  And I reinvest everything I make even to this day. You know what I mean?
*  Like it's absurd the amount of money I spend on content and I don't care.
*  I'll just stop sleeping and I'll just film every other day.
*  Like you're just not going to beat me at my own game. And that's fine. You shouldn't.
*  Like I didn't get where I am by just beating someone else at their own game.
*  I just found my own lane and innovated and adapted.
*  And so yeah, there's a lot of people that do copy me and it's fine, whatever, do it,
*  but just know you're not going to get to where I am doing that.
*  And so I'd advise you don't.
*  You give away a lot of the secrets, basically everything about how you operate.
*  I don't hold anything back. Go for it.
*  How do you think about that? Because that's pretty rare.
*  I think, and this is definitely not, most people in my stance, I don't think would take this,
*  or my position would take this stance, but I see every other YouTuber or person on social media,
*  even because we're also focused super heavily on YouTube.
*  But last year we were also the most followed TikTok creator in the world as well.
*  Actually we were most subscribed to YouTube channel in the world and the most followed
*  TikTok account in the world. But in general, I just see everyone else as collaborators,
*  not competitors. I don't think giving advice and helping other creators do well in any way
*  harms me and I think it only brings more value to my life.
*  How was it jumping on TikTok and trying to understand that platform from scratch?
*  From being a successful YouTuber to understand a totally different algorithm,
*  fundamentally different algorithm.
*  It's interesting. Well, not even just the algorithm, just the content.
*  I'm going from basically 15 minute short films to sub one minute vertical content.
*  It's a whole different, just ballpark.
*  The first little while I was doing TikTok, it was just kind of figuring out
*  what does Mr. Beast look like in this short form content.
*  But recently we've really started to catch our stride and come up with some original concepts
*  and figure out how to innovate over there just like we did on YouTube.
*  Because I didn't want it to just be shitty YouTube videos.
*  So an example is we played the rock for 100k and rock paper scissors and the loser had to
*  donate 100k to charity. We went to random people on a campus and we offered them.
*  So I said, I'll give you $100 if you fly to Paris and give me a baguette.
*  And then they said no. And I was like, I'll give you $300 if you fly to Paris and give me a baguette.
*  And I was expecting this person to say no and it'd go up to like 10 grand.
*  And he's like, yes. And so he flew to Paris, got a baguette and brought it back and gave it to me.
*  And that across everything got like 450 million views.
*  Because it's just really cool just to see this random guy get on a plane,
*  spend a day in Paris and we cut it up real nicely and bring it back.
*  And so we're starting to find just tons of original content over there.
*  But it seems like an epic video to make for one minute.
*  No one on short form is doing it. That's the thing.
*  It's just so funny because TikTok's been big for a while now, years.
*  And then as we started to really figure out things on the YouTube channel and get it
*  cranking where I have some free time, we set our sights on TikTok and like, okay,
*  what are people not doing? How do we make it better, put in more effort, make it good?
*  And we did the same thing we did at YouTube, just different over on TikTok.
*  And it worked. And now we're the fastest growing or most followed TikTok account in 2022.
*  And it's just funny that no one else did that.
*  And you're not afraid to do epic stuff, which also during the brainstorming,
*  some of the ideas you're like, that's better as a short. That's crazy.
*  Can you remember one? Cause I remember I said that a bunch, but I can't think of one.
*  All I remember is that they were like epic videos.
*  Like really? You're going to do that for a one minute video?
*  Yeah.
*  That's crazy. So like, are you posting similar content to a YouTube short as a TikTok?
*  Yeah, those were just double up. It's just hard. You know, what's actually pretty fascinating
*  and people who do social media listening to this will probably find this pretty interesting is
*  picture like the content creation meta three years ago versus now where you can make sub one
*  minute vertical content and it go viral on TikTok and go viral on YouTube shorts,
*  go viral on Instagram reels. It goes viral on Facebook. It goes Reddit. You know,
*  you swipe through vertical content now and Twitter when you click on a video and you flip through it.
*  So this is actually very weird. This is the first time in the history of, I guess,
*  Western social media that one form of content could actually go super viral on every single
*  platform. It's never been like that before. So they're going viral individual. They're not
*  like, like I can post something on TikTok that'll get a hundred million views and then post on
*  shorts and it'll get 200 million views and then post it on Instagram and get 50 million views.
*  And then, you know, I haven't yet, but you know, you can then turn around and tweet it and get
*  tens of millions of views and you can post on Reddit and get tens of millions of views and
*  Facebook and get tens of millions of views. And that just wasn't a thing. Three years ago,
*  Twitter didn't have when, cause a lot of you probably don't even know this, but when you
*  tap on a video now and you swipe down, it just turns into TikTok. That wasn't a thing. Even a
*  year ago, Reddit, that wasn't a thing a year ago. Probably two years ago, that wasn't a thing on
*  Instagram. Three years ago, that wasn't a thing on YouTube, right? With YouTube shorts. So this
*  is all new and I don't, it's weird. I haven't heard a single person talk about it, but this is
*  the first time where content can actually go viral on every single platform and you don't have to
*  write or film a video for Facebook, film a 12 minute video for YouTube, film a sub 60 second
*  video for TikTok, write a tweet for Twitter and post this on Reddit. You can just do the same thing
*  on every platform. And the fact that your content has gone viral on multiple platforms
*  regularly means that virality is not accidental. Sometimes it can be of course, but it's just,
*  it can be engineered. Yeah. So many people say it's luck and they're like, you're just lucky or this
*  or that, but what, what do we have to probably like a thousand videos over 10 million views.
*  Like we don't ever have a dud. Like you can call it luck, but I think it can be trained. I, I,
*  I counsel YouTubers all the time and show them how to go from getting a couple million views a
*  month to 10 million views a month very easily. And even certain ones, like, it's just one of my
*  friends, like he was just really struggling. And so I just started showing him basically everything
*  I know and just doing like once every week, sometimes once every two weeks calls and he went
*  from $10,000 a month on YouTube to over 400,000, just doing these little counseling calls. And so
*  I mean, people can make excuses all they want and say it's just luck or say, you know,
*  well, anyways, I don't even want to quote all the other stuff, but it's just, it is, it is a
*  teachable skill. It's a learnable skill. You can study your way to consistently make viral videos,
*  no matter how small your channel is, even if you have zero subscribers, you could, if, if you
*  actually studied hard enough and like basically if you knew what I knew and some of these,
*  so I don't sound so arrogant. Also like some of these other friends that have that I'd say are
*  the smartest people in the world when it comes to content creation online. If you had the knowledge
*  that was in our heads, you could do it very easily. I see people do it all the time. And
*  what's even more interesting is I go on podcasts and I say everything I know. And these people are
*  also very open. Some of them I know it's all out there. And a lot of people, instead of just
*  studying that and trying to absorb and apply it in their own way, they're just like, no, it's just
*  luck. You know, so you do lay it all out there, but I got to push back to one interesting thing. I
*  think a crucial component of your success is the idea stage, the idea generation, the brainstorm
*  I heard today, but getting really good at generating ideas. So it's not, it's not just
*  the selection of the thumbnail and the title, that creative process. It's also just the,
*  the engine of generating really good ideas and getting that. I mean, I would say that is probably
*  the thing that needs to be trained the most for most creators, right? That they're, they just don't
*  put enough ideas on paper. Yes, but also a lot of creators also just don't, you know, which I didn't
*  either for the longest time, just didn't don't make good enough content, you know, content that's
*  worthy of getting 10 million views. In the idea or the execution of the idea? Both. I mean, like,
*  think about how many people just make videos, they film them in under 20 minutes and they don't really
*  put any effort into it. And like, you know, it's like my first 500 videos didn't deserve to get a
*  million views. Like there's a reason they did. They're terrible, you know, but at the time I
*  thought they did, right? And I'm in the mindset of a lot of small YouTubers where I thought those
*  videos deserved a million views and I thought that I would have them hated me. But I watch them back
*  now and I can tell you exactly why the videos were fucking horrible. You know what I mean?
*  Well, so what was the breakthrough for you to start realizing is to start having a self-awareness,
*  you know, about these videos aren't good enough. You're probably still going through that. You're
*  probably still growing to see. Yeah, every six months you should look back and hate your videos
*  or at least see things you could improve and be like, oh, I could have done this better, that
*  better. If not, then you're not learning quick enough. In my opinion, at least. Where's the
*  source of that learning even for you now? Just look at the metrics. I mean, I just got back from
*  a mastermind where I just got like, you know, 10 of the smartest people I knew and we just locked
*  ourselves in a cabin and taught each other stuff. Constantly every day, not every day now, probably
*  every other day I go on a walk and I just call random people. I'll just say, yeah, teach me something.
*  And I mean, it's just, you just have to have a never-ending thirst for learning. Like that's
*  very imperative, especially if you want, like if you want to get on top and then stay on top. The
*  only way to do it is just to constantly be learning or someone who is learning is just going to,
*  you know, have a leg up on you in the knowledge game. And what kind of stuff are you? Because
*  you've talked about offline that you just love learning of all kinds. It doesn't matter. But
*  in terms of videos, are you studying videos? Are you studying? Recently, not as much. I'm more
*  because to get to the videos I want, I have to build this business and scale up and hire. So
*  more of my recent time has been like my teenage years were spent studying virality and studying
*  content creation. Now I'm studying how to build a content company so I can actually produce the
*  crazy ideas I want to produce, if that makes any sense. So yeah, and that's the business side.
*  We talked about hiring. Do you have trouble firing people? No, I'm pretty sure almost every person.
*  Yeah, actually every person I've ever fired, we just give them severance. And I like to see it
*  more as it's no ill will. Like if there's like, if I fired you, if there's some other job you want
*  me to help you get, I'll DM them on Twitter. Like, you know, if you want to go work for,
*  I don't know, insert whatever, MTV, give me someone to DM. I'll DM them. Like, you know, I try to make
*  it more like a transition and do whatever we can to make it as easy as possible. And then something
*  was just not working for you because you want people, like you said, super passionate. Because
*  at the end of the day, if you hold someone that you, onto someone that you don't see being here in 10
*  years, you're just doing them a disservice. You're just giving them more ingrained, more enrooted and
*  where they are. And the sooner you do it and help them move on to their like new life, the better.
*  Given all the wisdom you have now, if you were to give advice to somebody or if you were to start
*  over again, you had no money. What would be the first 10 videos you tried to make on a new channel?
*  I guess that's advice for a new person and nobody knows you. Yeah. And nobody knows me. Yeah. Like
*  how do you think they have a mask on? And you also, I guess, don't have the wisdom. But if I don't
*  have what I have in my head, then I would say just fail. Like just a lot of people get analysis
*  paralysis and they'll just sit there and they'll plan their first video for three months. And
*  any of you listening, if you, especially if you have zero views on your channel, your first video
*  is not going to give views, period. It's not. Your first 10 are not going to give views. I can very
*  confidently say that. So stop sitting there and thinking for months and months on end and just
*  get to work and start uploading. Like all you need to do, this applies to people who have not
*  uploaded videos, but have dreams of being a YouTuber, is make a hundred videos and improve
*  something every time. Do that. And then on your hundred and first video, we'll start talking. Like
*  maybe you can get some views, but you know, your first hundred are going to stop. There are very
*  freak cases like Liza Koshy or Emma Chamberlain who have really good personalities and it doesn't
*  take them so as many videos. And it's just like people who are seven foot five and making the
*  NBA. Like, yes, there are free cases you can find, but for the average person like us, you know,
*  who don't have these exceptional personalities and you know, backgrounds and filmmaking,
*  just make a hundred videos, improve something each time, and then talk to me on your hundred
*  and first video. Well, the improve something each time is the tricky one. How do you improve
*  something each time? The second one, just, I don't know, put more effort into the script. The third
*  one, try to learn a new editing trick. The fourth one, try to figure out a way that you can have
*  better inflections in your voice. The fifth one, try to, you know, study a new thumbnail tip and
*  implement it. The sixth one, try to figure out a new title. There's infinite ways. That's the beauty
*  of content creation online. There's literally infinite ways from the coloring to the frame rate,
*  to the editing, to the filming, to the production, to the jokes, to the pacing, to every little thing
*  can be improved and they can never not be improved. There's no, there's literally no such thing as a
*  perfect video. So if you knew everything you know now, but no money. Step one, would I just
*  brainstorm like, okay, I don't have money. What are some viral things? Like, I mean,
*  the first thing that comes to mind is something as simple as when I count to a hundred thousand,
*  which is what I did do when I was poor. And like that worked, but like what's something like that
*  I could do that would be even more attention grabbing. Yeah, you were, as part of the
*  brainstorm, you would throw out a lot of ideas and people throw out a bunch of ideas. And one of the
*  questions is, is this even doable? Right? Yeah. First off, come up with ideas you think would do
*  well, and then ask yourself later if they're doable. Yeah. Because there's, there's different
*  ways you can accomplish something. Don't be cynical about the do-ability of stuff. Yeah,
*  because there really are so many different ways you can accomplish a goal. Like,
*  um, when we give away an island, like we gave our a hundred million subscriber an island,
*  you know, you can't find private islands that, you know, don't look like shit for less than
*  $10 million. So this isn't doable, right? All right. The idea doesn't exist, not doable,
*  exit off, but then, you know, you dig into it and you, you know, find different alternatives. You
*  find, okay, well, what if we just buy a $2 million island that sucks and then spend a million dollars,
*  you know, importing some sand, let's build a beach, let's import 300 trees, let's build a little bit
*  of canals, cut some paths, boom. Now it's a really nice island, but it's actually affordable
*  because we don't have $10 million to spend on a video, but we can afford to spend three and a half
*  and lose whatever, a million dollars on that video. So like, that's an example of like, yeah,
*  if you just went off the gut test, you'd be like, this isn't doable. You know, every island is $10
*  million. We're screwed. Like if we go cheaper, it's just a terrible island. No. And so if you,
*  like, there are so many different ways you can achieve what you want, you really got to push
*  through notes, which not a lot of people do. You have to have like a more of a dominant
*  personality and just a willingness to, when people tell you it's not possible, just actually go
*  through all the variables and eliminate them all yourself. Have a stubbornness and resilience to
*  failure maybe. For what we do and creators online, it's very imperative that you have,
*  that a no isn't a no to you. You really have to like think and just like, we take a personality
*  test and like just having a dominant personality is a better indicator that when someone tells you,
*  oh, there's no way you're going to build a brick wall for under a hundred grand, you know, you'll
*  be like, okay, and then still go check the next 10 vendors and you know, figure it out.
*  Yeah. What advice would you give to an already established channel? Like with one, two, three,
*  four million subscribers, how to like 10 exit, like increase it without losing maybe-
*  Yeah, that's where it's very specific, like channel by channel. You can't give general advice.
*  Okay. Yeah. Because if I do, millions of creators are going to see this and then they're going to do
*  it and I'm going to fuck them over. You know? Oh, I see. I see. So let's say I'd like two million
*  subscribers on this podcast. Yeah. Like how would you 10x that without sacrificing what it is?
*  10x your stuff. Does it matter? So you've talked about with success.
*  Yeah. It's different for everyone. Like is 10xing your definition of success? No. Well, then it's
*  going to be right off the bat. It's hard because if you don't give a shit about 10xing, it's even
*  harder than 10x. He does this because he likes helping people. That's one thing I've found
*  throughout this day. Every time I talk data, it's so funny with him because it's like, you know,
*  you could do this to get more views and he'll just be like blank. I feel like that doesn't register
*  anything. He just like doesn't care, which is, it's really cool. I'm really nervous about that.
*  I'm really nervous about the numbers affecting, cause it's so fun. Yeah. It's so fun to focus on
*  the numbers and I'm really worried about that. But at the same time, you should be cognizant of that
*  because you've created not just some of the most watched videos, but some of the most amazing
*  videos ever. So there's a strong correlation there. It's not like you're selling your soul
*  to make a highly viewed video. It's actually, if you look at the metrics, it helps you understand
*  what is compelling and not. And so I feel like I am, I feel like there's some value to investigate
*  what work, when people tune on and when not to be more data-driven even on podcasts. But I'm really
*  afraid of that. On the flip side, I think part of the appeal is that you don't care about that kind
*  of stuff. But there could be stuff that doesn't have to do anything with that and it has to do
*  with stylistic choices of lighting and cameras, or maybe with, for example, topics. Yeah. You know,
*  like even what you've asked me here is like different than what most people ask me. Yeah. So
*  it could be, I mean, and it'd be nice to understand that. But again, I'm worried about
*  polluting the creative process. At the end of the day, this is a true case of it's your own intuition.
*  Like, you know your viewers better than anyone else. It's whatever. See, I'd like to push back on
*  that. I really don't. You do. I don't. Who else? Name one person who knows your viewers better than you.
*  Somebody that looks at numbers of podcasts? No, you know your viewers. You know, you're the only,
*  how many episodes have you done? 350. Exactly. But I'm not paying attention. You're the only one who's
*  watched every second of all 350 of them. Probably. That's just, that's just not, no, I haven't. But
*  the- Well, cause you did it. So you do know what's in all of them. Sure. Your content is you,
*  I'm telling you, you do. And this is just one of those moments where you're an intelligent guy and
*  you just have to trust your like instincts. Like just think what is the typical ex viewer and what
*  do they want? I don't think like that. But that's all you would have to do. And whatever your gut
*  tells you, that would be the best guess. You don't know what the typical viewer is though. I don't,
*  cause I should investigate that would be very, very difficult. And then you have to start looking at
*  the numbers. You have to start to like consider demographics. The only way I know that anybody
*  even watches it is cause I'll sometimes run into people like when I run along the river and they'd
*  be like, I love you, Lex. It's like, okay, well that, that's, that's the data point. And they're
*  like cool people, but you know, I don't know. Like I don't have any other, it's difficult, man. It's
*  difficult to know. It's difficult to know who listens to boxes. It's difficult. Do you have a sense
*  of who's, I mean, like you're so huge that everybody watches. Yeah. But no, I still do. I'd say
*  if you were to just put a gun to my head and you're, you're like, all right, we're going to
*  pick a random person that watched your last video and you have to like roughly guess what they are.
*  And if you're not close, we'll kill you. I would say probably like a teenager that plays video games.
*  Like some, some like that would be probably the typical one. And then there are people that are
*  maybe a little bit younger. A lot of people that are older as well, but in a random, random sample
*  size. Yeah. It's probably like a male boy that plays video games. Like that's the best way I would
*  describe it. But I don't try to pertain to them. I just make whatever I think is interesting and
*  good content. And this is what we were talking about before, even though hypothetically 35 to
*  40% of my audience is women, which is, you know, less than a majority. If we get a hundred million
*  views of video, that's still 30 to 40 million females that watch every video, which is probably
*  the largest, you know, views per video for women on the whole platform, which you wouldn't think
*  that, you know, like I can't think of a single other creator that gets more women to watch their
*  videos than that. And so it's just anything, even like people above the age of 30, even if it's only
*  like three or 4%, that's still three to 4% of a hundred million views is a lot of people that age.
*  So we, we hit a large group of, of kind of every demographic, if that makes any sense.
*  So what if we look at other, maybe more challenging kinds of channels or not, but if we look at
*  educational, for example, like lectures or if we look, yeah, educational, it could be short videos.
*  Like how would you 10X that? Like something on robotics and biology, on science and engineering
*  and all of that. That's more educational focused. We would honestly just have to pull the day,
*  because it's the same way if you went to Gordon Ramsay, you said, how would a new cook cook better?
*  You know, it's like, even then that's not even specific. You have to go channel by channel.
*  You really do, or I'm giving horrible advice because if there was these just cool rules,
*  everyone would do it. You know what I mean? Like if there's these magical little principles.
*  How quickly when you look at a channel, can you kind of give advice?
*  Yeah. It's, it's like surface level at the start. And then the more, if we watch 10 videos,
*  I feel like I'd have a good profile. And I could tell you in my opinion, you know,
*  especially once I look at the analytics and I get more ingrained in like, okay,
*  the typical viewers, this they're from here. Here's how they're feeling, you know,
*  because there are people who make videos for rednecks and like the rednecks taste of content
*  is just so much different than obviously women watching makeup videos, which are so much different
*  than, you know, teenage boys watching a Minecraft video. They're just all different. So the biggest
*  thing you have to do is put your heads, your head in the head space of the viewer and see the content
*  how they would. Cause if you just try to only give your taste, which is what a lot of people do
*  and things from your perspective, it's very biased and it's just not going to work for everyone.
*  And that's actually how you do more harm than good, which is something I'm very careful of.
*  Yeah. But at the same time, just generating a lot of ideas. I think the first time I've talked to
*  was on clubhouse actually. I mentioned something about robots and like almost immediately you went
*  to generating a bunch of ideas around robots. It's just a hundred robots versus a hundred humans.
*  Yeah. How far can a robot throw a potato? I think your idea, like the first idea was
*  because you just said so many ideas I never even thought of, but it's, it's, it shows the value of
*  basically brainstorming with people that think differently. But at the end of the day,
*  my ideas are probably, you know, might lean towards some people a little bit younger than
*  your audience. Like some of the stuff. Yeah. There's still ideas. Like I think the first one you said,
*  cause we're talking about a quadruped, like a robot dogs, you said to replace a biological dog
*  with a robot dog and see if the owner notices something. You were just quickly brainstorming
*  different ideas of like, this was years ago. I remember it. Yeah. It's just, I mean, it's like,
*  oh yeah, I never really thought about that kind of sort of, it's the basic, the tension between
*  what does it take for a robot and our AI system to replace the biological systems that we,
*  the biological creatures that we love in our lives. Yeah. And, but like, that was like the,
*  the pace of idea generation was the thing that struck me today. And in general,
*  it's like, that's how you get at good videos is you keep, keep, it's much easier to make a video
*  around a good idea, obviously than a bad one. You just send yourself up for success. Okay. So
*  that's for 10X and already popular channel. What's the hardest number you said, the numbers that
*  matters click through rate, average view duration and surveys. What's the hardest number to optimize
*  for it? Probably surveys. You know, do you have any, do you have an insight into the surveys at
*  all? No, not really. But if you just click on a bunch of random videos online, you'll eventually
*  get a survey. What's this video transformative, heartwarming, inspiring, what people rate does
*  make a difference. And it's like, you can give people a click of it. You can get them to watch
*  it, but you can't really fake whether or not they're satisfied. Like they don't lie. The surveys,
*  you know, you know, maybe one person here, they're my troll, but once you aggregate enough,
*  it's a pretty clear telltale of the video. So either you're making a great video or you're not.
*  What is it? Minimizing the non-regrettability. Yeah. I think Elon tweeted that that's what he's
*  tried to do on Twitter. And that's interesting. That's basically the survey metric, how happy you
*  are that you've been using the platform. Elon tweeted, we want to limit the amount of regrettable
*  minutes people spend on Twitter. And the first thing I thought is like, that's something YouTube
*  already has a lot, like their whole survey system and feedback loop. How tough is it to take on
*  YouTube you think? For Twitter? Yeah, for Twitter, for anybody else.
*  I mean, it's going to be basically impossible. I mean, YouTube's not going anywhere. And I mean,
*  I don't know. I don't think anyone's going to do what YouTube does better than them,
*  at least not in the next 10 years. You asked on Twitter, would you rather have $10 million or
*  10 million subscribers on YouTube? What would your own answer be at various stages in your career?
*  If I had nothing, I would say $10 million. Because with $10 million, you can hire some people and
*  pump out content with like a million or two, get 10 million subscribers and then keep the other
*  8 million. So that's if you believe in your ability to grow a channel. If you don't believe in your
*  ability to grow a channel, then you shouldn't take the 10 million subscribers because you're
*  just going to kill the channel. So the 10 million is definitely a better question would be, would
*  you rather have a million dollars or 10 million subscribers? That's where it gets a little tricky
*  because now it's like, hmm, you know, a million dollars life changing amount of money.
*  But you know, if you semi knew what you're doing, you probably make a million dollars off a 10
*  million subscriber channel. But there is a little bit of risk. A million dollars might not be enough
*  to build a strong team because you don't know how to do it. So you might waste all of that money.
*  Yeah. Or they just keep it and retire. Yeah. Okay. That's true. Yeah. Because 10 million is
*  just so high. It's like just never work again. Who cares for the average human? That's so much
*  money. It's interesting to me also to the value of the subscriber versus the value of the dollar.
*  I suppose how valuable is a subscriber for like what percentage of the videos,
*  like how active the subscribers in watching the video for you. That's hard. I don't know.
*  I was actually thinking more about the subscriber to dollar. Like if someone has 10 million
*  subscribers, have they made $10 million? I don't know. I don't know why that that kind of popped
*  in my head. It's an interesting thought. Do you ever, when you analyze videos, do you ever analyze
*  videos like we've talked about offline of other videos across the YouTube in general, just to
*  understand trends, to understand social behavior and all that? Not all, but a lot of the questions
*  are analytics based. Yeah. It's so fun. Because I love it. I mean, it's just a giant social experiment,
*  right? Like what people like to watch, what people share. It's like a fascinating look.
*  So like I said before, what percentage of your audience do you think care about this kind of
*  stuff? Like this deeply about YouTube analytics? I think a large amount care about
*  curiosity and exploration of interesting ideas. So in that sense, yeah, this would fit it.
*  I love it. This is funny. This isn't me like trying to make, I love you. I actually,
*  I love your Magnus one and even your Hikaru one was really good and a bunch of other ones. But
*  I think we're getting to the point now where only analytics junkies would want to keep hearing more
*  analytics talk. And the normie is probably like, they've had their dose of YouTube talk for the
*  next three years. Maybe I'm wrong. Hey, comment if I'm wrong. I could be, I don't know your audience.
*  See, this is where you would tell me, shut up. I know my audience, you dumbass. And I don't at all.
*  I actually, I just follow the thread of curiosity. And I think there's just a lot of curious humans
*  in the world. And to me it's like, so the question about analytics is the question of
*  basically stepping away, stepping outside of yourself and thinking, why the hell do I like
*  TikTok so much? Why do I like Twitter so much? Why do I like YouTube so much? And getting,
*  even if you're not a creator, getting an insight into that is really interesting.
*  It's like what, cause all these platforms are fundamentally changing the nature of content.
*  People are reading books less, they're probably going to be watching movies less and less.
*  They're probably going to be watching Netflix less and less. Do you ever think about the sort
*  of the darker side of YouTube and with shadow banning and censorship and all the kind of topics,
*  especially if you see it in other platforms like Twitter that, that Elon recently highlighted
*  the shadow banning that was happening and in general, the censorship that was happening on
*  those platforms. Do you think about the role of centralized control of which information isn't
*  or isn't made available through search and discovery? I'll be honest, I never really think
*  about it. You just say you just try to make fun videos that. Yeah, I'm more, I'm kind of more in
*  my own lane, but it's not like that. I don't just specifically think about it. I just like a lot of
*  stuff in general. I can't just kind of in my own lane thinking about my own stuff. But you know,
*  now that you asked, I'm curious. What are your thoughts on, on YouTube and that kind of stuff?
*  Well, I'm generally against centralized censorship or shadow banning. Shadow banning is the worst one
*  because not that the goal of creating a healthy platform where you're having great conversations
*  and videos that are not spreading misinformation, that sounds like an admirable goal, but that's
*  too difficult of a job for a centralized entity. That's too big of a responsibility. Yeah. There's
*  misinformation stuff. And then there's also just like the videos where they do something that causes
*  what happened back then, the, or adpocalypse, you know, and a lot of creators revenue plummets
*  because people are doing videos that advertisers don't deem acceptable. And then now all these big
*  advertisers are pulling and the little guys are getting hit and because ad rates drop by 30% and
*  the person who just quit his job to go full-time concentration now can't sustain it. So it's also,
*  it's like a lot of different variables as well. That makes it so complicated.
*  Well, I think the big thing is transparency, especially around shadow banning for,
*  for people. I agree on shadow banning. You should be transparent. You should let people know it,
*  it, you know, obviously there has to be some type of controls. People can't just post whatever.
*  And so if you're pulling those levers, they should at least know. Yeah. So they know how,
*  how to improve their content. They can understand it. They can,
*  exactly. If it's a wrong shadow banning, like as a society that we should not shadow ban this
*  kind of content, that means you should be publicly discussing it and having that.
*  And if it's not known, then it's just kind of like, well, then who's pulling the strings and like,
*  how do we know they're not just manipulating things to get whatever message they want out there and
*  silence other ones? Yeah. And there could be sort of in the background, government influence,
*  which is where actual freedom of speech comes into play, that the government should not have
*  any control or be able to put pressure on censorship of speech. And it gets weird if none
*  of that is being, there's no transparency around it. But to be fair, that's a huge responsibility.
*  The amount of content that YouTube is, upload on YouTube, that is shared by YouTube, viewed by
*  YouTube. But even more of a reason why it would probably make sense to be transparent, you know,
*  because then people can help fact check it. That's right. But that requires building a
*  platform that makes that easy. Right? Like to make fact checking easy, to make the, like Twitter
*  now has like being able to share context and all that kind of stuff, that crowdsource it. Crowdsources
*  the way Wikipedia crowdsource it. I mean, there's, it's right. And then you open a random Wikipedia
*  article. But like, you know, people criticize Wikipedia because there is a political lean to
*  the editors of Wikipedia and then they get, there's some articles that definitely have a bias to them,
*  and all that kind of stuff. It's a difficult problem. It's a difficult problem to solve that
*  ultimately, as much as possible, it would be nice for the viewer to have control of that versus the
*  the entity that's hosting it. So for the viewer to decide. I'm just going to make
*  cool videos. Yeah. Yeah. Let's go to Antarctica again. How was that? How was going to, you just
*  came back from Antarctica. I watched the video. That was, that was fun. That was a really fun video.
*  Thank you.
*  I mean, there's a lot of things I can comment about that. But what was that? What was the hardest part
*  of making that video? The hardest part was just getting out there. It's just so remote. And, you
*  know, you land the plane on just this ice runway and it's so sketchy. And then once the plane takes
*  off, you're just there. You're the most remote place on the planet. And it's, it's just very
*  breathtaking. I don't, if you have the chance to ever go to Antarctica, I would recommend it. It was
*  probably like the, in the video, we climbed a mountain that wasn't named so we can name it.
*  And like standing on top of that mountain and just seeing, kind of like nothing. And because once you
*  get outside the outskirts and you get deep in Antarctica, there's no penguins, nothing lives
*  there at all. And so there's just nothing in every direction. It's just snow and these crazy,
*  beautiful mountains and some of them stick into the clouds. And it was, and if you go during
*  summertime, the sun never goes down. So the sun's up 24 seven and it's just like spinning in circles
*  at the top of the planet or whatever it looks like top. Yeah. You guys come up with this several
*  times. How beautiful. Yeah. And so it's just, yeah, it's just very beautiful. What about shooting
*  itself? Like the technical aspects of shooting it? Oh, I mean, well, so somehow we lucked out. One of
*  the days was like the warmest day in like forever. That's been in Antarctica. It was like, it was
*  positive degrees, but at certain parts, it was also like negative 20, negative 30. And that's where
*  the cameras, you constantly have to be switching out the batteries and heating them up and like
*  putting them basically in like your pants or they'll just get way too cold. And we were prepared
*  for much worse, but it ended up being much better than we thought. So for that video, but in general,
*  maybe some other challenging videos, how does, how do you go from the idea stage to the actual
*  execution to the final video? Can you take me through like a full process of like, we're talking
*  to boss some crazy wild ideas today. How do you go from that to a final video where you click
*  publish? Well, I mean, obviously first things first, you gotta figure out the idea and then it just
*  depends. I mean, pick any video you can think of on my channel. I can take you through it.
*  Well, what about the, in a circle? You have to stay in a circle for a hundred days. Yeah. So
*  for that one, step one, one of the most popular. Yeah, that video did really well. So we,
*  problem is we have to, this is where you get really into the nuances of the company because
*  we have a lot of videos going out. You can't just in a vacuum be like, all right, we're not doing
*  anything for a hundred days. We're only filming this. So step one is we had to build an independent
*  crew that could actually do that for a hundred days. That way everyone else could keep working
*  on the normal videos and not just screw everything up. So step one, you build that team. Okay,
*  we got the team. Now what do we need? Well, to do this, we need probably like 10 cameras, at least
*  rolling at all times. So we're probably going to need to get a trailer and hook up a bunch of
*  storage and stuff to just carry out the sheer volume of footage we're going to have. And so
*  get a trailer, set up the cameras, go out in the field, paint a circle. Now we need a house,
*  go buy a house, bring it out there. And then it's like, oh wait, I think it'd be funny if I brought
*  the house in on the intro, you know, find a crane that can lift up a house so I can drive it in and
*  drop it in the intro. And that's like an iterative process where you're like, okay, this will be
*  funnier. So it's not all upfront that you sort of. Yeah, ideally it would be, but as you kind of see
*  things, you get inspired and then you think of more and more. And this would be better with a
*  crane. Yeah, it'd be better if I dropped out of the house. Yeah, that was crazy that you decided to
*  do that. So fearless in the kind of crazy stuff you're willing to do. Exactly. What I'm a broken
*  record, but whatever makes the best video possible. Yeah, that's, that's all you focus on. Okay, so
*  what about the delegation of like who gets to what are the cameraman, like the people operating
*  the cameras, what who's responsible for different things? Is it like a distributed process?
*  So like that's where whoever the lead cam would be on that video would just decide it. That one,
*  because we shot over a hundred days, we didn't, a lot of it was just Sean and the guy who was in the
*  circle just blogging. I'm just getting my camera and he figured it out. And then we'd have like for
*  him just set hours each day that a cameraman would come. So if he had any content, he needed extra
*  hands instead of just having someone on standby 24 seven. It made more sense to do set hours.
*  Nice. And yeah, it was hard, but you know, explaining it in hindsight, it sounds so simple,
*  you know? And I guess like the more, because that one is relatively simple, I guess, because it's a
*  low number of people. Yeah, the hard part about that is just the time. Like, you know, I checked
*  in on them so many different days and it's like an hour here, two hours there, three hours there,
*  over a hundred days adds up to be a ton of time. And even then, like, you know, if you have a
*  10 person crew, you know, paying them daily rates for a hundred days, it just, all of that adds up.
*  What about like the hundred versus hundred, hundred adults versus 100 kids? What was the, what was
*  bringing that to life? That seems like exceptionally challenging.
*  Yeah. Basically the thought process was we did a hundred kids versus, or sorry, a hundred boys
*  versus a hundred girls. Yeah. People loved it. Honestly, I didn't think they'd like it as much
*  as they did. Video did really, really well. So the second I saw that video was crushing, I was like,
*  all right, we're doing it again. But last time we did it, we did it in our studio. So we built a
*  giant room, put a hundred girls in it. Sounds bad when I explain it like this. And then a giant
*  room, put a hundred boys. And we're like, after a hundred hours, whichever room has the most people,
*  we'll give them half a million dollars. So it did well. So we're like, all right, we're going to do
*  it again. So we threw out all these different ideas. It was like a hundred football players
*  versus a hundred cheerleaders, a hundred this, a hundred that, a hundred prisoners versus a hundred
*  cops. So just craziest ideas. And we settled on a hundred kids versus a hundred adults. And then
*  the next step was like, how do we make it better? The kids versus adults are the, sorry, the boys
*  versus girls. The first one we did was inside. The problem was every time it was night when we did
*  these long time lapses, you couldn't see the sun go up and down. So we're like, okay, this time I
*  want to do it outside. So the cubes are outside. And instead of doing circles, we want to make them
*  cubes. And then, you know, it's figure out, do we want that? Yeah. Just, just. Those videos came up
*  at least today as ones that are like really complicated in terms of the audio, in terms of
*  how to film it. Yeah, that's the problem. We had a lot of audio issues because in the first one,
*  we didn't have a roof on it. The second one, there was a roof. So there's a lot of reverb,
*  which then in editing made it brutal. Like half the shots weren't usable and it really screwed
*  us over. So we had to do a lot of Frankensteining in the editing to make up for basically my
*  ignorance. So you mentioned that you were surprised how well that, that, that one did. A lot of
*  creators talk about getting depressed when the videos don't do as well as they kind of expect
*  it. There's a kind of feeling you can get really worn out by that. Do you, do you yourself feel
*  that? And also do you have advice for others that feel this? Yeah, it's weird because I am a numbers
*  guy, but also it, it used to, it used to very much, especially when I was like betting everything I
*  had on a video, when it did bad, that was devastating, man. I'd cry and I'd be depressed
*  for days and it really would have a severe impact on my mood. But I don't know now it doesn't really
*  matter. It's a, if a video does better, just look at it and I'm like, oh, why'd this video do bad?
*  Probably, oh, there's a little retention dip there. I don't think people like the thumbnail.
*  Maybe we should switch it. I just look at it objectively unemotional and then just move on.
*  I feel like that's a much healthier way of going about it. So if a creator is listening, like that
*  is the ideal way to respond to a video that's doing bad. Just remove emotion from the equation
*  and just look at it and figure out how you can improve the next one. Is there tricks to deta,
*  being able to detach yourself from the, from that? Because, because like in your case,
*  I mean, that's true for creators, but in your case, this, this is like a lot of money on the line.
*  Yeah. Well, and this video cost my life. Yeah. So much time, but no, I mean, you just,
*  I mean, I don't know. The only real answer is it's just a conscious effort. You just have to
*  unemotionally look at the video, determine the problems and then move on. Like there is no secret.
*  You know what I mean? It's just, that's, it's that. And if you really can't bring yourself to do it,
*  then you're just screwed. Honestly, maybe you're not meant for this game.
*  Okay. So that's part of the development as a creator is like you're being able to be
*  detached. For longevity. Yeah. Yeah. You have to unemotionally be able to look at videos that
*  flop and figure it out. Cause if not just getting, you can't, not every video can be a one out of 10.
*  And so when a video does bad, you know, that, that just stress and depression is just going
*  to eventually get to you in the long run. So you said you've failed in a bunch of videos,
*  sort of taking them to completion. So what are some of the biggest fails? Yeah. Weirdly enough,
*  as we've matured and we've done this more, we don't have that problem as much, especially now
*  we're getting into the multimillion dollar budgets per video. It's like failure is not really an
*  option anymore. So I'm a little more particular about what I do, but back in the day, yeah, like
*  we would do a video where we spent 24 hours on a deserted Island and we filmed it, did it all. And
*  I just, I didn't like it after the edit. So I just grabbed the voice and we went back to the
*  deserted Island and spent another 24 hours there and refilmed it. Or, uh, could that have been
*  caught and prevented at the idea stage? Like where, no, it's a good idea. It was just poor
*  execution. To be honest, when we were out there, it was hot. We were, we were just like, we all,
*  at one point just kind of wanted to die. It was just miserable. So how do you avoid that these days?
*  Well, I just went, what is a little cooler to be honest. And then we had literally the amount of
*  fun we had in the video was like 10 times higher. Oh, interesting. So you like, there's some
*  practical details that you just learned. Yeah, I know what it takes to do. Videos that where it's
*  very hot or it's on water. Cause I get super seasick. It was like a kind of like 10 things
*  that if they have these variables, I'm down to do it. But my fun meter is not as high as normal.
*  Uh, like we tried to, um, anytime we do anything on a boat, like when we spent 24 hours in a
*  beer, minute or triangle, or when I tried to spend like, which it didn't get up, but I tried to spend
*  like a hundred hours at sea or whatever, just like on a raft, it just like, I, it makes me want to
*  throw up and I get so seasick. I came and see straight, but there are just some videos that
*  require me to be on a boat. So I just suck it up. Um, so when you spend months in creating a video,
*  I know this is probably stressful to some creators. Uh, like how much stress,
*  how do you feel when you have to click publish? Uh, now not much. You're able to detach yourself.
*  Yeah. Again, and old me tons. I'd be like scratching and nervous and like my hands will be
*  sweating. Like to the point where I'm almost about to puke, I'm like, I really hope people like this,
*  but you know, I don't know. I think that's just part of maturing it. There's different,
*  as a content creator, there's different phases. And, uh, you just like, once you get over the,
*  the fear that you're just going to wake up one day and be irrelevant, you know, and you just,
*  you know, accept that, like you believe in yourself and you believe in your content and that
*  you can continue to be relevant, then you don't, I don't know, you kind of are, it's a little bit
*  easier to detach yourself, I guess. And that's, I, it's a much healthier place to be. You can't do
*  this for 10 years. If every little thing just causes these huge emotional reactions, it's like,
*  that's why a lot of creators go a little, you know, mentally insane. You know, you have to get out
*  of that game because it really messes with you. We've talked about this a little bit, but how do
*  you define and how do you suggest others define success on YouTube? It's so subjective. Some,
*  some people, success is retiring their mom. Literally, you know, for you,
*  success is inspiring people and educating them and, you know, whatever, the peak of their curiosity.
*  For other people, it's just quitting their job.
*  So you have to self-reflect on what your definition of success is. Because I think a lot of creators
*  kind of don't really think, don't introspect. Like, they kind of want to keep getting more and more
*  subscribers kind of thing. Yeah. But subscribers is just a vanity metric, you know, it doesn't,
*  subscribers don't correlate to views. Sure. Or views.
*  Yeah, I know. But that's more, that was a direct view. That was more directed to people listening,
*  because a lot of people do really care about subscribers or even followers, like on TikTok.
*  But if you look like your view, if on YouTube, very, very few percent, if even a percent of your
*  views come from the sub feed, right? They're almost all home for your suggested. When's the
*  last time you clicked on your sub feed to watch a video? Oh, almost never. Yeah.
*  Maybe five years ago. It used to be a thing. It's not anymore. No one does.
*  And it's getting harder and harder to find. I subscribe to way too many channels, I think.
*  Yeah, that's what everyone does. And you subscribe to 10 channels, they're great. But
*  two years later, your taste evolves and it's like, it's a mess. And so subscribers don't really
*  matter. Followers on TikTok don't really matter. So anyways, they really are the definition of a
*  vanity metric. But what about views? They do, obviously, because if people are
*  showing up time and time again, that's what matters. Okay. So that's a good thing to
*  define a success. I just feel like that too can be a problem. Because I would say,
*  if I wanted to be successful, as a young creator, I might start copying Mr. Beast or something like
*  that. You start trying to take shortcuts as opposed to find your own unique voice. So chasing
*  views is a problem too, it feels like. Or no. As long as you detach yourself from them. I mean,
*  if you're lazy, and you just want to copy someone else and not experiment and find your own way.
*  But you can't make that excuse for them. And someone just isn't coming up with the original
*  stuff and putting in the effort. You can't just say, oh, it's because they're chasing views. We
*  need some different metric for them to chase. No, they just need to find their own way. It just
*  feels like unique type of content will often lead to sacrifice in the number of views in the short
*  term. By the long term, you win. Okay. Or if you do win, you win more, I guess would be a better way
*  putting it. Do you think you will IPO Mr. Beastburger or Feastables in the next five,
*  10 years? Beastburger or Feastables? No, I kind of think... Actually, you know what? I just realized,
*  this is our first time talking about those. We're like an hour and a half in, that's so funny.
*  We started talking about what... My retention brain kicked in.
*  I wonder if you have retention brain for life itself.
*  Oh, I do. Every time I'm talking to someone, I'm like, okay.
*  What about loved ones? Spending time with loved ones thinking, we could be doing something much
*  better right now. Yes. No, that is a serious problem. So we'll pause the Beastburger question.
*  Yes. But that's why my current girlfriend, which I was telling you before when we were talking about
*  this, is she has a genuine love for learning. And that's something I have. I always feel like
*  I need to be learning something to justify the time I'm spending. And so that's why it's such
*  a nice trait because I feel like that time is being used optimally because whether we're watching a
*  documentary or we're going and taking an IQ test or reading about whatever, just why modern art is
*  the thing, I don't know, whatever weird thing we decide to do, I'm always learning and improving.
*  So it justifies the time. So to maximize retention in your relationship, you want to spend time
*  with that time learning as much as possible. Yeah, which conveniently, I don't have to force,
*  right? Or I want to be recharging. So when I do work, I can hit the ground harder. And luckily,
*  we're into a lot of the same things, which happen to be learning. Sometimes it's not learning,
*  maybe watching an anime or something like that. But I'm a big believer in you're either
*  if you, well, if your goal is to be like a super successful entrepreneur, you need to either be
*  working or you need to be doing something that decompresses and recharges you so you can work
*  again. If your goal is to be like a really kick-ass entrepreneur. Obviously, we're
*  boiling this down to like a very basic thing. And so the things you're doing in your time
*  when you're not working, if it doesn't recharge you, you're screwed. You're just a ticking time
*  bomb waiting to implode. And so you got to like heavily recharge. And like, so like, watching
*  for me, anime or whatever it is playing a board game, like that is actually kind of crucial to
*  my success, which takes a lot of maturing to come to that conclusion because I used to be the kind
*  of guy that wanted to work every hour of the day. And I would try to train myself to not need that
*  stuff. And I almost resented like that. I have to do these kinds of things and it would piss me off
*  because it's not optimal. And I just really want to make content and entertain people.
*  But as someone who's gone down that road, you just work every day for two, three months straight and
*  every hour of the day and then it's just a bomb waiting to explode and lose your mind.
*  And the only real sustainable thing is to just like give yourself time to recharge in between
*  working. So there's a kind of balance you have to find. You have to. And I hate it more than anyone
*  else because you hate not working. Yeah, because it's just not optimal for time. Like it's,
*  it's as a human, I do need to occasionally watch a mindless show and play a board game.
*  And it took me a very long time to like come to peace with that and not, I would have like
*  borderline panic attacks when I do it because I think I just, what am I doing right now? Why
*  am I doing this? I should be, you know, like, what if one day I have to lay off an employee
*  because we're not doing so well? Like, how could I justify watching this show or whatever I'm doing
*  right now? You know, it's like, there's a lot of things like that that go on in your head, but
*  it's necessary. Before we return to Mr. Beastburger,
*  what is like a, since we're on the topic, what is a perfect day in the life, perfectly productive
*  day in the life of Mr. Beast look like? Oh boy. Well, I mean, or like a standard. I mean,
*  the perfectly productive day was we filmed my main channel video because those get 100 million
*  a pop. I mean, it doesn't really get any better than that. What about like the average day when
*  you're not on the set? Yeah. And you're like, like, cause you're running a lot of things,
*  right? Yeah. So right now we have our snack brand Feastables. We have a restaurant chain,
*  Beastburger. And then we basically, which we haven't even really launched any products yet,
*  but we have the data company that I was showing you where we're going to roll out some tools for
*  creators. And then we have the reacts channel, the gaming channel, the main channel. And then
*  we have my charity, which also has a channel. And so kind of how I've structured my life right now
*  is whatever I have free time, we just kind of go, Hey guys, Jimmy's got an hour from 2pm to 3pm.
*  And everyone's just like, I need this, I need this. And this channel's like, I need this thing filmed
*  or, you know, whatever the guy who runs my TikToks, like I need this TikTok filmed or, you know,
*  Beastburger is like, I need this menu item approved. Do we need to talk about this marketing
*  thing? And then we kind of just look at what everyone needs. And we're like, that one looks
*  like the most important, we'll do that. And then, so it's just kind of like, you know,
*  if I just did that for every company in a day, then that's optimal. If I just kind of,
*  like an optimal day for me would be going down to eight companies and just whatever their like
*  two to three biggest pain points or things they need from me and just doing those.
*  Based on priority and then trying to keep it as short as possible to just the things that you're
*  needed on. It doesn't get more optimal than that. If I clear the bottlenecks or some bottlenecks for
*  all my companies, then it's, yeah, that's a perfect day.
*  Yeah. I mean, even just me, cause you're like, you're showing me around and you're being a
*  great and gracious host. But on top of that, you're just doing all these meetings. You basically.
*  I felt bad at some point. So I was like, oh, I just tricked him into going to meetings with me.
*  He's like my little meeting buddy.
*  Yeah. I mean, it was fun. It was fun to see it. It was fun to see how effectively you've delegated,
*  you basically trust the team to do a really good job on the various things. And there's just
*  a strong team that's able to carry the flag on all the different tasks from the, from the
*  brainstorming and the main channel to the reacts and so on. Yeah. It's really interesting. I mean,
*  it's really interesting what it takes to build a team like that. Cause you very quickly build
*  a very large team that's, that's able to scale.
*  Which is very scary. That's my first, you know, I I'm 24, you know, and I think I was telling you
*  this earlier. It's funny cause six years ago, I had to raise my hand to go use the bathroom.
*  And now I'm in charge of hundreds of people and entertain hundreds of millions of people.
*  And so it is crazy just how quick it comes up. And I wish I was a little bit older so I could
*  have ran a couple of companies and failed a few companies in the past and like learn from those
*  and apply those here. Cause I know for a fact when I'm 34, I'm 24 now, when I'm 34, I'll know so much
*  more about running a business and scaling and hiring and, and how to lead people and better
*  effectively communicate and all these different skillsets that will make me a better leader
*  that that's the only thing that sucks is I just don't have those because I just haven't been
*  through the lessons and I just have such a lucrative thing on my plate right now.
*  And it just sucks that I have to learn the lessons with the lucrative thing. You know what I mean?
*  Yeah. Cause you, you, you already have so much influence, so much impact, but
*  you have effectively scaled. What, what, what lessons do you draw from that? How to effectively
*  scale as a 24 year old? Like you. Yeah, that's something I feel like I actually could give a
*  lot of value to, to young people who are doing it. Like older people who've built five companies
*  or whatever they do. I probably couldn't, you know, they're going to be like, oh, this is so obvious,
*  but for younger first time business owners, you gotta just experiment to be honest. And
*  for us, like it's just a new space. No one had really ever scaled up a hundred person
*  team to build, make content on YouTube. So there wasn't no, I spent all this time, like
*  I hired one person from Disney to, at one point to come in and, and help. And obviously that was
*  a dumb idea looking back on it, but you know, I thought, oh, they make great stuff. People want
*  to watch and they come over here and help me build a team. And you know, they build it more
*  the traditional way and not like how it should be online. And so then it's like, okay, now I'm not
*  trying to trash people. Like they all tried their best, but then I hired this one person who does
*  this different type of media and runs a hundred person team. And then you come in here and they
*  try to build it that way and they don't really listen to you or value or see the difference.
*  And I tried basically for building this company with like four or five different people who worked
*  in different veins of media. And you know, every single time it's just like, they just don't get
*  it. And they like, they don't understand my world. And the eventual solution was just like,
*  to roll up my sleeves and do it myself, you know, with like James, Mary, him man, and just like,
*  no, no one's ever done this. And like, no one's going to just give us a golden carrot and tell us
*  how to build this company. We got to figure the fuck out ourselves. And you have to kind of build
*  up people from scratch then. Yeah, exactly. All the stuff I was talking about earlier and all the
*  lessons I learned along the way. And so for me, that was a big part of like, stop trying to have
*  someone build this company for me and just do it myself. Cause it's scary. Like I spent my whole
*  life studying YouTube videos of virality, not business building, but fuck it. I was like,
*  I guess we just got to do it ourselves then. And that's where things really start to click. And
*  we got the exponential growth. We started getting the right people and training them the right way.
*  And, you know, just throwing conventional stuff out the door and focusing on what's actually
*  practical for YouTube, which is just completely different than traditional media. So you train
*  people and then those people train people and so on. Yeah. I mean, it's just even like, you know,
*  how you do the lighting on sets or like how you do the audio or, or, you know, not writing scripts.
*  So, you know, we're just not as efficient with our filming. Like sometimes I have to have 30
*  cameras running. Why? Because it's not scripted. I don't, I don't know what Chris is going to do
*  when we start filming. He might run over there, but guess what? We got to have a plan because
*  there's only one shot. I can't, you know, tell them not to do that. Yeah. That's the shooting,
*  but then there's also the editing. Yeah. And then the editing as well and not having guardrails and
*  kind of, you know, I, at the end of the day, it's whatever I want the video that their job is to
*  make a video that they think I'll like because it's my channel, but you know, you can achieve that
*  kind of however. And so it's just, everything's just different. You know, it's much more, I guess,
*  like a startup as opposed to, are you often surprised like with the result? Like you think
*  a certain, like we watched the video today. Those really nice, those different than you would have
*  potentially edited it. Are you sometimes surprised by like a decision that it makes? Like, okay,
*  that's not the way I would have done it, but it's actually, this is a cool idea.
*  Yeah, of course. Yeah. The thing, my biggest fear is I don't ever want to get trapped in like
*  bubble of, you know, cause we are getting a hundred million views of video on the main channel.
*  Like, but I don't want to get in this feedback loop of just my ideas are great or I can have
*  feedback loop, but stop learning and improving because it is easy sometimes to be like, what
*  we're doing is working. We need to just keep doing it. I want to keep learning and trying
*  new things. And I guess one way I'd put it is like, you don't, when you're on a come up or
*  you're growing, you don't want to test new things. Once you start to plateau or have a downtrend,
*  because if you're like, you know, you, you're skyrocketing, right? You're up, up, up. And then
*  you level off, you start to go down and you're like, oh, this isn't working anymore. Let's start
*  experimenting. Well, if you have a bad experiment, now you're in like a tailspin, you're nose diving
*  and you have one more bad experiment. You're like screwed. Kind of I'm oversimplifying.
*  You want to test things while you're still growing to keep the growing from happening. Because once
*  you like have, you know, again, very oversimplifying that like, you know, kind of level off,
*  you do a couple of tests, they go wrong. In my, you're like screwed. You know, I mean,
*  you're already out the door. Now you're just confirming that you're out the door
*  and online entertainment. So that's kind of how I see it. So I think it's very imperative that
*  you're constantly always experimenting and trying things, even if you're getting crazy, unheard of
*  growth. And so that outside of the thing that brought you to the dance, you just dived right
*  into Mr. Beast Burger and feastables. This is a whole nother industry. Like, what was that like?
*  Well, so Beast Burger, we kind of, it was supposed to be like just a pop up. Like we just partnered
*  with someone who had 300 restaurants and we're just like, you know, let's just sell Beast
*  Burgers for a day or two. Let's see what happens. We didn't really think it would be as big as it
*  was. But those first like that first day, you know, we do six figures in sales and they all
*  sell out and they're running to local Walmart. They can't keep up with the demand. And it's like,
*  okay, well, maybe let's just leave it open a week, whatever. And we're just doing crazy revenue. And
*  it's like, okay, well, let's add some more restaurants and let's just leave them open for a
*  month. And we're just still doing six figures a day. And it kind of just went from this thing that
*  was, I don't know, it wasn't really, I didn't really plan on running a restaurant chain,
*  but here I am. But didn't that in some sense also open your mind to something like feastables?
*  Feastables is something I've always wanted to do. Because I think just in general,
*  American snacks are just full of so much horrible ingredients, to be honest. And they're not,
*  I don't know, I feel like there also just hasn't been any innovation in American snacks in quite
*  a while. And so that's just something I've always been pretty passionate about. The thing we built
*  that from scratch. So we hired the CEO and built a team around them. And we spent probably over
*  two and a half years before we even launched just like building the right team, figuring things out
*  and making sure it was actually ran the way I wanted. Which feastables has just been crushing.
*  It's very interesting. This is something I've never talked about publicly, but having products
*  in retail, it's like before feastables, everything I had done was online. So if you wanted to,
*  you know, anything from the Cocoa Peace brand, you'd have to buy it online and ship it to you.
*  But feastables, now that, you know, because our first product, chocolate bars, we started putting
*  that in retail locations. So like, for example, Walmart, it's crazy. Like it's just, it doesn't
*  make sense how if you're, which I guess it does for, because we get a hundred million views of
*  videos. So a lot of people know us. If I go stand on Walmart, those people recognize me and ask for
*  photos. Like if I stood there long enough, I could take 150 photos today in Walmart, 200, whatever it
*  is. So obviously it makes sense. Those people go find feastables, but then you just multiply that
*  by every Walmart in America. And it just gets so crazy. And I didn't think we'd be doing the kind
*  of revenue we are. And we're about to launch in some other, I don't know if I'm allowed to say it,
*  so whatever, but other big retail locations and convenience stores. And like by the end of next
*  year, we could be in like 40, 50,000 locations and the numbers just don't make sense. So, you know,
*  what are some interesting challenges about scaling there that surprised you?
*  The biggest problem, which I didn't think would be was just keeping the shelves in Walmart stock,
*  to be honest. Like it was, it was, it was brutal. Well, even then sometimes like, you know,
*  you get them the stuff and they're like, it takes them like a day or two to put it out in
*  that specific location. And I had to stop promoting it because every time I'd mention it,
*  like 40% of people would just be like, it's not there. It's not in Walmart or I can't buy it.
*  And so there's like a three-ish month period where I just didn't promote feastables because I was
*  scared that someone would go buy it and it's just not there. And so like it took us a very long time
*  to catch up to the demand and also, you know, it's not like we have unlimited money. So I,
*  but now we're relatively caught up in keeping up, but it's going to be interesting because
*  now this year in 2023, we're going to basically, you know, 10X the amount of locations are in.
*  So we're, and we're going to try to launch new products. So we're in for an interesting ride,
*  but yeah, I just hate, I hate when I tell people, you know, like, hey, go try this product. And then
*  they go on their local Walmart and eventually other places and it's not there. It's just so brutal.
*  You know, they made that whole journey out there and they can get it. And so that was really it.
*  Besides that, that's, it's been doing way better than I ever thought.
*  You've talked to a couple of places about maybe doing mobile games or computer games in the future.
*  Is that something you're still considering?
*  Yes. Because, you know, do you normally talk with people as much as we talked beforehand?
*  No, no, that was the problem. We spent all day today talking about something.
*  I just looked at my head. Everything you asked me is stuff we already talked about.
*  Not really.
*  Well, no, no, no, not everything. I take it back. But sorry, the last two questions. Yes. And so
*  it's just funny because-
*  What? No, I tried. So there's a different style of asking those questions
*  because I on purpose didn't dig further. Would you-
*  I could tell. Yeah.
*  So I can tell you-
*  Okay, this is by the way. Okay. All right. Well, this is the first time I've ever talked to somebody
*  as much as I did with you beforehand.
*  Yeah.
*  On the same day.
*  I know. Not even the same day.
*  We spent all day together. And I only slept one hour.
*  Yeah.
*  Literally, it's funny.
*  This is a hilarious and awesome social experiment.
*  I picked him up from his hotel and I just like harassed him all day to hang out with me.
*  Here we are now.
*  I love it.
*  I was secretly recording the whole time just so you know. I'm just kidding.
*  Anyway, so what was the question?
*  So the interesting thing is with Beast Burger and Feastables that there's physical goods as
*  opposed to like making mobile games or PC game, whichever one we end up doing, which is software.
*  And I actually have a giant international audience. Most of my audience is obviously
*  outside of America. And so the problem we're running into is it just takes time to build up
*  the supply chain and get Feastables in Southeast Asia, get Feastables in India, get Feastables in
*  Brazil and Mexico and all these other places where we have giant pockets of our audience.
*  And same thing with Beast Burger. It's just going to take probably years,
*  unless we partner with someone who already has a distribution, which we're figuring out. But
*  the beauty of software is I can make a hypothetical game or whatever we end up doing and
*  all my fans can use it tomorrow, the day I mention it. And so if I promote something in a video to
*  100 million people and it's basically like a game, they can all download it. But if I promote a
*  Feastables bar, right now it's only in America because we're struggling just to keep up with
*  American demand. We haven't even gotten the chance to go outside of America. So I alienate a majority
*  of my audience and it feels sort of shitty to just mention something that most of them can't buy.
*  But on the flip side, you can't just spawn this crazy infrastructure and just have tens of millions
*  of bars and all your products in every single store across the world before you promote it. So
*  you can't put the egg before the chicken. And so that's what I'm excited about. I want to get into
*  less physical stuff and more stuff that everyone in my audience can actually use.
*  Well, especially if there's a social element to the gaming too, because it's not unlike
*  Feastables. That's a product you consume. You missed it. When you're setting up for this,
*  we were doing some basically just laying out everything that we're planning for. So our
*  end phase is where we want to start hiring the team to build it. And we're kind of just laying
*  out the game. And I was actually really curious to get your thoughts, but I can't say it because
*  whatever I say, someone's just going to take it and run with it. But I have a pretty good idea.
*  About the kind of games you're thinking about? Yeah. I mean, I can imagine we also talked a
*  little bit about it. It's super awesome. So much good talk. All right. The juicy talk's
*  having you. She's like, I got to go set up. Well, you know, I already heard a lot of awesome
*  stuff. I mean, but that is a different kind of team you need to hire. Is that a little
*  nerve wracking, like going into a new field and trying to? A little bit. But then I remind
*  myself like Steve Jobs didn't know how to code. Right. And, you know, he just knew what a good
*  product was. And I feel like as someone who wasted so much of his life playing video games,
*  I have a good sense of it. And that might be ignorance. Well, that's really important. Right.
*  It's not about coding. It's about what makes for a good game. Exactly. And again, that might
*  genuinely be ignorance. And maybe I end up, you know, getting binned the butt because of what I'm
*  saying now. But I think just like with YouTube, I just want to obsess over making a great product
*  and things that I think my audience will love. And I think as long as I keep that as my north star,
*  it will do well. What is the path to being worth a hundred billion look like?
*  There's a path to being worth a hundred billion look like. I don't know. Okay. Let me just pause.
*  You're 24 and there's so much awesome scaling, so many great ideas. Do you think about different
*  trajectories? Yeah. What those possible trajectories might look like? Yeah. I mean,
*  if the goal was to just be worth a hundred billion dollars, yes. I mean, my goal,
*  I'm a broken record. So make the best video possible because I know whatever else I want
*  will come obviously. The video is the foundation. Yeah, exactly. So the path to a hundred billion
*  dollars is keep getting a hundred million views of video, you know what I mean? Or more. Yeah,
*  or more. Exactly. If we can keep growing. But if we can keep Feastables growing, right? And we
*  eventually expand international and one day we're in a hundred thousand retail locations and we're
*  selling the same amount of units per SKUs like we're currently doing, I mean, that would crush. And
*  then obviously, ideally one day we open up hundreds of Beastburgers. We get it where we turn out,
*  Supercell, a couple hit games. I don't want to make dozens or hundreds of games. I just want
*  to make games that are just great. And we rarely drop them, but we do their bangers. And just
*  whatever other stuff we end up doing, all that combined. I mean, it's just interesting because
*  what's a show that's pooled a hundred million views per episode basically? Like we're doing.
*  The Super Bowl gets praised because they get a hundred million viewers, but I can't think of a
*  show. Maybe it reruns or something. There's also a show that has a singular kind of figure
*  that you can now use as a... Like I don't have a network telling me what to do. I don't have
*  anyone. Like I can do whatever I want. So it's a very interesting position because I put out content
*  and a hundred million people show up. And then I also have a gaming channel. I put out content and
*  15 million people show up in every action. I put out content and 10 million people show up.
*  I have a TikTok and I put out content and on average 20 million people show up. And like,
*  so as long as I can keep that going and then we build these businesses, it's like, it's honestly
*  pretty scary to see what will happen over the years because Feastables launched last year,
*  2022. So it's a relatively new thing. And Beast Warrior, we just started scaling up the physical
*  side and we haven't obviously even launched any mobile games yet. So I think I'm at the antithesis
*  of it. I don't see a world where my YouTube channels are relevant in the next couple of years.
*  I just, this is what I live for. And so if I can keep that going and then really start to expand
*  these businesses that leverage off of it, then yeah, I mean, hopefully there's a day one where
*  I can give away a billion dollars in a video, honestly. Yeah, that would be one hell of a video.
*  Let me ask you the ridiculous question. Since you went from being broke to being rich, although you
*  keep spending all your money, does money buy happiness? How has money changed sort of your
*  your contentment, your happiness in life?
*  It's money by happiness. No, not, I mean, to a point, yes. Once you can take care of your health,
*  you can take care of like any immediate dangers and you can take care of your family relatively.
*  No, it doesn't. But those things do. When I first came into money, one of the first things I did was
*  retire my mom. And that brought me tons of happiness. And if my brother had a medical
*  emergency and we couldn't afford it and I made money to afford it, that would bring tons of
*  happiness. So once you take care of those basic necessities, so we'll say makeover, hypothetically
*  a million dollars, no, it really doesn't. Adding an extra zero, going from 10 million to 100 million
*  or whatever it is, makes no difference. So you're giving that or just fearless in spending the money?
*  Yeah, well, let me reframe. I guess it could for some people, if you really, I don't know,
*  you spent your whole life obsessing over cars, it probably would bring you a little bit of joy to
*  buy a nice Lamborghini. I'm coming more from the frame of mind of an entrepreneur, someone who's
*  really obsessed with business building. For me and a lot of my friends and people I hang around,
*  what brings us happiness is winning and building companies and changing the world. That is fun.
*  It's a complex problem you can wake up every day and it gives you something to obsess over
*  and devote your life to. Whereas just having money doesn't. Well, one interesting question I have for
*  you psychologically, because you have become wealthy and because part of your work is giving
*  away a lot of money, do you find it hard to find people you can trust? Do people see you basically
*  as a source of money, as opposed to another human being? It's weird because you would think yes,
*  but I feel like I also know the right places to look. But yeah, if I just walked into Target and
*  tried to make friends with 10 random people, of course. So you can kind of sense who has the
*  right thing in their heart. It's so obvious. I don't even want to go into descriptions.
*  Honestly, a lot of my friends, like Chandler, I played Little League with him. And Tyler,
*  the guy, I went to school with him. Chris, he was my first subscriber. Carl was here after we got
*  big. But whatever, he's friends with the boys. And it is a lot of my closer friends, even like
*  my YouTube friends, I knew before I was big. So maybe there is some merit to that. Maybe it is.
*  I don't know. I've never really put too much thought into it. Maybe there's a reason I hang
*  around a lot of these people I knew before I got big because it's much easier. And they help you
*  keep like your radar sharp of who can and can't be trusted because you know you can trust them.
*  It's difficult when you become richer and richer and more powerful.
*  Well, one thing you'll also find when you get rich, not even richer, but more famous. One thing I
*  thought is, as I climbed this ladder of YouTube and got bigger, I thought there would be tons of
*  people like me. People that take the kamikaze approach to building a business. You just throw
*  all your money in it. You throw all your time. You throw all your energy. You throw everything.
*  You're just like, fuck it. It's this or I'm dead. I thought there would be hundreds of me.
*  And there isn't.
*  There's like maybe one or two. And I talk to those motherfuckers every single day. I'm sick
*  and tired of talking to them, but I love them. But it's just so interesting because every level
*  I got up, I get a million subscribers. They're like, all right, where's all these guys in the
*  million subscribers that are fucking psychopaths? And then you know.
*  People become conservative as they get more.
*  Especially as they get bigger. Yeah. And 20 million subscribers, 30. Every step of the way,
*  it's like I just got more and more lonely to be honest. It sounds cliche and you hear that kind
*  of shit in movies and you're like, oh, that's not how it works. But it is. There's just not many
*  people that just want to give up everything, go all in, then obsess over making the greatest
*  goddamn videos every single day of their life. They're really hard to find.
*  And be able to sacrifice everything for that video. Basically, put all the money right back in.
*  Or the people doing it. They're on just a small scale. And if I talk to them, it's just
*  99.9% of the time I'm teaching them things. So it's lonely because there's not too many people,
*  especially in the creative space that are as crazy as you.
*  Yeah, it is. 100%. It's not what I was expecting. I was expecting there would be a lot of people like
*  me. Well, I guess the guy who talked to you almost is a bit like you in that sense.
*  Yeah, just in a different domain. Yeah, exactly.
*  Just willingness to put it all back in. And that's why I found right now a lot of the
*  people I relate to don't even make YouTube videos. I'm veering more and more away from
*  fellow content creators and more to just, I'm just looking for those other people who just share a
*  little bit of it so I don't feel so fucking crazy all the time. You know what I mean?
*  People I feel normal around, they tend to just be doing the randomest things, but loving it.
*  Well, I think that's really inspiring. It's like the Bukowski line, find what you love and let it
*  kill you. It's really put everything, put everything into the thing you love. That's
*  like the way to really create special stuff, but it's also the way to live out your life.
*  You have to be careful giving this advice because they're like bodybuilders who will be like,
*  just go to the gym, be disciplined. I'm disciplined, go to the gym. But I would argue
*  for those people, it's not even disciplined. They just enjoy weightlifting, right? Because
*  there are people who are jacked, but they don't make much money or run a business. If they're
*  that disciplined, they would be hitting every area of their life. They just really like business.
*  And there's people like me who just to an extreme level love building companies. It's not even
*  disciplined for me. It's just in my blood. It's what I wake up, I don't think about it. I don't
*  push myself. I don't need to watch a fucking motivational video to go work. I just do it.
*  It's programmed in me at this point. And I couldn't imagine a world where I don't wake up
*  and do it every day. But I think that a little bit of it is genetics and just how you're hard
*  wired. Not that it can't be trained or taught and not that, you know, and obviously the friend group
*  you're in influences these things and over time, I think can change it. But someone's just not going
*  to be able to flip a switch and then just start doing a kamikaze approach to building a business.
*  Just like a lot of people try to flip a switch and start bodybuilding and then quit majority of the
*  time, you know, that's just not innate to them. I think a lot of us have the capacity to do that
*  in some domain. Yeah, I think if you went about it strategically, if you surrounded yourself with
*  fellow like-minded people and, you know, slowly over time switched it. But if you just try to
*  like hardcore do it, you're just going to lose your mind. Do you ever worry about your mental health?
*  Did you take steps to protect it to, yeah, to like for the long run to make sure you have the
*  mental strength to go on? Yes, weirdly enough, the best thing for my mental health was giving into
*  my innate nature to work. The most depressed I get is when I try to restrict it and like I don't
*  work weekends or I don't work this day. What's best for me is just to work when I feel like working
*  and then just not work when I don't. Like and just have no constraints because there are just some
*  nights where I don't want to sleep and for whatever reason I feel compelled to go all night, whatever.
*  Like just do it, you know, do whatever you want is what I tell my like working brain. And I just
*  give into it and I feel that's where I feel the happiest. And then, you know, it's typically like
*  but when I'm really in the grind mode, it'll be like seven or eight days just non-stop going going
*  and it's like I'll realize like oh I need some recharge time and then go fucking binge a season
*  of anime. Yeah, but that's the thing like people will tell you don't work weekends or don't do this
*  or don't work past this or blah blah give you all these constraints. But for me, and it's
*  unconventional, I just give into it. I think there's something really to be said for that.
*  I try to surround myself with people that like when I don't when I pull an all-nighter, they don't go
*  like you should get more sleep. There's a reason I pulled that all-nighter. Like if I'm really
*  passionate about something, they say they basically encourage it because I have no problem getting
*  sleep and getting rest. What I need in my life is people that encourage you to kind of keep going,
*  keep going with the stuff you're passionate about. Normal people, they don't want that life
*  and they probably shouldn't. It's not good for you. But yeah, if you hang around people like just
*  whatever different people, you're gonna feel crazy and it's gonna wear on you. Whereas if you're around
*  similar people, it's just it's so much easier. Like if you, you know, I've started weightlifting
*  more and like one thing that's helped is just having jacked people around. They naturally just
*  eat healthier. They do. Like they naturally just have freaking grilled chicken and all this shit
*  and high protein meals and it's just like easier for me to just piggyback and be like oh can you
*  just order me whatever you're getting. And they're like oh I gotta go to the gym and I'll be like oh
*  shit I'll just join you, you know. And it's like it's just it's cheat codes, you know. You just
*  surround yourself with people that you want to be and it makes it like 70% easier in my opinion.
*  It's like that is the cheat code to life and I wish, obviously your audience is definitely a lot
*  older but you know to the older people listening like if you have are in a place of mentorship for
*  someone younger or have influence over younger people, you should really try to drill that in
*  their heads. Like the people they are around 100% dictates the outcome. I would not be on 120 million
*  subscribers if I didn't find when I was around a million. I had a couple friends that were just
*  also psychopaths, you know. I outgrew them but at the time it was great and I wouldn't be where I am
*  today if it wasn't for them. And just all along the way the friends that I hung out with had such a
*  dramatic impact on where I am. Like I'd probably have 80 million less subscribers, you know, if it
*  was if I wasn't so strategic about hanging out with people that I had value to and they also
*  had value to me. So the advice for young people would be to be very selective about the people you
*  so selective. It's crazy. Like Chris, you know, he's really funny and that's why he's great for
*  the videos. And part of why he's so funny is he consumes copious amounts of cartoons and just
*  funny content. And so I'll find like when I spend more time with Chris, I'll start just quoting these
*  weird cartoons and shows and like my speech will literally change just after like a week of spending
*  more time with him. It's like that quick out of effect, you know. Now picture that over the
*  course of years. I mean, yeah, it has such a huge influence. Like pluck one of their friends out and
*  hypothetically put me in there and you know there's no doubt if they're trying to become a content
*  creator, their odds of success is 10x, right? Obviously you can't do that but you got to find
*  your closest version of it. And just be selective, yeah. But this also applies not just to younger,
*  to older people too. Agree, but it's even more, I like when I was a teenager I just, you know,
*  I couldn't relate to many people and I just thought it was like a freaking nature because
*  no one was obsessed with building businesses or any of this kind of stuff. And so like back then,
*  you know, that advice would have been helpful. Maybe not that particularly, but just knowing that
*  there are, it's not that you're a freaking nature, you just haven't found people that have
*  the same interests. So the task is not to feel sorry for yourself or somehow change yourself,
*  it's more to find people you fit in with. Yeah, I mean, assuming which, you know, you're not getting
*  confirmed, like, assume it's not something bad. If you're hobby is shooting things,
*  or shooting things you shouldn't be shooting, you know, don't find people that encourage that.
*  But outside of that for sure, actually as an answer to what is the best advice someone ever gave
*  you, you said you're crazy until you're successful, then you're a genius. 100%. All along the way,
*  people gave me so much advice on why I shouldn't be doing it, why I'm crazy. Every step of the way
*  people wanted to tell me why I shouldn't be doing this and should get a life should stop being too
*  obsessed, everything under the book. And then once I'm successful, those same people are like, dang,
*  you're a genius. Wow, you really, you pulled that off. Those are probably the same people that will
*  give you advice now. You're the most successful video creator of all time, stick to that anytime
*  you want to do something new, right? They'll like pressure you not to do, you know, feastables or
*  mobile gaming or whatever lays beyond. It's funny how people don't. Well, honestly, they're the type
*  of people I just don't talk to anymore. I wouldn't even know what they have to say now. So most people
*  on the team are like, yes, and they're like, whatever the idea you got, they're with it.
*  No, it's weird. We actually have a, my team pushes back on me pretty hardcore,
*  which I want. I don't want Yes Men. And they're like, James, you know, the CEO who helped me
*  build all this. He's very adamant, like we're not Yes Men. And he trains people to really think for
*  themselves. And even when I give them orders, like really think like, is this optimal? Is there
*  context or information Jimmy could be missing that I can provide that can help him make a more
*  updated decision? Like I'm not God, you know what I mean? Like I'm human and I make errors. And so
*  don't take what I say as the Bible. So even like in the brainstorming and so on, they can push back.
*  Yeah, you can see it like Tyler, anytime I said something, he would give me feedback and push
*  back, which is what I want. I don't want him just to be like, yes, you're a fucking genius. Good job,
*  Jimmy. You know, I don't need that. You know, I need negatives.
*  You talked about being in a relationship. What role, Jimmy, does love play in the human condition?
*  I think, well, the big thing is love can be scary because this is, you know, the human you're going
*  to spend the most amount of time with in your life, you know, and so for a project that over 50 years,
*  they can be a liability or an asset. I love the metrics. You know, I love, no, but seriously,
*  it's got to be someone that makes you better. For me, I can't truly love someone that doesn't make
*  me better because in the long run, across the years. Because if not, then it's like, it's a negative,
*  you know, to everything I've spent my life building. But luckily I'm very happy with the
*  partner I have and like we were talking about before, I do think she makes me better. There's
*  a lot of actually positives I've noticed, even things as simple as like, you know, I struggle
*  to turn off my brain at night because I'm just thinking about all the businesses and how we could
*  do better or whatever weird thing I have on my mind. But, you know, just chatting with her and
*  hanging out with her helps me like basically just shut my brain off and like mellow out. And even
*  like there's just a ton of little things like that that I've noticed are positives, especially
*  when you really look for them that are easy to gloss over if you're not. And so for me, yeah,
*  I have someone who I think is very beautiful, very intelligent, makes me better, constantly pushing
*  me, okay with me, working hard, makes me smarter. And just all these different things that I think
*  for me, love just makes me a better person, you know what I mean? Which makes me love her even
*  more. Does that make sense? Absolutely. What advice would you give on finding somebody like
*  that? Just really don't give up until you find someone that, you know, there's so many people on
*  the planet. I mean, there really is. There's billions of- The odds are in your favor.
*  Of, yeah, like just don't settle and find someone that, you know, makes you happy.
*  Yeah, just like you said, surround yourself with people that make you a better person. In the same
*  case, surround yourself with that one special person that really makes you a better person.
*  And maybe that's just an entrepreneurial brain looking at it. Not everyone wants to
*  hyper-optimize their life like me, but for me to like truly love someone, they have to make me a
*  better person. In every way, yeah. Yeah. Well, what do you hope your 24- We started talking about
*  death. Let's finish talking about death. What do you hope your legacy is? When you look 100 years
*  from now and the AI has completely taken over and the aliens visit and discuss with the AI,
*  what this last of special humans that existed on earth was like, what do you hope they say about you?
*  It's a deep one. Probably just that, because it's hard, right? Like I said before, Elon
*  is over double my age. I could live every second I've lived up to this point in my life and still
*  not even be Elon's age. So I have so much time. I just hope whatever it is that it's a net positive
*  on the world and it impacts billions of people in a positive way that makes lasting change.
*  So you admire people like Steve Jobs and Elon Musk for having sort of reached for that goal as well.
*  Yeah, of course. To help millions. I mean, the iPhone's the most successful product ever invented.
*  It's hard not to admire what he created. The same with sort of as Johnny Ive talks about
*  the passion, the effort they put into the designing the iPhone. That little bit of love
*  is transferred to the whole world. They get to experience the joy of that from the designer.
*  What a beautiful thing to do. I couldn't think of anything better to create something that
*  even after you're dead for decades just has such a profound impact on basically half the human
*  population. It's wild. Brings joy to people. Well, I hope you do just that, man. You've already done
*  it for millions and millions and millions and millions of people and I hope you keep doing it.
*  I can't, like it's so exciting to see what happens this year and next year. I know. Like the sky's
*  the limit. I can't, I mean the videos but all the other businesses you're in and you as a human
*  being as you grow, I can tell I know as everyone knows you have a kind heart and the fact that
*  you're really damn good at actually using that kind of heart to help a lot of people.
*  It's awesome to see, man. I appreciate it. More importantly before we go,
*  are we going to play Dune tonight? Some board games? I'm not going to play Dune. I have to,
*  I have one hour. You don't want to play board games with me? I want to, I'll play, I'll play
*  board games. You don't want to play board games? If only I wasn't an idiot and actually flew to the
*  right airport. If you don't play board games with me, they're going to dislike the video.
*  Thanks for listening to this conversation with Mr. Beast. To support this podcast,
*  please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from the
*  poet and philosopher, Reverend Dronoth Tagore. Reach high for stars lie hidden in you.
*  Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
