---
Date Generated: June 13, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 10318s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence', 'elon musk', 'joe rogan', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex friedman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex pod', 'lex podcast', 'sara walker']
Video Views: 9325
Video Rating: None
Video Description: Sara Walker is an astrobiologist and theoretical physicist. She is the author of a new book titled "Life as No One Knows It: The Physics of Life's Emergence". Please support this podcast by checking out our sponsors:
- Notion: https://notion.com/lex
- Motific: https://motific.ai
- Shopify: https://shopify.com/lex to get $1 per month trial
- BetterHelp: https://betterhelp.com/lex to get 10% off
- AG1: https://drinkag1.com/lex to get 1 month supply of fish oil

EPISODE LINKS:
Sara's Book - Life as No One Knows It: https://amzn.to/3wVmOe1
Sara's X: https://x.com/Sara_Imari
Sara's Instagram: https://instagram.com/alien_matter

PODCAST INFO:
Podcast website: https://lexfridman.com/podcast
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/2lwqZIr
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/2nEwCF8
RSS: https://lexfridman.com/feed/podcast/
Full episodes playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLrAXtmErZgOdP_8GztsuKi9nrraNbKKp4
Clips playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLrAXtmErZgOeciFP3CBCIEElOJeitOr41

OUTLINE:
0:00 - Introduction
1:07 - Definition of life
21:45 - Time and space
32:26 - Technosphere
36:51 - Theory of everything
45:32 - Origin of life
1:07:10 - Assembly theory
1:23:24 - Aliens
1:35:14 - Great Perceptual Filter
1:39:12 - Fashion
1:43:14 - Beauty
1:49:35 - Language
1:56:16 - Computation
2:06:03 - Consciousness
2:14:55 - Artificial life
2:38:48 - Free will
2:45:32 - Why anything exists

SOCIAL:
- Twitter: https://twitter.com/lexfridman
- LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/lexfridman
- Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/lexfridman
- Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/lexfridman
- Medium: https://medium.com/@lexfridman
- Reddit: https://reddit.com/r/lexfridman
- Support on Patreon: https://www.patreon.com/lexfridman
---

# Sara Walker: Physics of Life, Time, Complexity, and Aliens | Lex Fridman Podcast #433
**Lex Fridman:** [June 13, 2024](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wwhTfyX9J34)
*  So you have an original life event,
*  it evolves for four billion years, at least on our planet,
*  it evolves a technosphere, the technologies themselves
*  start having this property we call life,
*  which is the phase we're undergoing now.
*  It solves the origin of itself,
*  and then it figures out how that process all works,
*  understands how to make more life,
*  and then can copy itself onto another planet
*  so the whole structure can reproduce itself.
*  The following is a conversation with Sarah Walker,
*  her third time on this podcast.
*  She is an astrobiologist and theoretical physicist
*  interested in the origin of life
*  and in discovering alien life on other worlds.
*  She has written an amazing new upcoming book titled
*  Life As No One Knows It, The Physics of Life's Emergence.
*  This book is coming out on August 6th,
*  so please go pre-order it now.
*  It will blow your mind.
*  This is the Lex Freedman Podcast.
*  To support it, please check out our sponsors
*  in the description.
*  And now, dear friends, here's Sarah Walker.
*  You open the book, Life As No One Knows It,
*  The Physics of Life's Emergence,
*  with a distinction between the materialists
*  and the vitalists.
*  So what's the difference?
*  Can you maybe define the two?
*  I think the question there is about whether
*  life can be described in terms of matter
*  and physical things, or whether there is some
*  other feature that's not physical
*  that actually animates living things.
*  So for a long time, people maybe have called that a soul.
*  It's been really hard to pin down what that is.
*  So I think the vitalist idea is really that,
*  it's kind of a dualistic interpretation,
*  that there's sort of the material properties,
*  but there's something else that animates life
*  that is there when you're alive,
*  and it's not there when you're dead.
*  And materialists kind of don't think that there's
*  anything really special about the matter of life
*  and the material substrates that life is made out of.
*  So they disagree on some really fundamental points.
*  Is there a gray area between the two?
*  Like, maybe all there is is matter,
*  but there's so much we don't know
*  that it might as well be magic.
*  That like, whatever that magic that the vitalists see.
*  Meaning like, there's just so much mystery
*  that it's really unfair to say that it's boring
*  and understood, and as simple as quote unquote physics.
*  Yeah, I think the entire universe is just a giant mystery.
*  I guess that's what motivates me as a scientist.
*  And so oftentimes when I look at open problems
*  like the nature of life or consciousness,
*  or what is intelligence, or are there souls,
*  or whatever question that we have that we feel like
*  we aren't even on the tip of answering yet,
*  I think we have a lot more work to do
*  to really understand the answers to these questions.
*  So it's not magic, it's just the unknown.
*  And I think a lot of the history of humans
*  coming to understand the world around us
*  has been taking ideas that we once thought were magic
*  or supernatural and really understanding them
*  in a much deeper way that we learn what those things are.
*  And they still have an air of mystery
*  even when we understand them.
*  There's no sort of bottom to our understanding.
*  So do you think the vitalists have a point
*  that they're more eager and able to notice the magic of life?
*  I think that no tradition, vitalists included,
*  is ever fully wrong about the nature
*  of the things that they're describing.
*  So a lot of times when I look at different ways
*  that people have described things across human history,
*  across different cultures,
*  there's always a seed of truth in them.
*  And I think it's really important to try to look for those
*  because if there are narratives
*  that humans have been telling ourselves
*  for thousands of years, for thousands of generations,
*  there must be some truth to them.
*  We've been learning about reality for a really long time.
*  And we recognize the patterns that reality presents us.
*  We don't always understand what those patterns are.
*  And so I think it's really important
*  to pay attention to that.
*  So I don't think the vitalists are actually wrong.
*  And a lot of what I talk about in the book,
*  but also I think about a lot just professionally
*  is the nature of our definitions of what's material
*  and how science has come to invent the concept of matter.
*  And that some of those things actually really are inventions
*  that happened in a particular time
*  in a particular technology
*  that could learn about certain patterns
*  and help us understand them.
*  And that there are some patterns we still don't understand.
*  And if we knew how to measure those things,
*  or we knew how to describe them in a more rigorous way,
*  we would realize that the material world,
*  matter has more properties than we thought that it did.
*  And one of those might be associated
*  with the thing that we call life.
*  Life could be a material property
*  and still have a lot of the features
*  that the vitalists thought were mysterious.
*  So we may still expand our understanding
*  what is incorporated in the category of matter
*  that will eventually incorporate such magical things
*  that the vitalists have noticed like life.
*  Yeah, so I think about,
*  I always like to use examples from physics.
*  So I'll probably do that to like,
*  it's just my go-to place.
*  But in the history of gravitational physics,
*  for example, in the history of motion,
*  when Aristotle came up with his theories of motion,
*  he did it by the material properties he thought things had.
*  So there was a concept of things falling to earth
*  because they were solid-like
*  and things raising to the heavens
*  because they were air-like
*  and things moving around the planet
*  because they were celestial-like.
*  But then we came to realize that thousands of years later,
*  and after the invention of many technologies
*  that allowed us to actually measure time
*  in a mechanistic way and track planetary motion,
*  and we could roll balls down in climb planes
*  and track that progress,
*  we realized that if we just talked about
*  mass and acceleration,
*  we could unify all motion in the universe
*  in a really simple description.
*  So we didn't really have to worry about the fact
*  that my cup is heavy and the air is light,
*  like the same laws describe them,
*  if we have the right material properties
*  to talk about what those laws are actually interacting with.
*  And so I think the issue with life is
*  we don't know how to think about information
*  in a material way,
*  and so we haven't been able to build
*  a unified description of what life is
*  or the kind of things that evolution builds
*  because we haven't really invented
*  the right material concept yet.
*  So when talking about motion,
*  the laws of physics appear to be the same
*  everywhere out in the universe.
*  You think the same is true for other kinds of matter
*  that we might eventually include life in?
*  I think life obeys universal principles.
*  I think there is some deep underlying explanatory framework
*  that will tell us about the nature of life in the universe
*  and will allow us to identify life
*  that we can't yet recognize because it's too different.
*  You write about the paradox of defining life.
*  Why does it seem to be so easy and so complicated
*  at the same time?
*  All the sort of classic definitions people want to use
*  just don't work.
*  They don't work in all cases.
*  So Carl Sagan had this wonderful essay
*  on definitions of life where I think he talks about
*  aliens coming from another planet.
*  If they saw Earth, they might think that cars
*  were the dominant life form
*  because there's so many of them on our planet.
*  And humans are inside them,
*  and you might wanna exclude machines,
*  but any definition like classic biology textbook definitions
*  would also include them.
*  And so he wanted to draw a boundary between
*  these kinds of things by trying to exclude them,
*  but they were naturally included
*  by the definitions people wanna give.
*  And in fact, what he ended up pointing out
*  is that all of the definitions of life that we have,
*  whether it's life is a self-reproducing system
*  or life eats to survive or life requires compartments,
*  whatever it is, there's always a counter example
*  that challenges that definition.
*  This is why viruses are so hard or why fire is so hard.
*  And so we've had a really hard time trying to pin down
*  from a definitional perspective exactly what life is.
*  Yeah, you actually bring up the zombie ant fungus.
*  I enjoyed looking at this thing.
*  As an example, one of the challenges,
*  you mentioned viruses, but this is a parasite.
*  Look at that.
*  Did you see this in the jungle?
*  Infects ants.
*  Actually, one of the interesting things about the jungle,
*  everything is ephemeral.
*  Everything eats everything really quickly.
*  So if an organism dies, that organism disappears.
*  It's a machine that doesn't have,
*  I wanted to say it doesn't have a memory or a history,
*  which is interesting given your work on history
*  in defining a living being.
*  The jungle forgets very quickly.
*  It wants to erase the fact that you existed very quickly.
*  Yeah, but it can't erase it. It's just restructuring it.
*  And I think the other thing that is really vivid to me
*  about this example that you're giving
*  is how much death is necessary for life.
*  So I worry a bit about notions of immortality
*  and whether immortality is a good thing or not.
*  So I have sort of a broad conception
*  that life is the only thing the universe generates
*  that actually has even the potential to be immortal.
*  But that's as like this sort of process
*  that you're describing where life is about memory
*  and historical contingency
*  and construction of new possibilities.
*  But when you look at any instance of life,
*  especially one as dynamic as what you're describing,
*  it's a constant birth and death process.
*  But that birth and death process is like the way
*  that the universe can explore what possibilities can exist.
*  And not everything, not every possible human
*  or every possible ant or every possible zombie ant
*  or every possible tree will ever live.
*  So it's an incredibly dynamic and creative place
*  because of all that death.
*  So does this thing, this is a parasite that needs the ant.
*  So is this a living thing or is this not a living thing?
*  So this is, it just pierces the ant.
*  I mean, it, and I've seen a lot of this, by the way,
*  organisms working together in the jungle,
*  like ants protecting a delicious piece of fruit.
*  So they need the fruit, but like if you touch that fruit,
*  they're going to, like the forces emerge.
*  They're fighting you, they're defending that fruit
*  to the death.
*  It's just nature seems to find mutual benefits, right?
*  Yeah, it does.
*  I think the thing that's perplexing for me
*  about these kinds of examples is, you know,
*  effectively the ants dead, but it's staying alive now
*  because it's piloted by this fungus.
*  And so that gets back to this, you know,
*  thing that we were talking about a few minutes ago
*  about how the boundary of life is really hard to define.
*  So, you know, any time that you want to draw a boundary
*  around something and you say, this feature is the thing
*  that makes this alive, or this thing is alive on its own,
*  there's not ever really a clear boundary.
*  And these kinds of examples are really good at showing that
*  because it's like the thing that you would have thought
*  is the living organism is now dead,
*  except that it has another living organism
*  that's piloting it.
*  So the two of them together are alive in some sense,
*  but they're now in this kind of weird symbiotic relationship
*  that's taking this ant to its death.
*  So what do you do with that
*  in terms of when you try to define life?
*  I think we have to get rid of the notion
*  of an individual as being relevant.
*  And this is really difficult because, you know,
*  a lot of the ways that we think about life,
*  like the fundamental unit of life is the cell,
*  individuals are alive,
*  but we don't think about how gray that distinction is.
*  So for example, you might consider, you know,
*  self-reproduction to be the most defining feature of life.
*  A lot of people do actually, like, you know,
*  one of these standard different definitions
*  that a lot of people may feel like to use in astrobiology
*  is life is a self-sustaining chemical system
*  capable of Darwinian evolution,
*  which I was once quoted as agreeing with,
*  and I was really offended because I hate that definition.
*  I think it's terrible.
*  And I think it's terrible that people use it.
*  I think, like, every word in that definition
*  is actually wrong as a descriptor of life.
*  So life is a self-sustaining chemical system
*  capable of Darwinian evolution.
*  Why is that?
*  That seems like a pretty good definition.
*  Yeah, I know.
*  If you want to make me angry, you can pretend I said that.
*  And believed it.
*  So self-sustaining chemical system, Darwinian evolution.
*  What is self-sustaining?
*  What's so frustrating?
*  I mean, which aspect is frustrating to you?
*  But it's also very interesting words.
*  Yeah, they're all interesting words.
*  And, you know, together they sound really smart
*  in what life is,
*  but you can use any of the words individually,
*  and you can come up with counter examples
*  that don't fulfill that property.
*  The self-sustaining one is really interesting
*  thinking about humans, right?
*  Like, we're not self-sustaining.
*  We're dependent on societies.
*  And so, you know, I find it paradoxical
*  that, you know, it might be that societies,
*  because they're self-sustaining units,
*  are now more alive than individuals are.
*  And that could be the case,
*  but I still think we have some property
*  associated with life.
*  I mean, that's the thing that we're trying to describe.
*  So that one's quite hard.
*  And in general, you know,
*  no organism is really self-sustaining.
*  They always require an environment.
*  So being self-sustaining is coupled,
*  in some sense, to the world around you.
*  We don't live in a vacuum.
*  So that part's already challenging.
*  And then you can go to chemical system.
*  I don't think that's good either.
*  I think there's a confusion,
*  because life emerges in chemistry.
*  That life is chemical.
*  I don't think life is chemical.
*  I think life emerges in chemistry,
*  because chemistry is the first thing the universe builds,
*  where it cannot exhaust all the possibilities,
*  because the combinatorial space of chemistry is too large.
*  Well, but is it possible to have a life
*  that is not a chemical system?
*  Yes.
*  There's a guy I know named Lee Cronin
*  has been on our podcast a couple times,
*  who just got really pissed off listening to this.
*  I know, I see, what a coincidence.
*  He probably just got really pissed off hearing that.
*  I hope people somehow don't know
*  that he's a chemist.
*  Yeah, but he would agree with that statement.
*  Would he?
*  I don't think he would.
*  I don't think he would.
*  He would broaden the definition of chemistry
*  until it would include everything.
*  Oh, sure.
*  Okay, so you're- Or maybe, I don't know.
*  But wait, but you said the universe,
*  that's the first thing it creates, is chemistry.
*  Where the, very precisely,
*  it's not the first thing it creates, obviously.
*  It has to make atoms first.
*  But it's the first thing.
*  If you think about the universe originated,
*  atoms were made in Big Bang Nuclei synthesis,
*  and then later in stars, and then planets formed,
*  and planets become engines of chemistry.
*  They start exploring what kind of chemistry is possible.
*  And the combinatorial space of chemistry is so large
*  that even on every planet in the entire universe,
*  you will never express every possible molecule.
*  I like this example, actually, that Lee gave me,
*  which is to think about taxol.
*  It has a molecular weight of about 853.
*  It's got a lot of atoms, but it's not astronomically large.
*  And if you tried to make one molecule
*  with that molecular formula
*  in every three-dimensional shape you could make
*  with that molecular formula,
*  it would fill 1.5 universes in volume.
*  So with one unique molecule.
*  That's just one molecule.
*  So chemical space is huge.
*  And I think it's really important to recognize that,
*  because if you wanna ask a question
*  of why does life emerge in chemistry?
*  Well, life emerges in chemistry
*  because life is the physics
*  of how the universe selects what gets to exist.
*  And those things get created
*  along historically contingent pathways and memory
*  and all the other stuff that we can talk about.
*  But the universe has to actually make
*  historically contingent choices in chemistry
*  because it can't exhaust all possible molecules.
*  What kind of things can you create
*  that's outside the combinatorial space of chemistry?
*  That's what I'm trying to understand.
*  Oh, if it's not chemical.
*  So I think some of the things
*  that have evolved in our biosphere,
*  I would call as much alive as chemistry, as a cell,
*  but they seem much more abstract.
*  So for example, I think language is alive.
*  I think, or at least life, I think memes are.
*  I think-
*  You're saying language is life?
*  Yeah.
*  Language is alive.
*  Oh boy, I'm gonna have to explore that one.
*  Okay, but-
*  Life maybe not alive,
*  but I actually don't know where I stand exactly on that.
*  I've been thinking about that a little bit more lately.
*  But mathematics too.
*  And it's interesting because people think
*  that math has this platonic reality
*  that exists outside of our universe.
*  And I think it's a feature of our biosphere
*  and it's telling us something
*  about the structure of ourselves.
*  And I find that really interesting
*  because when you would sort of internalize
*  all of these things that we notice about the world
*  and you start asking, well, what do these look like
*  if I was something outside of myself
*  observing these systems that we're all embedded in,
*  what would that structure look like?
*  And I think we look really different
*  than the way that we talk about
*  what we look like to each other.
*  What do you think a living organism in math is?
*  Is it one axiomatic system or is it individual theorems
*  or is it individual steps of-
*  I think it's the fact that it's open-ended in some sense.
*  It's another open-ended combinatorial space
*  and the recursive properties of it
*  allow creativity to happen,
*  which is what you see with the revolution
*  in the last century with Gödel's theorem and Turing.
*  And there's clear places where mathematics
*  notices holes in the universe.
*  So it seems like you're sneaking up
*  on a different kind of definition of life,
*  open-ended large combinatorial space,
*  room for creativity.
*  Definitely not chemical.
*  I mean, chemistry is one substrate.
*  Restricted to chemical.
*  Okay, what about the third thing,
*  which I think will be the hardest
*  because you probably like it the most
*  is evolution or selection.
*  Well, specifically it's Darwinian evolution.
*  And I think Darwinian evolution is a problem,
*  but the reason that that definition is a problem
*  is not because evolution is in the definition,
*  but because the implication is that
*  most people would wanna make
*  is that an individual is alive.
*  And the evolutionary process,
*  at least the Darwinian evolutionary process,
*  most evolutionary processes,
*  they don't happen at the level of individuals.
*  They happen at the level of populations.
*  So again, you would be saying something
*  like what we saw with the self-sustaining definition,
*  which is that populations are alive,
*  but individuals aren't
*  because populations evolve and individuals don't.
*  And obviously like maybe you're alive
*  because your gut microbiome is evolving,
*  but Lex as an entity right now
*  is not evolving by canonical theories of evolution.
*  In assembly theory, which is attempting to explain life,
*  evolution is a much broader thing.
*  So then an individual organism
*  can evolve under assembly theory?
*  Yes, you're constructing yourself all the time.
*  Assembly theory is about construction
*  and how the universe selects for things to exist.
*  What if you reformulate everything
*  and then you're like,
*  a population is a living organism.
*  That's fine too.
*  But this again gets back to,
*  so I think what all of the,
*  we can nitpick at definitions.
*  I don't think it's incredibly helpful to do it,
*  but the reason for me-
*  It's fun.
*  Yeah, it is fun.
*  It is really fun.
*  And actually I do think it's useful
*  in the sense that when you see the ways
*  that they all break down,
*  you either have to keep forcing in
*  your sort of conception of life you want to have,
*  or you have to say,
*  if the world is breaking down for a reason,
*  maybe I should adopt a more expansive definition
*  that encompasses all the things that I think are life.
*  And so for me,
*  I think life is the process of how information structures
*  matter over time and space.
*  And an example of life is what emerges on a planet
*  and yields an open ended cascade of generation of structure
*  and increasing complexity.
*  And this is the thing that life is.
*  And any individual is just a particular instance
*  of these lineages that are structured across time.
*  And so we focus so much on these individuals
*  that are these short temporal moments
*  in this larger causal structure
*  that actually is the life on our planet.
*  And I think that's why these definitions break down
*  because they're not general enough,
*  they're not universal enough, they're not deep enough,
*  they're not abstract enough
*  to actually capture that regularity.
*  Because we're focused on those,
*  that little ephemeral thing that we call human life.
*  Aristotle focusing on heavy things falling
*  because they're earth-like and things floating
*  because they're air-like,
*  it's the wrong thing to focus on.
*  So what exactly are we missing by focusing on
*  at such a short span of time?
*  I think we're missing most of what we are.
*  So one of the issues,
*  I've been thinking about this really viscerally lately,
*  it's weird when you do theoretical physics
*  because I think it literally changes
*  the structure of your brain
*  and you see the world differently,
*  especially when you're trying to build new abstractions.
*  Do you think it's possible if you're a theoretical physicist
*  it's easy to fall off the cliff
*  and go descend into madness?
*  I mean, I think you're always on the edge of it,
*  but I think what is amazing about being a scientist
*  and trying to do things rigorously is it keeps your sanity.
*  So I think if I wasn't a theoretical physicist,
*  I would be probably not sane.
*  But what it forces you to do is hold the fire,
*  you have to hold yourself to the fire of like,
*  these abstractions in my mind
*  have to really correspond to reality
*  and I have to really test that all the time.
*  And so I love building new abstractions
*  and I love going to those incredibly creative spaces
*  that people don't see as part of the way
*  that we understand the world now.
*  But ultimately I have to make sure
*  that whatever I'm pulling from that space
*  is something that's really usable
*  and really like relates to the world outside of me.
*  That's what science is.
*  So we were talking about what we're missing
*  when we look at a small stretch of time
*  and a small stretch of space.
*  Yeah, so the issue is we evolve perception
*  to see reality a certain way, right?
*  So for us, space is really important
*  and time feels fleeting.
*  And I had a really wonderful mentor, Paul Davies,
*  most of my career and Paul's amazing
*  because he gives these like
*  little seed thought experiments all the time.
*  Like something he used to ask me all the time
*  when I was a postdoc, this is kind of a random tangent,
*  but was like, how much of the universe
*  could be converted into technology
*  if you were thinking about like long-term futures
*  and stuff like that.
*  And it's like a weird thought experiment,
*  but like there's a lot of deep things there.
*  And I do think a lot about the fact that
*  we're really limited in our interactions with reality
*  by the particular architectures that we evolved.
*  And so we're not seeing everything.
*  And in fact, our technology tells us this all the time
*  because it allows us to see the world in new ways
*  by basically allowing us to perceive the world
*  in ways that we couldn't otherwise.
*  And so what I'm getting at with this is
*  I think that living objects are actually huge.
*  Like there are some of the biggest structures
*  in the universe, but they are not big in space,
*  they are big in time.
*  And we actually can't resolve that feature.
*  We don't interact with it on a regular basis.
*  So we see them as these fleeting things
*  that have this really short temporal clock time
*  without seeing how large they are.
*  When I'm saying time here, I really like the way
*  that people could picture it is in terms of
*  causal structures.
*  So if you think about the history of the universe
*  to get to you, and you imagine that that entire history
*  is you, that is the picture I have in my mind
*  when I look at every living thing.
*  So you have a tweet for everything.
*  You tweeted.
*  Doesn't everyone?
*  You have a lot of poetic, profound tweets.
*  Sometimes they're puzzles that take a long time
*  to figure out.
*  Well, you know what the trick is?
*  The reason they're hard to write is because
*  it's compressing a very deep idea into a short
*  amount of space.
*  And I really like doing that intellectual exercise
*  because I find it productive for me.
*  Yeah, it's a very interesting kind of compression algorithm.
*  Yeah, I like language.
*  I think it's really fun to play with.
*  Yeah, I wonder if AI can decompress it.
*  That'd be interesting.
*  I think I would like to try this, but I think I use language
*  in certain ways that are non-canonical,
*  and I do it very purposefully.
*  And it would be interesting to me how AI would interpret it.
*  Yeah, your tweets would be a good touring test
*  for super intelligence.
*  Anyway, you tweeted that things only look emergent
*  because we can't see time.
*  So if we could see time, what would the world look like?
*  You're saying you'll be able to see everything
*  that an object has been, every step of the way
*  that led to this current moment,
*  and all the interactions that require to make
*  that evolution happen.
*  You would see this gigantic tail.
*  The universe is far larger in time than it is in space.
*  And this planet is one of the biggest things
*  in the universe.
*  Also, the more complexity, the bigger the object.
*  Yeah, the modern technosphere is the largest object
*  in time in the universe that we know about.
*  And when you say technosphere, what do you mean?
*  I mean the global integration of life
*  and technology on this planet.
*  So all the technological things we've created?
*  But I don't think of them as separate.
*  They're very integrated with the structure
*  that generated them.
*  So you can almost imagine it,
*  time is constantly bifurcating
*  and it's generating new structures.
*  And these new structures are locally
*  constructing the future.
*  And so things like you and I are very close together in time
*  because we didn't diverge very early
*  in the history of the universe.
*  It's very recent.
*  And I think this is one of the reasons
*  that we can understand each other so well
*  and we can communicate effectively.
*  And I might have some sense of what it feels like to be you,
*  but other organisms bifurcated from us in time earlier.
*  This is just the concept of phylogeny, right?
*  But if you take that deeper
*  and you really think about that as the structure
*  of the physics that generates life,
*  and you take that very seriously,
*  all of that causation is still bundled up
*  in the objects we observe today.
*  And so you and I are close in this temporal structure,
*  but we're so close because we're really big
*  and we only are very different
*  and sort of like the most recent moments
*  in the time that's like embedded in us.
*  It's hard to use words to visualize what's in minds.
*  I have such a hard time with this sometimes.
*  I'm like, actually I was thinking in the way over here.
*  You have pictures in your brain
*  and then they're hard to put into words.
*  But I realized I always say I have a visual,
*  but it's not actually I have a visual,
*  it's I have a feeling.
*  Because oftentimes I cannot actually draw a picture
*  in my mind for the things that I say,
*  but sometimes they go through a picture
*  before they get to words.
*  But I like experimenting with words
*  because I think they help paint pictures.
*  Yeah, it's again, some kind of compressed feeling
*  that you can query to get a sense
*  of the bigger visualization that you have in mind.
*  It's just a really nice compression.
*  But I think the idea of this object
*  that in it contains all the information
*  about the history of identity that you see now,
*  just trying to visualize that is pretty cool.
*  I mean, obviously the mind breaks down quickly
*  as you step seconds and minutes back in time.
*  But I guess it's just a gigantic object
*  you're supposed to be thinking about.
*  Yeah, I think so.
*  And I think this is one of the reasons
*  that we have such an ability to abstract as humans,
*  because we are so gigantic that the space
*  that we can go back into is really large.
*  So the more abstract you're going,
*  the deeper you're going in that space.
*  But in that sense, aren't we fundamentally all connected?
*  Yes.
*  And this is why the definition of life
*  is that it cannot be the individual.
*  It has to be these lineages,
*  because they're all connected, they're interwoven,
*  and they're exchanging parts all the time.
*  Yeah, so maybe there's certain aspects of those lineages
*  that can be lifelike, they can be characteristics,
*  they can be measured, like with the Sunbe theory,
*  that have more or less life.
*  But they're all just fingertips of a much bigger object.
*  I think life is very high dimensional.
*  And in fact, I think you can be alive in some dimensions
*  and not in others.
*  Like if you could project all the causation that's in you,
*  in some features of you, very little causation is required,
*  and like very little history, and in some features a lot is.
*  So it's quite difficult to take this really high dimensional,
*  very deep structure and project it into things
*  that we really can understand and say,
*  like, this is the one thing that we're seeing,
*  because it's not one thing.
*  It's funny we're talking about this now,
*  and I'm slowly starting to realize,
*  one of the things I saw when I took ayahuasca,
*  afterwards actually, so the actual ceremony
*  is four or five hours, but afterwards you're still riding
*  whatever the thing that you're riding,
*  and I got a chance to afterwards hang out with some friends
*  and just shoot the shit in the forest,
*  and I get to see their faces.
*  And what was happening with their faces and their hair
*  is I would get this interesting effect.
*  First of all, everything was beautiful,
*  and I just had so much love for everybody,
*  but I could see their past selves, like, behind them.
*  It was this effect where, I guess it's a blurring effect
*  of where like if I move like this,
*  the faces that were just there are still there,
*  and it would just float like this, behind them,
*  which will create this incredible effect,
*  but it's also another way to think about that
*  is visualizing a little bit of that object
*  of the thing they wore just a few seconds ago.
*  It's a cool little effect.
*  That's very cool.
*  And now it's like giving it a bit more profundity
*  to the effect that was just beautiful aesthetically,
*  but it's also beautiful from a physics perspective,
*  because that is a past self.
*  I get a little glimpse at the past selves that they wore,
*  but then you take that to its natural conclusion,
*  not just a few seconds ago,
*  but just to the beginning of the universe,
*  and you can probably get down that lineage.
*  It's crazy that there's billions of years inside all of us.
*  All of us.
*  Yeah.
*  And then we connect, obviously,
*  not too long ago.
*  You mentioned just the technosphere,
*  and you also wrote that the most alive thing
*  on this planet is our technosphere.
*  Yeah.
*  Why is the technology we create a kind of life form?
*  Why are you seeing it as life?
*  Because it's creative, but with us, obviously,
*  not independently of us,
*  and also because of this lineage view of life,
*  and I think about life often as a planetary scale phenomena,
*  because that's the natural boundary
*  for all of this causation that's bundled
*  in every object in our biosphere.
*  And so for me, it's just sort of the current boundary
*  of how far life on our planet has pushed
*  into the things that our universe can generate.
*  And so it's the furthest thing.
*  It's the biggest thing.
*  And I think a lot about the nature of life
*  across different scales.
*  And so we have cells inside of us that are alive,
*  and we feel like we're alive,
*  but we don't often think about the societies
*  that we're embedded in as alive,
*  or a global scale organization of us
*  and our technology on the planet as alive.
*  But I think if you have this deeper view
*  into the nature of life,
*  which I think is necessary also to solve the origin of life,
*  then you have to include those things.
*  All of them.
*  You have to simultaneously think about life
*  at every single scale, the planetary and the bacteria level.
*  Yeah.
*  This is the hard thing about solving the problem of life,
*  I think, is how many things you have to integrate
*  into building a sort of a unified picture
*  of this thing that we wanna call life.
*  And a lot of our theories of physics are built
*  on building deep regularities that explain
*  a really broad class of phenomena.
*  And I think we haven't really traditionally thought
*  about life that way.
*  But I think to get at some of these hardest questions,
*  like looking for life on other planets
*  or the origin of life,
*  you really have to think about it that way.
*  And so most of my professional work
*  is just trying to understand every single thing
*  on this planet that might be an example of life,
*  which is pretty much everything,
*  and then trying to figure out
*  what's the deeper structure underlying that.
*  Yeah, Schrodinger wrote that living matter,
*  while not alluding the laws of physics
*  established up to date,
*  is likely to involve other laws of physics
*  hitherto unknown.
*  So to him...
*  I love that quote.
*  There was a sense that at the bottom of this
*  are new laws of physics that could explain
*  this thing that we call life.
*  Yeah, Schrodinger really tried to do
*  what physicists try to do,
*  which is explain things.
*  And his attempt was to try to explain life
*  in terms of non-equilibrium physics,
*  because he thought that was the best description
*  that we could generate at the time.
*  And so he did come up with something really insightful,
*  which was to predict the structure of DNA
*  as an aperiodic crystal.
*  And that was for a very precise reason
*  that that was the only kind of physical structure
*  that could encode enough information
*  to actually specify a cell.
*  We knew some things about genes,
*  but not about DNA and its actual structure
*  when he proposed that.
*  But in the book, he tried to explain life
*  as kind of going against entropy.
*  And so some people have talked about it
*  as like Schrodinger's paradox,
*  how can life persist
*  when the second law of thermodynamics is there.
*  But in open systems, that's not so problematic.
*  And really the question is,
*  why can life generate so much order?
*  And we don't have a physics to describe that.
*  And it's interesting,
*  generations of physicists have thought about this problem.
*  Oftentimes it's like when people are retiring,
*  they're like, oh, now I can work on life.
*  Or they're like more senior in their career
*  and they've worked on other more traditional problems.
*  And there's still a lot of impetus
*  in the physics community to think that
*  non-equilibrium physics will explain life.
*  But I think that's not the right approach.
*  I don't think ultimately the solution
*  to what life is there.
*  And I don't really think entropy has much to do with it
*  unless it's entirely reformulated.
*  Well, because you have to explain how interesting order,
*  how complexity emerges from the soup.
*  Yes, from randomness.
*  From randomness.
*  Physics currently can't do that.
*  No, physics hardly even acknowledges
*  that the universe is random at its base.
*  We like to think we live in a deterministic universe
*  and everything's deterministic.
*  But I think that's probably an artifact
*  of the way that we've written down laws of physics
*  since Newton invented modern physics
*  and his conception of motion and gravity.
*  Which he formulated laws that had initial conditions
*  and fixed dynamical laws.
*  And that's been sort of become the standard canon
*  of how people think the universe works
*  and how we need to describe any physical system
*  is with an initial condition and a law of motion.
*  And I think that's not actually
*  the way the universe really works.
*  I think it's a good approximation
*  for the kind of systems that physicists have studied so far.
*  And I think it will radically fail in the long term
*  at describing reality at its more basal levels.
*  I'm not saying there's a base.
*  I don't think that reality has a ground.
*  And I don't think there's a theory of everything.
*  But I think there are better theories
*  and I think there are more explanatory theories.
*  And I think we can get to something that explains
*  much more than the current laws of physics do.
*  When you say theory of everything,
*  you mean like everything, everything.
*  Yeah, like in physics right now,
*  it's really popular to talk about theories of everything.
*  So string theory is supposed to be a theory of everything
*  because it unifies quantum mechanics and gravity.
*  And people have their different pet theories of everything.
*  And the challenge with a theory of everything,
*  I really love this quote from David Krakauer,
*  which is a theory of everything is a theory of everything
*  except those things that theorize.
*  Oh, you mean removing the observer from the thing.
*  Yeah, but it's also weird
*  because if a theory of everything explained everything,
*  it should also explain the theory.
*  So the theory has to be recursive.
*  And none of our theories of physics are recursive.
*  So it's a weird concept.
*  Yeah, but it's very difficult to integrate the observer
*  into a theory.
*  I don't think so.
*  I think you can build a theory acknowledging
*  that you're an observer inside the universe.
*  But it doesn't become recursive in that way?
*  And you're saying it's possible to make a theory
*  that's okay with that?
*  I think so.
*  I mean, I don't think there's always gonna be
*  the paradox of another meta level
*  you could build on the meta level, right?
*  So like if you assume this is your universe
*  and you're the observer outside of it,
*  you have some meta description of that universe,
*  but then you need a meta description
*  of you describing that universe, right?
*  So this is one of the biggest challenges that we face
*  being observers inside our universe.
*  And also why the paradoxes
*  and the foundations of mathematics
*  and any place that we try to have observers in the system
*  or system describing itself show up.
*  But I think it is possible to build a physics
*  that builds in those things intrinsically
*  without having them be paradoxical
*  or have holes in the descriptions.
*  And so one place I think about this quite a lot,
*  which I think can give you sort of a more concrete example
*  is the nature of like what we call fundamental.
*  So we typically define fundamental right now
*  in terms of the smallest indivisible units of matter.
*  So again, you have to have a definition
*  of what you think material is and matter is,
*  but right now what's fundamental or elementary particles?
*  And we think they're fundamental
*  because we can't break them apart further.
*  And obviously we have theories like string theory
*  that if they're right, would replace the current description
*  of what's the most fundamental thing in our universe
*  by replacing with something smaller,
*  but we can't get to those theories
*  because we're technologically limited.
*  And so if you look at this from a historical perspective
*  and you think about explanations changing
*  as physical systems like us learn more about the reality
*  in which they live, we once considered atoms
*  to be the most fundamental thing.
*  And it literally comes from the word indivisible.
*  And then we realized atoms had substructure
*  because we built better technology,
*  which allowed us to quote unquote, see the world better
*  and resolve smaller features of it.
*  And then we built even better technology,
*  which allowed us to see even smaller structure
*  and get down to the standard model particles.
*  And we think that there might be structure below that,
*  but we can't get there yet with our technology.
*  So what's fundamental, the way we talk about it
*  in current physics is not actually fundamental.
*  It's the boundaries of what we can observe in our universe,
*  what we can see with our technology.
*  And so if you wanna build a theory
*  that's about us and about what's inside the universe
*  that we can observe, not what's at the boundary of it,
*  you need to talk about objects that are in the universe
*  that you can actually break apart to smaller things.
*  So I think the things that are fundamental
*  are actually the constructed objects.
*  They're the ones that really exist
*  and you really understand their properties
*  because you know how the universe constructed them
*  because you can actually take them apart.
*  You can understand the intrinsic laws that built them.
*  But the things at the boundary are just at the boundary,
*  they're evolving with us and we'll learn more
*  about that structure as we go along.
*  But really if we wanna talk about
*  what's fundamental inside our universe,
*  we have to talk about all these things
*  that are traditionally considered emergent,
*  but really just structures in time
*  that have causal histories that constructed them
*  and are really actually what our universe is about.
*  So we should focus on the construction methodology
*  as the fundamental thing.
*  Do you think there's a bottom
*  to the smallest possible thing that makes up the universe?
*  I don't see one.
*  And it'll take way too long.
*  It'll take longer to find that
*  than it will to understand the mechanism that created life.
*  I think so, yeah.
*  I think for me, the frontier in modern physics,
*  where the new physics lies,
*  is not in high energy particle physics,
*  it's not in quantum gravity,
*  it's not in any of these sort of traditionally sold,
*  this is gonna be the newest deepest insight we have
*  into the nature of reality.
*  It is going to be in studying the problems of life
*  and intelligence and the things that are sort of
*  also our current existential crises as a civilization
*  or a culture that's going through an existential trauma
*  of inventing technologies that we don't understand right now.
*  Existential trauma and the terror we feel
*  that that technology might somehow destroy us,
*  us meaning living, intelligent living organisms,
*  and yet we don't understand what that even means.
*  Well, humans have always been afraid
*  of our technologies though, right?
*  So it's kind of a fascinating thing
*  that every time we invent something we don't understand,
*  it takes us a little while to catch up with it.
*  I think also in part humans kind of love being afraid.
*  Yeah, we love being traumatized.
*  It's weird.
*  We wanna learn more.
*  And then when we learn more, it traumatizes us.
*  Yeah.
*  You know, I never thought about it this before,
*  but I think this is one of the reasons I love what I do
*  is because it traumatizes me all the time.
*  That sounds really bad.
*  But what I mean is like,
*  I love the shock of realizing that,
*  coming to understand something in a way
*  that you never understood it before.
*  I think it seems to me when I see a lot of the ways
*  other people react to new ideas
*  that they don't feel that way intrinsically,
*  but for me that's why I do what I do.
*  I love that feeling.
*  But you're also working on a topic
*  where it's fundamentally ego destroying
*  because you're talking about life.
*  It's humbling to think that we're not,
*  the individual human is not special.
*  Yeah.
*  And you're like very viscerally exploring that.
*  Yeah, I'm trying to embody that
*  because I think you have to live the physics
*  to understand it, but there's a great quote about Einstein.
*  I don't know if this is true or not
*  that he once said that he could feel like
*  the beam in his belly.
*  And I think,
*  but I think like you gotta think about it though, right?
*  If you're a really deep thinker
*  and you're really thinking about reality that deeply
*  and you are part of the reality
*  that you're trying to describe,
*  like you feel it, you really feel it.
*  That's what I was saying about
*  you're always like walking along the cliff.
*  If you fall off, you're falling into madness.
*  Yes, it's a constant descent in the madness.
*  The fascinating thing about physicists and madness
*  is that you don't know if you've fallen off the cliff.
*  Yeah, you know you don't know.
*  That's the cool thing about it.
*  I rely on other people to tell me.
*  Actually, this is very funny
*  because I have these conversations with my students often.
*  They're worried about going crazy.
*  I have to like,
*  reassure them that one of the reasons they'll stay sane
*  is by trying to work on concrete problems.
*  Going crazy or waking up,
*  I don't know which one it is.
*  Yeah.
*  So what do you think is the origin of life on earth?
*  And how can we talk about it in a productive way?
*  The origin of life is like this boundary
*  that the universe can only cross
*  if a structure that emerges can reinforce its own existence,
*  which is self-reproduction, autocatalysis,
*  things people traditionally talk about.
*  But it has to be able to maintain its own existence
*  against this sort of randomness that happens in chemistry
*  and this randomness that happens in the quantum world.
*  And like, it's in some sense the emergence
*  of like a deterministic structure that says,
*  I'm gonna exist and I'm gonna keep going.
*  But pinning that down is really hard.
*  We have ways of thinking about it in assembly theory
*  that I think are pretty rigorous.
*  And one of the things I'm really excited about
*  is trying to actually quantify in an assembly theoretic way
*  when the origin of life happens.
*  But the basic process I have in mind
*  is like a system that has no causal contingency,
*  no constraints of objects,
*  basically constraining the existence of other objects
*  or allowing the existence of other objects.
*  And so that sounds very abstract,
*  but like you can just think of like a chemical reaction
*  can't happen if there's not a catalyst, for example,
*  or a baby can't be born if there wasn't a parent.
*  So there's a lot of causal contingency that's necessary
*  for certain things to happen.
*  So you think about this sort of unconstrained random system,
*  there's nothing that reinforces
*  the existence of other things.
*  So the sort of resources just get washed out
*  in all of these different structures
*  and none of them exist again,
*  or they're not very complicated
*  if they're in high abundance.
*  And some random events allow some things
*  to start reinforcing the existence
*  of a small subset of objects.
*  And if they can do that,
*  like just molecules basically recognizing each other
*  and being able to catalyze certain reactions,
*  there's this kind of transition point that happens
*  where unless you get a self reinforcing structure
*  something that can maintain its own existence,
*  it actually can't cross this boundary to make any objects
*  in high abundance without having this sort of past history
*  that it's carrying with us
*  and maintaining the existence of that past history.
*  And that boundary point where objects can't exist
*  unless they have the selection and history in them
*  is what we call the original life.
*  And pretty much everything beyond that boundary
*  is holding on for dear life to all of the causation
*  and causal structure that's basically put it there.
*  And it's carving its way through this possibility space
*  into generating more and more structure.
*  And that's when you get the open end cascade of evolution,
*  but that boundary point is really hard to cross.
*  And then what happens when you cross that boundary point
*  and the way objects come into existence
*  is also like really fascinating dynamics
*  because as things become more complex,
*  the assembly index increases,
*  I can explain all these things.
*  Sorry, you can tell me what you wanna explain.
*  I mean explain or what people will wanna hear.
*  Sorry, I have like a very vivid visual in my brain
*  and it's really hard to articulate it.
*  Got to convert it to language.
*  I know, it's so hard.
*  It's like it's going from like a feeling
*  to a visual to language is so stifling sometimes.
*  I have to convert it from language to a visual feeling.
*  I think it's working.
*  I hope so.
*  I really like the self-reinforcing of the objects.
*  I mean, just so I understand,
*  one way to create a lot of the same kind of object
*  is make them self-reinforcing.
*  Yes, so self-reproduction has its property, right?
*  Like if the system can make itself,
*  then it can persist in time, right?
*  Because all objects decay,
*  they all have a finite lifetime.
*  So if you're able to make a copy of yourself before you die,
*  before the second law eats you
*  or whatever people think happens,
*  then that structure can persist in time.
*  So that's a way to sort of emerge out of a random soup,
*  out of a randomness of soup.
*  Right, but things that can copy themselves are very rare.
*  Yeah, rare.
*  And so what ends up happening is that you get structures
*  that enable the existence of other things.
*  And then somehow, only for some sets of objects,
*  you get closed structures that are self-reinforcing
*  and allow that entire structure to persist.
*  Right, so the one object A reinforces the existence
*  of object B, but object A can die.
*  Yeah.
*  So you have to close that loop.
*  Right, so this is the classic idea.
*  It's just all very unlikely statistically,
*  but that's sufficiently,
*  so you're saying there's a chance.
*  There is a chance.
*  There's low probability, but once you solve that,
*  once you close the loop,
*  you can create a lot of those objects.
*  And that's what we're trying to figure out,
*  is what are the causal constraints that close the loop.
*  So there is this idea that's been in the literature
*  for a really long time that was originally proposed
*  by Stuart Kaufman as really critical to the origin life
*  called the autocatholic set.
*  So autocatholic set is exactly this property.
*  We have A makes B, B makes C, C makes A,
*  and you get a closed system.
*  But the problem with the theory of autocatholic sets
*  is incredibly brittle as a theory,
*  and it requires a lot of ad hoc assumptions.
*  Like you have to assume function.
*  You have to say this thing makes B.
*  It's not an emergent property,
*  the association between A and B.
*  And so the way I think about it is much more general.
*  If you think about these histories that make objects,
*  it's kind of like the structure of the histories
*  becomes, collapses in such a way
*  that these things are all in the same sort of
*  causal structure, and that causal structure
*  actually loops back on itself to be able to generate
*  some of the things that make the higher level structures.
*  Lee has a beautiful example of this actually in molybdenum.
*  It's like the first non-organic autocatholic set.
*  It's a self-reproducing molybdenum ring.
*  But it's like molybdenum, and basically,
*  if you look at the molybdenum,
*  it makes a huge molybdenum ring.
*  I don't remember exactly how big it is.
*  It might be like 150 molybdenum atoms or something.
*  But if you think about the configuration space
*  of that object, it's exponentially large,
*  how many possible molecules.
*  So why does the entire system collapse
*  on just making that one structure?
*  If you start from molybdenum atoms
*  that are maybe just a couple of them stuck together.
*  And so what they see in this system
*  is there's a few intermediate stages.
*  So there's some random events where the chemistry
*  comes together, makes these structures.
*  And then once you get to this very large one,
*  it becomes a template for the smaller ones.
*  And then the whole system just reinforces
*  its own production.
*  How did Lee find this molybdenum?
*  If I knew how Lee's brain work,
*  I think I would understand a little more
*  about the universe.
*  This is not an algorithmic discovery.
*  It's a-
*  No, but I think it goes to the deepest roots
*  of when he started thinking about origins of life.
*  So I don't know all his history,
*  but what he's told me is he started out in crystallography.
*  And there's some things that he would just,
*  people would just take for granted
*  about chemical structures
*  that he was deeply perplexed about.
*  Just why are these really intricate,
*  really complex structures forming so easily
*  under these conditions?
*  And he was really interested in life,
*  he started in that field.
*  So he's just carried with him these sort of deep insights
*  from these systems that seem like they're totally not alive
*  and just like these metallic chemistries
*  into actually thinking about the deep principles of life.
*  So I think he already knew a lot about that chemistry
*  and he also, assembly theory came from him
*  thinking about how these systems work.
*  So he had some intuition about what was going on
*  with this molybdenum ring.
*  The molybdenum might be able to be the thing
*  that makes a ring.
*  They knew about them for a long time,
*  but they didn't know that the mechanism
*  of why that particular structure formed
*  was autocatalytic feedback.
*  And so that's what they figured out in this paper.
*  And I actually think that paper is revealing
*  some of the mechanism of the origin of life transition.
*  Because really what you see,
*  like the origin of life is basically like,
*  you should have a combinatorial explosion
*  of the space of possible structures
*  that are too large to exhaust.
*  And yet you see it collapse on this,
*  really small space of possibilities
*  that's mutually reinforcing itself to keep existing.
*  That is the origin of life.
*  There's some set of structures that result
*  in this autocatalytic feedback.
*  Yeah.
*  And what is it, tiny, tiny, tiny, tiny percent?
*  I think it's a small space.
*  But chemistry is very large.
*  And so like-
*  There might be a lot of them out there,
*  but we don't know.
*  And one of them is the thing
*  that probably started life on Earth.
*  That's right.
*  Or many, many starts.
*  Yes.
*  And it keeps starting maybe.
*  Yeah.
*  I mean, there's also all kinds of other weird properties
*  that happen around this kind of phase boundary.
*  So this other project that I have in my lab
*  is focused on the origin of chirality,
*  which is thinking about,
*  so chirality is this property of molecules
*  that they can come in mirror image forms.
*  So like chiral means hand.
*  So your left and right hand
*  are what's called non-superimposable
*  because if you try to lay one on the other,
*  you can't actually lay them directly on top of each other.
*  And that's the property of being a mirror image.
*  So there's this sort of perplexing property
*  of the chemistry of life
*  that no one's been able to really adequately explain
*  that all of the amino acids in proteins are left-handed
*  and all of the bases in RNA and DNA are right-handed.
*  And yet the chemistry of these building block units,
*  amino acids and nucleobases is the same
*  for left and right-handed.
*  So you have to have some kind of symmetry breaking
*  where you go from these chemistries
*  that seem entirely equivalent
*  to only having one chemistry take over as the dominant form.
*  And for a long time, I had been really,
*  I actually did my PhD on the origin of chirality.
*  I was working on it as like
*  a symmetry breaking problem in physics.
*  This is how I got started in the origin of life.
*  And then I left it for a long time
*  because I thought it was like one of the most boring problems
*  in the origin of life, but I've come back to it
*  because I think there's something really deep going on here
*  related to this like combinatorial explosion
*  of the space of possibilities.
*  But just to get to that point,
*  like this feature of this handedness has been the main focus
*  but people take for granted
*  the existence of chiral molecules at all
*  that this property of having a handedness.
*  And they just assume that,
*  it's just a generic feature of chemistry.
*  But if you actually look at molecules,
*  if you look at chemical space,
*  which is like the space of all possible molecules
*  that people can generate,
*  and you look at small molecules,
*  things that have less than about seven to 11 heavy atoms,
*  so things that are not hydrogen,
*  almost every single molecule in that space is achiral,
*  like doesn't have a chiral center.
*  So it would be like a spoon,
*  a spoon doesn't have it,
*  like it's the same as its mirror image.
*  It's not like a hand that's different than its mirror image.
*  But if you get to like this threshold boundary
*  above that boundary,
*  almost every single molecule is chiral.
*  So you go from a universe
*  where almost nothing has a mirror image form,
*  there's no mirror image universe of possibilities
*  to this one where every single structure
*  has pretty much a mirror image version.
*  And what we've been looking at in my lab
*  is that it seems to be the case
*  that the original life transition happens around the time
*  when you start accumulating,
*  you push your molecules to a large enough complexity
*  that chiral molecules become very likely to form.
*  And then there's a cascade of molecular recognition
*  where chiral molecules can recognize each other.
*  And then you get this sort of autocatalytic feedback
*  and things self-reinforcing.
*  So is chirality in itself an interesting feature
*  or just an accident of complexity?
*  No, it's a super interesting feature.
*  I think chirality breaks symmetry in time, not space.
*  So we think of it as a spatial property,
*  like a left and right hand.
*  But if I choose the left hand,
*  I'm basically choosing the future of that system
*  for all time because I've basically made a choice
*  between the ways that that molecule can now react
*  with every other object in its chemical universe.
*  Oh, I see.
*  And so you're actually like,
*  when you have this splitting of making a molecule
*  that now has another form it could have had
*  by the same exact atomic composition,
*  but now it's just a mirror image isometry,
*  you're basically splitting the universe
*  of possibilities every time.
*  Yeah, in two.
*  In two, but molecules can have more than one chiral center
*  and that's not the only stereosometry that they can have.
*  So this is one of the reasons that taxol
*  fills 1.5 universes of space.
*  It's all of these spatial permutations
*  that you do on these objects
*  that actually makes the space so huge.
*  So the point of this sort of chiral transition
*  that I'm pointing out is chirality is actually a signature
*  of being in a complex chemical space.
*  And the fact that we think it's a really generic feature
*  of chemistry and it's really prevalent
*  is because most of the chemistry we study on earth
*  is a product already of life.
*  And it also has to do with this transition and assembly,
*  this transition and possibility spaces,
*  because I think there's something really fundamental
*  going on at this boundary
*  that you don't really need to go that far
*  into chemical space to actually see life
*  in terms of this depth in time,
*  this depth in symmetries of objects
*  in terms of like chiral symmetries
*  or this assembly structure.
*  But getting past this boundary
*  that's not very deep in that space requires life.
*  It's a really weird property.
*  And it's really weird that so many abrupt things happen
*  in chemistry at that same scale.
*  So would that be the greatest invention ever made on earth
*  in its evolutionary history?
*  So I really liked that formulation of it.
*  Nick Lane has a book called Life Ascending
*  where he lists the 10 great inventions of evolution.
*  The origin of life being first,
*  and DNA, the hereditary material
*  that encodes the genetic instructions
*  for all living organisms,
*  then photosynthesis, the process that allows organisms
*  to convert sunlight into chemical energy,
*  producing oxygen as a byproduct,
*  the complex cell, eukaryotic cells,
*  which contain a nucleus and organelles
*  arose from simple bacterial cells,
*  sex, sexual reproduction, movement,
*  so just the ability to move under which
*  you have the predation, the predators,
*  and ability of living organisms to find food.
*  Oh, I like that movement in there, that's cool.
*  Yeah, but a movement includes
*  a lot of interesting stuff in there,
*  like predator-prey dynamic,
*  which, not to romanticize a nature's metal,
*  that seems like an important one.
*  I don't know, it's such a computationally powerful thing
*  to have a predator and prey.
*  Well, it's efficient for things to eat,
*  other things that are already alive
*  because they don't have to go all the way back
*  to the base chemistry.
*  Well, that, but maybe I just like deadlines,
*  but it creates an urgency, you're gonna get eaten.
*  You gotta live?
*  Yeah, like survival, it's not just the static environment
*  you're battling against, you're like,
*  yeah, the dangers against which you're trying to survive
*  are also evolving.
*  This is just a much faster way
*  to explore the space of possibilities.
*  I actually think it's a gift that we don't have much time.
*  Yes, sight, the ability to see,
*  so the increasing complexifying of sensory organisms,
*  consciousness and death,
*  the concept of programmed cell death.
*  These are all inventions along the line.
*  I like invention as a word for them, I think that's good.
*  Which are the more interesting inventions to you?
*  With origin of life, because you kind of
*  are not glorifying the origin of life itself.
*  There's a process.
*  No, I think the origin of life is a continual process,
*  that's why.
*  I'm interested in the first transition
*  in solving that problem, because I think it's the hardest,
*  but I think it's happening all the time.
*  When you look back at the history of Earth,
*  like what are you impressed happened?
*  I like sight as an invention,
*  because I think having sensory perception
*  and trying to comprehend the world,
*  to use anthropocentric terms,
*  is like a really critical feature of life.
*  And I also, it's interesting the way that sight
*  has complexified over time.
*  So if you think at the origin of life,
*  nothing on the planet could see.
*  So for a long time, life had no sight.
*  And then photon receptors were invented.
*  And then when multicellularity evolved,
*  those cells eventually grew into eyes.
*  And we had the multicellular eye.
*  And then it's interesting when you get to societies,
*  like human societies, that we invent even better technologies
*  of seeing like telescopes and microscopes,
*  which allow us to see deeper into the universe
*  or at smaller scales.
*  So I think that's pretty profound,
*  the way that sight has transformed the ability of life
*  to literally see the reality in which it's existing in.
*  I think consciousness is also obviously deeply interesting.
*  I've gotten kind of obsessed with like octopus.
*  I don't, like, they're just so weird.
*  And the fact that like they evolved complex nervous systems
*  kind of independently is like, seems very alien.
*  Yeah, there's a lot of alien like organisms.
*  That's another thing I saw in the jungle.
*  Yeah.
*  Just things that are like,
*  oh, okay, they make one of those, huh?
*  It just feels like there's-
*  Do you have any examples?
*  There's a frog that's as thin as a sheet of paper.
*  And I was like, what?
*  And it gets birthed through like pores.
*  Like how-
*  Oh, I've seen videos of that.
*  It's so gross when the babies come out.
*  Did you see that?
*  Like in person, like the babies coming out?
*  Oh no, no.
*  I saw the, without the-
*  Have you seen videos of that?
*  It's so gross.
*  It's one of the grossest things I've ever seen.
*  Well, so gross is just the other side of beautiful.
*  It's like, oh wow, that's possible.
*  I guess if I was one of those frogs,
*  I would think that was the most beautiful event
*  I'd ever seen.
*  Although like human childbirth is not that beautiful either.
*  Yeah, it's all a matter of perspective.
*  Well, we come in the world so violently.
*  It's just like, it's amazing.
*  I mean, the world is a violent place.
*  So again, another, it's just another side of the coin.
*  You know what?
*  What actually makes me think of one that's not up there,
*  which I do find really incredibly amazing
*  is the process of like the germline cell in,
*  you know, in organisms.
*  Like basically like every living thing on this planet
*  at some point in its life has to go through a single cell.
*  And this whole issue of like development,
*  like the developmental program is kind of crazy.
*  Like how do you build you out of a single cell?
*  How does a single cell know how to do that?
*  Like, you know, pattern formation
*  of a multicellular organism obviously like evolves with DNA,
*  but there's a lot of stuff happening there
*  about when cells take on certain morphologies
*  and things that people don't understand
*  like the actual shape formation mechanism.
*  And a lot of people study that.
*  And it's, and there's a lot of advances being made now
*  in that field.
*  I think it's pretty shocking though
*  that like how little we know about that process.
*  And often it's left off of people's lists.
*  It's just kind of interesting.
*  Embryogenesis is fascinating.
*  Yeah, cause you start from just one cell.
*  Yeah.
*  And the genes in all the cells are the same, right?
*  So like the differentiation has to be something
*  that's like much more about like the actual like,
*  you know, expression of genes over time
*  and like how they get switched on and off
*  and also the physical environment
*  of like the cell interacting with other cells.
*  And there's just a lot of stuff going on.
*  Yeah, the computation, the intelligence of that process
*  might be like the most important thing to understand.
*  We just kind of don't really think about it.
*  Right.
*  We think about the final product.
*  Yeah.
*  Maybe the key to understanding the organism
*  is understanding that process, not the final product.
*  Probably, yes.
*  I think most of the things about understanding anything
*  about what we are embedded in time.
*  Well, of course you would say that.
*  I know, so predictable.
*  It's turning into a deterministic universe.
*  It always has been, always was like the meme.
*  Yeah, always was, but it won't be in the future.
*  Well, that's before we talk about the future,
*  let's talk about the past, the assembly theory.
*  Can you explain assembly theory to me?
*  I listened to Lee talk about it for many hours
*  and I understood nothing.
*  No, I'm just kidding.
*  Well, I just wanted to take another,
*  you've been already talking about it,
*  but just, just, just another, just what,
*  from a big picture view,
*  is the assembly theory way of thinking about our world,
*  about our universe.
*  Yeah.
*  I think the first thing is, you know,
*  that like the observation that life seems to be
*  the only thing in the universe that builds complexity
*  and the way that we see it here.
*  And complexity is obviously like a loaded term,
*  so I'll just use assembly instead.
*  Cause I think assembly is more precise.
*  But the idea that like, you know,
*  all the things on your desk here from your computer
*  to the pen, to, you know, us sitting here
*  don't exist anywhere else in the universe,
*  as far as we know, they only exist on this planet.
*  And it took a long evolutionary history to get to us,
*  is a real feature that we should take seriously
*  as one that's deeply embedded in the laws of physics
*  and the structure of the universe that we live in.
*  And standard physics would say that, you know,
*  all of that complexity traces back to the
*  infinitesimal deviations and like the initial state
*  of the universe that there was some order there.
*  I find that deeply unsatisfactory.
*  And what assembly theory says that's very different
*  is that the universe is basically constructing itself.
*  And when you get to these commonest tutorial spaces
*  like chemistry, where the space of possibilities
*  is too large to exhaust them all,
*  you can only construct things along historically
*  contingent paths, like you basically have causal chains
*  of events that happen to allow other things
*  to come into existence.
*  And that this is the way that complex objects get formed
*  is basically unscatholing on the past history
*  of objects making more complex objects,
*  making more complex objects.
*  That idea in itself is easy to state and simple,
*  but it has some really radical implications
*  as far as what you think is the nature of the physics
*  that would describe life.
*  And so what assembly theory does formally
*  is try to measure the boundary in the space of all things
*  that chemically could exist, for example,
*  like all possible molecules, where is the boundary
*  above which we should say these things are too complex
*  to happen outside of an evolutionary chain of events,
*  outside of selection.
*  And we formalize that with two observables.
*  One of them is the copy number of the object.
*  So how many of the object did you observe?
*  And the second one is what's the minimal number
*  of recursive steps to make it.
*  So if you start from elementary building blocks
*  like bonds for molecules and you put them together
*  and then you take things you've made already
*  and build up to the object,
*  what's the shortest number of steps you had to take?
*  And what Lee's been able to show in the lab with his team
*  is that for organic chemistry, it's about 15 steps.
*  And then you only see molecules that, you know,
*  the only molecules that we observe
*  that are past that threshold are ones that are in life.
*  And in fact, one of the things I'm trying to do
*  with this idea of like trying to actually quantify
*  the origin of life as a transition
*  in like a phase transition assembly theory
*  is actually be able to explain why that boundary
*  is where it is.
*  Cause I think that's actually the boundary
*  that life must cross.
*  So the idea of going back to this thing
*  we were talking about before about these structures
*  that can reinforce their own existence
*  and move past that boundary,
*  15 seems to be that boundary in chemical space.
*  It's not a universal number.
*  It will be different for different assembly spaces.
*  But that's what we've experimentally validated so far.
*  And then-
*  So literally 15, like the assembly index is 15.
*  It's 15 or so for the experimental data, yeah.
*  So that's when you start getting the self-reinforcing.
*  That's when you have to have that feature
*  in order for to observe molecules
*  in high abundance in that space.
*  So copy numbers, the number of exact copies,
*  that's what you mean by high abundance
*  and assembly index or the complexity of the object
*  is how many steps it took to create it,
*  and then you can think of it as a recursive.
*  Recursive, yeah.
*  So you can think of objects in assembly theory
*  as basically recursive stacks
*  of the construction steps to build them.
*  So it's like you take this step
*  and then you make this object
*  and you make it this object and make this object
*  and then you get up to the final object.
*  But that object is all of that history
*  rolled up into the current structure.
*  What if you took the long way home?
*  You can't take the long way.
*  Why not?
*  The long way doesn't exist.
*  It's a good song though.
*  If I do a random walk from A to B,
*  I'll eventually, if I start at A,
*  I'll eventually end up at B
*  and that random walk will be much shorter than,
*  longer than the shorter.
*  If you look at objects,
*  so we define something we call the assembly universe
*  and the assembly universe is ordered in time.
*  It's actually ordered in the causation,
*  the number of steps to produce an object.
*  And so all objects in the universe
*  are in some sense exist in a layer
*  that's defined by their assembly index.
*  And the size of each layer is growing exponentially.
*  So what you're talking about,
*  if you wanna look at the long way of getting to an object,
*  as I'm increasing the assembly index of an object,
*  I'm moving deeper and deeper
*  into an exponentially growing space.
*  And it's actually also the case that the sort of
*  typical path to get to that object
*  is also exponentially growing
*  with respect to the assembly index.
*  And so if you want to try to make
*  a more and more complex object
*  and you wanna do it by a typical path,
*  that's actually an exponentially receding horizon.
*  And so most objects that come into existence
*  have to be causally very similar to the things that exist
*  because they're close by in that space
*  and they can actually get to it
*  by an almost shortest path for that object.
*  The almost shortest path is the most likely.
*  And like by a lot.
*  By a lot.
*  Okay, so if you see a high copy number.
*  Yeah, imagine yourself.
*  A copy number greater than one.
*  Yeah, I mean, basically we live,
*  the more complex we get,
*  we live in a space that is growing exponentially large.
*  And the ways of getting to objects in the space
*  are also growing exponentially large.
*  And so we're this kind of recursively stacked structure
*  of all of these objects
*  that are clinging onto each other for existence.
*  And then they grab something else
*  and are able to bring that thing into existence
*  because it's kind of similar to them.
*  But there is a phase transition.
*  There is a.
*  There is a transition.
*  There is a place where you would say, oh.
*  I think it's actually abrupt.
*  I've never been able to say that in my entire career
*  before I've always gone back and forth
*  about whether the original life was kind of gradual
*  or abrupt, I think is very abrupt.
*  Poetically, chemically, literally.
*  What snaps?
*  Okay, that's very beautiful.
*  It snaps.
*  Okay, but.
*  We'll be poetic today.
*  But no, I think there's like a lot of random exploration
*  and then there's like,
*  and then the structure, the possibility space
*  just collapses on the structure kind of really fast
*  that can reinforce its own existence
*  because it's basically fighting against non-existence.
*  Yeah, you tweeted,
*  the most significant struggle for existence
*  in the evolutionary process
*  is not among the objects that do exist,
*  but between the ones that do
*  and those that never have the chance to.
*  This is where selection does most of its causal work.
*  The objects that never get a chance to exist.
*  Yeah.
*  The struggle between the ones that never get a chance
*  to exist and the ones that, okay.
*  What's that line exactly?
*  I don't know, we can make songs out of all of these.
*  What are the objects that never get a chance to exist?
*  What does that mean?
*  So there was this website, I forgot what it was,
*  but it's like a neural network
*  that just generates a human face.
*  And it's like, this person does not exist.
*  I think that's what it's called, right?
*  So you can just click on that all day
*  and you can look at people all day that don't exist.
*  All of those people exist in that space
*  of things that don't exist.
*  Yeah, but there's the real struggle.
*  Yeah, so the struggle of the quote,
*  the struggle for existence is,
*  that goes all the way back to Darwin's writing
*  about natural selection, right?
*  So like the whole idea of survival of the fittest
*  is everything struggling to exist,
*  this predator or prey dynamic,
*  and the fittest survive.
*  And so the struggle for existence
*  is really what selection is all about.
*  But you're, and that's true.
*  We do see things that do exist competing
*  to continue to exist.
*  But each time that,
*  like if you think about this space of possibilities
*  and each time the universe generates a new structure,
*  or like an object that exists,
*  generates a new structure along this causal chain,
*  it's generating something that exists,
*  that never existed before.
*  And each time that we make that kind of decision,
*  we're excluding a huge space of possibilities.
*  And so actually like as this process
*  of increasing assembly index,
*  it's not just that like the space that these objects exist in
*  is exponentially growing,
*  but there are objects in that space
*  that are exponentially receding away from us.
*  So they're becoming exponentially less and less likely
*  to ever exist.
*  And so existence excludes a huge number of things.
*  Just because of the accident of history, how it ended up.
*  Yeah, it is in part an accident
*  because I think some of the structure that gets generated
*  is driven a bit by randomness.
*  I think a lot of it,
*  so one of the conceptions that we have in assembly theory
*  is the universe is random at its base.
*  You can see this in chemistry,
*  like unconstrained chemical reactions are pretty random.
*  And also quantum mechanics,
*  there's lots of places that give evidence for that.
*  And deterministic structures emerge by things
*  that can causally reinforce themselves
*  and maintain persistence over time.
*  And so we are some of the most deterministic things
*  in the universe.
*  And so like we can generate very regular structure
*  and we can generate new structure
*  along a particular lineage,
*  but the possibility space that the sort of tips,
*  like the things we can generate next is really huge.
*  So there's some stochasticity in what we actually
*  instantiate as like the next structures
*  that get built in the biosphere.
*  It's not completely deterministic
*  because the space of future possibilities is always larger
*  than the space of things that exist now.
*  So how many instantiations of life is out there,
*  do you think?
*  So how often does this happen?
*  What we see happen here on earth,
*  how often is this process repeated throughout our galaxy,
*  throughout the universe?
*  So I said before, like right now,
*  I think the origin of life is a continuous process on earth.
*  Like I think this idea of like combinatorial spaces
*  that our biosphere generates, not just chemistry,
*  but other spaces often cross this threshold
*  where they then allow themselves to persist
*  with a particular regular structure over time.
*  So language is another one where,
*  like the space of possible configurations
*  of the 26 letters of the English alphabet
*  is astronomically large,
*  but we use with very high regularity certain structures.
*  And then we associate meaning to them
*  because of the regularity of like how much we use them.
*  So meaning is an emergent property of the causation
*  and the objects and like how often they recur
*  and what the relationship of the recurrence is
*  to other objects.
*  Meaning is the emergent property, okay, got it.
*  Well, this is why you can play with language so much,
*  actually, so words don't really carry meaning.
*  It's just about how you lace them together.
*  Yeah, but from where does the-
*  But you don't have a lot of room,
*  obviously as a speaker of a given language,
*  you don't have a lot of room with a given word to wiggle,
*  but you do have a certain amount of room
*  to push the meanings of words.
*  And I do this all the time and you have to do it
*  with the kind of work that I do,
*  because if you want to discover an abstraction,
*  like some kind of concept that we don't understand yet,
*  it means we don't have the language.
*  And so the words that we have are inadequate
*  to describe the things.
*  This is why we're having a hard time talking
*  about assembly theory,
*  because it's a newly emerging idea.
*  And so I'm constantly playing with words in different ways
*  to try to convey the meaning
*  that is actually behind the words, but it's hard to do.
*  So you have to wiggle within the constraints.
*  Yes, lots of wiggle.
*  The great orators are just good at wiggling.
*  Do you wiggle?
*  I'm not a very good wiggler, no.
*  This is the problem, this is part of the problem.
*  Now I like playing with words a lot.
*  It's very funny, because I know you talked about this
*  with Lee, but people were so offended by the writing
*  of the paper that came out last fall.
*  And it was interesting because the ways that we use
*  words were not the way that people
*  were interacting with the words.
*  And I think that was part of the mismatch
*  where we were trying to use words in a new way
*  because we were trying to describe something
*  that hadn't been described adequately before,
*  but we had to use the words that everyone else uses
*  for things that are related.
*  And so it was really interesting to watch that clash play out
*  in real time for me, being someone that tries to be
*  so precise with my word usage,
*  knowing that it's always gonna be vague.
*  Boy, can I relate.
*  What is truth?
*  Is truth the thing you meant when you wrote the words,
*  or is truth the thing that people understood
*  when they read the words?
*  Oh yeah.
*  I think that compression mechanism into language
*  is a really interesting one,
*  and that's why Twitter is a nice exercise.
*  I love Twitter.
*  You get to write a thing, and you think a certain thing
*  when you write it, and then you get to see
*  all these other people interpret it
*  in all kinds of different ways.
*  And I use it as an experimental platform for that reason.
*  I wish there was a higher diversity
*  of interpretation mechanisms applied to tweets,
*  meaning all kinds of different people would come to it,
*  like some people that see the good in everything,
*  and some people that are ultra-cynical,
*  a bunch of haters and a bunch of lovers and a bunch of.
*  Maybe they could do better jobs
*  with presenting material to people.
*  It's usually based on interest,
*  but I think it would be really nice
*  if you got 10% of your Twitter feed
*  was random stuff sampled from other places.
*  That'd be kind of fun.
*  Also, I would love to filter,
*  just bin the response to tweets
*  by the people that hate on everything.
*  Yes.
*  The people that are.
*  Oh, that would be fantastic.
*  The people that are super positive on everything,
*  and they'll just kind of, I guess,
*  normalize their response,
*  because then it'd be cool to see
*  if the people that are usually positive about everything
*  are hating on you, or totally don't understand,
*  or completely misunderstood.
*  Yeah, usually it takes a lot of clicking to find that out.
*  Yeah, so it'd be better if it was sorted, yeah.
*  The more clicking you do,
*  the more damaging it is to the soul.
*  It's like instead of, you could have the blue check,
*  but you should have, are you a pessimist, an optimist?
*  Yeah, there's a lot of colors.
*  Theotic neutral.
*  What's your personality?
*  A whole rainbow of checks.
*  And then you realize there's more categories
*  than we could possibly express in colors.
*  Yeah, of course.
*  People are complex.
*  That's our best feature.
*  I don't know how we got to the wiggling required,
*  given the constraints of language,
*  because I think we started about me asking
*  about alien life, which is how many different times
*  did the face transition happen elsewhere?
*  Do you think there's other alien civilizations out there?
*  This goes into like the,
*  are you on the boundary of insane or not?
*  But when you think about the structure of the physics
*  of what we are that deeply,
*  it really changes your conception of things.
*  And going to this idea of the universe,
*  being kind of small in physical space
*  compared to how big it is in time and how large we are,
*  it really makes me question about whether there's
*  any other structure that's like this giant crystal in time,
*  this giant causal structure like our biosphere
*  slash technosphere is anywhere else in the universe.
*  Why not?
*  I don't know.
*  Just because this one is gigantic,
*  doesn't mean there's no other gigantic.
*  But I think when the universe is expanding,
*  it's expanding in space,
*  but in assembly theory, it's also expanding in time.
*  And actually that's driving the expansion in space.
*  And expansion in time is also driving the expansion
*  in the sort of combinatorial space of things on our planet.
*  So that's driving the sort of pace of technology
*  and all the other things.
*  So time is driving all of these things,
*  which is a little bit crazy to think that the universe
*  is just getting bigger because time is getting bigger.
*  But like the sort of visual that gets built in my brain
*  about that is like the structure that we're building
*  on this planet is packing more and more time
*  in this very small volume of space, right?
*  Cause our planet hasn't changed its physical size
*  in 4 billion years, but there's like a ton of causation
*  and recursion and time,
*  whatever word you wanna use information, packed into this.
*  And I think this is also embedded in sort of
*  the virtualization of our technologies
*  or the abstraction of language and all of these things.
*  These things that seem really abstract
*  are just really deep in time.
*  And so what that looks like is you have a planet
*  that becomes increasingly virtualized.
*  And so it's getting bigger and bigger in time,
*  but not really expanding out in space.
*  And the rest of space is like kind of moving away from it.
*  Again, it's a sort of exponentially receding horizon.
*  And I'm just not sure how far
*  into this evolutionary process something gets,
*  if it can ever see that there's another
*  such structure out there.
*  What do you mean by virtualized in that context?
*  Virtual as sort of a play on virtual reality
*  and like simulation theories, but virtual also in a sense
*  of, we talk about virtual particles in particle physics
*  which they are very critical to doing calculations
*  about predicting the properties of real particles
*  but we don't observe them directly.
*  So what I mean by virtual here is virtual reality for me,
*  things that appear virtual appear abstract
*  are just things that are very deep in time
*  in the structure of the things that we are.
*  So if you think about you as a 4 billion year old object,
*  the things that are part of you,
*  like your capacity to use language or think abstractly
*  or have mathematics are just very,
*  deep temporal structures.
*  That's why they look like they're informational
*  and abstract is because they're like,
*  they're existing in this temporal part of you
*  but not necessarily spatial part.
*  Just because I have a 4 billion year old history,
*  why does that mean I can't hang out with aliens?
*  There's a couple ideas that are embedded here.
*  So one of them comes again from Paul.
*  He wrote this book years ago about,
*  the eerie silence and why we're alone.
*  And he concluded the book with this idea of
*  quinteligence or something,
*  but like this idea that like really advanced intelligence
*  would basically just build itself into a quantum computer
*  and it would wanna operate in the vacuum of space
*  cause that's the best place to do quantum computation.
*  And it would just like run out all of its computations
*  indefinitely, but it would look completely dark
*  to the rest of the universe.
*  And I don't think as typical,
*  like I don't think that's actually like the right physics
*  but I think something about that idea
*  as I do with all ideas is partially correct.
*  And Freeman Dyson also had this amazing paper
*  about how long life could persist
*  in a universe that was exponentially expanding.
*  And his conception was like,
*  if you imagine analog life form,
*  it could run slower and slower and slower
*  and slower and slower as a function of time.
*  And so it would be able to run indefinitely
*  even against an exponentially expanding universe
*  because it would just run exponentially slower.
*  And so I guess part of what I'm doing in my brain
*  is putting those two things together along with this idea
*  that we are building,
*  if you imagine with our technology,
*  we're now building virtual realities,
*  like things we actually call virtual reality,
*  which required four billions of years of history
*  and a whole bunch of data to basically embed them
*  in a computer architecture.
*  So now you can put like an Oculus headset on
*  and think that you're in this world.
*  And what you really are embedded in
*  is in a very deep temporal structure.
*  And so it's huge in time, but it's very small in space.
*  And you can go lots of places in the virtual space, right?
*  But you're still stuck in like your physical body
*  and like sitting in the chair.
*  And so part of it is,
*  it might be the case that sufficiently evolved
*  biospheres kind of virtualize themselves
*  and they internalize their universe
*  in their sort of temporal causal structure
*  and they close themselves off from the rest of the universe.
*  I just don't know if a deep temporal structure
*  even necessarily means that you're closed off.
*  No, I don't either.
*  So that's kind of my fear.
*  So I'm not sure I'm agreeing with what I say.
*  I'm just saying like, this is one sort of conclusion.
*  And you know, like in my most sort of like,
*  it's interesting because I don't do psychedelic drugs.
*  But when people describe to me like,
*  you're saying with the faces and stuff,
*  and like I have had a lot of deep conversations
*  with friends that have done psychedelic drugs
*  for intellectual reasons and otherwise.
*  But I'm always like, oh,
*  it sounds like you're just doing theoretical physics.
*  Like that's what brains do on theoretical physics.
*  So I live in these like really abstract spaces
*  most of the time, but there's also this issue
*  of extinction, right?
*  Like extinction events are basically pinching off
*  an entire like causal structure.
*  The one of these like, I'm gonna call them time crystals.
*  I don't like know what,
*  but there's like these very large objects in time
*  pinching off that whole structure from the rest of it.
*  And so it's like, if you imagine that sort of same thing
*  in the universe, I, you know,
*  I once thought that sufficiently advanced technologies
*  would look like black holes.
*  They'll be just completely imperceptible to us.
*  Yeah.
*  So there might be lots of aliens out there.
*  Maybe that's an explanation for all the singularities.
*  They're all pinched off causal structures
*  that virtualize their reality and kind of broke off from us.
*  Black holes in every way.
*  So like untouchable to us or unlikely to be detectable
*  by us with whatever sensory mechanisms we have.
*  Yeah.
*  But the other way I think about it is,
*  there is probably hopefully life out there.
*  So like I do work on life detection efforts
*  in the solar system and I'm trying to help
*  with the habitable worlds observatory
*  mission planning right now
*  and working with like the biosignatures team for that,
*  like to think about exoplanet biosignatures.
*  So like I have some optimism that we might find things,
*  but they're the challenges
*  that we don't know the likelihood for life,
*  like which is what you were talking about.
*  So if I get to a more grounded discussion,
*  what I'm really interested in doing
*  is trying to solve the origin of life
*  so we can understand how likely life is out there.
*  So I don't think that the,
*  I think that the problem of discovering alien life
*  and solving the origin of life are deeply coupled
*  and in fact are one in the same problem.
*  And that the first contact with alien life
*  will actually be in an origin of life experiment.
*  But that part I'm super interested in
*  and then there's this other feature
*  that I think about a lot,
*  which is our own technological phase of development
*  as sort of like what is this phase in the evolution
*  of life on a planet.
*  If you think about a biosphere emerging on a planet
*  and evolving over billions of years
*  and evolving into a technosphere.
*  When a technosphere can move off planet
*  and basically reproduce itself on another planet,
*  now you have biospheres reproducing themselves.
*  Basically they have to go through technology to do that.
*  And so there are ways of thinking about
*  sort of the nature of intelligent life
*  and how it spreads in that capacity
*  that I'm also really excited about and thinking about.
*  And all of those things for me are connected.
*  Like we have to solve the origin of life
*  in order for us to get off planet
*  because we basically have to start life on another planet.
*  And we also have to solve the origin of life
*  in order to recognize other alien intelligence.
*  All of these things are literally the same problem.
*  Right, understanding the origin of life here on Earth
*  is a way to understand ourselves.
*  And understanding ourselves is a prerequisite
*  for being able to detect other intelligent civilizations.
*  I for one, take it for what it's worth,
*  on Ayahuasca, one of the things I did is zoom out,
*  like aggressively, like a spaceship.
*  And it would always go quickly through the galaxy
*  and from the galaxy to this representation of the universe.
*  And at least for me, from that perspective,
*  it seemed like it was full of alien life.
*  Not just alien life, but intelligent life.
*  I like that.
*  And conscious life.
*  So like I don't know how to convert it into words.
*  It's more like a feeling, like you were saying.
*  A feeling converted to a visual to a word to words.
*  So I had a visual with it, but really it was a feeling
*  that it was just full of this vibrant energy
*  that I was feeling when I'm looking at the people in my life
*  and full of gratitude.
*  But that same exact thing is everywhere in the universe.
*  Right.
*  I totally agree with this.
*  Like that visual I really love.
*  And I think we live in a universe
*  that like generates life and purpose.
*  And like it's part of the structure of just the world.
*  And so maybe like this sort of lonely view I have is,
*  I never thought about it this way
*  till you were describing that.
*  I was like, I wanna live in that universe.
*  And I'm like a very optimistic person.
*  And I love building visions of reality that are positive.
*  But I think for me right now in the intellectual process,
*  I have to tunnel through this particular way
*  of thinking about the loneliness of being like separated
*  in time from everything else, which I think like we also
*  all are because time is what defines us as individuals.
*  So part of you is drawn to the trauma of being alone.
*  Yeah.
*  In a physics space.
*  Part of what I mean is like you have to go through ideas
*  you don't necessarily agree with to work out
*  what you're trying to understand.
*  And I'm trying to be inside this structure
*  so I can really understand it.
*  And I don't think I've been able to like,
*  I'm so deeply embedded in what we are intellectually
*  right now that I don't have an ability to see
*  these other ones that you're describing if they're there.
*  Well, one of the things you kind of described
*  that you already spoke to,
*  you call it the great perceptual filter.
*  Yeah.
*  So there's the famous great filter,
*  which is basically the idea that there's some really
*  powerful moment in every intelligent civilization
*  that where they destroy themselves.
*  Yeah.
*  That explains why we have not seen aliens.
*  And you're saying that there's something like that
*  in the temporal history of the creation of complex objects
*  that at a certain point, they've become an island,
*  an island too far to reach based on the perceptions.
*  I hope not.
*  Yeah.
*  Yeah, I worry about it.
*  Yeah.
*  But that's basically meaning
*  there's something fundamental about the universe
*  where if the more complex you become,
*  the harder it will be to perceive other complex.
*  Yeah.
*  I mean, just think about us with microbial life, right?
*  Like we used to once be cells.
*  And for most of human history,
*  we didn't even recognize cellular life was there
*  until we built a new technology,
*  microscopes that allowed us to see them.
*  Right?
*  So that's kind of, it's kind of weird, right?
*  Like things that we-
*  And they're close to us.
*  They're close, they're everywhere.
*  But also in the history of the development
*  of complex objects, they're pretty close.
*  Yeah, super close, super close.
*  Like, yeah, I mean, everything on this planet is like,
*  it's like pretty much the same thing.
*  Like the space of possibilities is so huge.
*  It's like we're virtually identical.
*  So how many flavors or kinds of life
*  do you think are possible?
*  I'm kind of like trying to imagine
*  all the little flickering lights in the universe,
*  like in the way that you were describing it.
*  That was kind of cool.
*  It was so, I mean, it was obvious to me.
*  It was exactly that.
*  It was like lights.
*  Yeah.
*  The way you maybe see a city,
*  but a city from like up above,
*  you see a city with the flickering lights,
*  but there's a coldness to the city.
*  Yeah.
*  There's some, you know that humans are capable
*  of good and evil and you could see like,
*  there's a complex feeling to the city.
*  I had no such complex feeling about seeing the lights
*  of all the galaxies, whatever, the billions of galaxies.
*  Yeah, this is kind of cool.
*  I'll answer the question in a second,
*  but it's just maybe like this idea of flickering lights
*  and intelligence is interesting to me because I,
*  you know, like we have such a human centric view
*  of alien intelligences that a lot of the work
*  that I've been doing with my lab
*  is just trying to take inspiration
*  from non-human life on earth.
*  And so I have this really talented undergrad student
*  that's basically building a model
*  of alien communication based on fireflies.
*  So one of my colleagues, Orit Peleg,
*  she's totally brilliant,
*  but she goes out with like GoPro cameras and like,
*  you know, films in high resolution,
*  all these firefly flickering.
*  And she has like this theory
*  about how their signaling evolved
*  to like maximally differentiate the flickering pattern.
*  So like she has a theory basically that predicts,
*  you know, like this species should flash like this.
*  If this one's flashing like this,
*  this other one's gonna do it at a slower rate
*  so that they, you know, like they can distinguish
*  each other living in the same environment.
*  And so this undergrad's building this model
*  where you have like a pulsar background
*  of all these like giant flashing sources in the universe
*  and an alien intelligence, you know,
*  wants to signal it's there.
*  So it's flashing like a firefly.
*  And I just like, I like the idea of thinking
*  about non-human aliens.
*  So that was really fun.
*  The mechanism of the flashing, unfortunately,
*  is like the diversity of that is very high
*  and we might not be able to see it.
*  That's what-
*  Yeah, well, I think there's some ways
*  we might be able to differentiate that signal.
*  I'm still thinking about this part of it.
*  So one is like, like if you have pulsars
*  and they all have a certain spectrum
*  to their pulsing patterns
*  and you have this one signal that's in there
*  that's basically tried to maximally differentiate itself
*  from all the other sources in the universe,
*  it might stick out in the distribution.
*  Like there might be ways of actually being able to tell
*  if it's an anomalous pulsar basically.
*  But I don't know if that would really work or not.
*  So still thinking about it.
*  You tweeted, if one wants to understand
*  how truly combinatorially and compositionally complex
*  our universe is, they only need step
*  into the world of fashion.
*  Yeah.
*  It's bonkers how big the constructible space
*  of human aesthetics is.
*  Can you explain?
*  Can you explore the space of human aesthetics?
*  Yeah, I don't know.
*  I've been kind of obsessed with the,
*  I never know how to pronounce it, it's a shopper rally.
*  Like, you know, like they have ears and things.
*  Like it's such like a weird grotesque aesthetic,
*  but like it's totally bizarre.
*  But what I meant, like I have a visceral experience
*  when I walk into my closet, I have like a lot of.
*  How big is your closet?
*  It's pretty big.
*  It's like I do assembly theory every morning
*  when I walk in my closet, because I have,
*  I really like a very large combinatorial diverse palette,
*  but I never know what I'm gonna build in the morning.
*  Do you get rid of stuff?
*  Sometimes.
*  Or do you have trouble getting rid of stuff?
*  I have trouble getting rid of some stuff.
*  It depends on what it is.
*  If it's vintage, it's hard to get rid of
*  because it's kind of hard to replace.
*  It depends on the piece, yeah.
*  So you have your closet,
*  is that one of those temporal time crystals that.
*  Yeah.
*  They just, you get to visualize the entire history.
*  It's a physical manifestation of my personality.
*  Right.
*  So why is that a good visualization of the combinatorial
*  and compositionally complex?
*  I think it's an interesting feature of our species
*  that we get to express ourselves through what we wear.
*  Right, like if you think about all those animals
*  in the jungle you saw,
*  they're born looking the way they look,
*  and then they're stuck with it for life.
*  That's true.
*  I mean, it is one of the loudest, clearest,
*  most consistent ways we signal to each other.
*  Yeah.
*  The clothing we wear.
*  Yeah.
*  And it's highly dynamic.
*  I mean, you can be dynamic if you want to.
*  Very few people are, there's a certain bravery,
*  but it's actually more about confidence,
*  willing to play with style and play with aesthetics.
*  And I think it's interesting
*  when you start experimenting with it,
*  how it changes the fluidity of the social spaces
*  and the way that you interact with them.
*  But there's also commitment.
*  You have to wear that outfit all the time.
*  I know, I know.
*  That's a big commitment.
*  Do you feel like that every morning?
*  No, I wear, that's why.
*  I feel like this is a life commitment.
*  All I have is suits and a black shirt and jeans.
*  Those are the two outfits.
*  Yeah.
*  Well, see, this is the thing though, right?
*  It simplifies your thought process in the morning.
*  So like, I have other ways I do that.
*  I park in the same exact parking spot
*  when I go to work on the fourth floor of a parking garage,
*  because no one ever parks on the fourth floor.
*  So I don't have to remember where I parked my car.
*  But I really like aesthetics and playing with them.
*  So I'm willing to spend part of my cognitive energy
*  every morning trying to figure out
*  what I want to be that day.
*  Did you deliberately think about the outfit
*  you're wearing today?
*  Yep.
*  Was there backup options?
*  Were you going back and forth between some?
*  Three or four.
*  But I really like the look.
*  Were they drastically different?
*  Yes.
*  Okay.
*  That's okay.
*  And even this one could have been really different,
*  because it's not just the sort of jacket and the shoes
*  and the hairstyle, it's the jewelry and the accessories.
*  So any outfit is a lot of small decisions.
*  Well, I think your current outfit
*  has a lot of shades of yellow.
*  There's a theme.
*  Yeah.
*  It's nice.
*  It's really, I'm grateful that you did that.
*  Thanks.
*  It's like it's all an art form.
*  Yeah, yellow's my daughter's favorite color.
*  And I never really thought about yellow much,
*  but she's been obsessed with yellow.
*  She's seven now.
*  And I don't know, I just really love it.
*  I guess you can pick a color
*  and just make that the constraint.
*  Yeah.
*  And just go with it.
*  I understand the beauty.
*  I'm playing with yellow a lot lately.
*  Like this is not even the most yellow
*  because I have black pants on,
*  but I have worn outfits that have probably
*  five shades of yellow in them.
*  Wow.
*  What do you think beauty is?
*  We seem to, so underlying this idea
*  of playing with aesthetics is
*  we find certain things beautiful.
*  Yeah.
*  What is it that humans find beautiful?
*  And why do we need to find things beautiful?
*  Yeah, it's interesting.
*  It's not, I'm not, I mean, I am attracted
*  to style and aesthetics because I think they're beautiful,
*  but it's much more because I think it's fun to play with.
*  And so I will get to the beauty thing,
*  but I guess I wanna just explain a little bit
*  about my motivation in this space
*  because it's really an intellectual thing for me.
*  And Stewart Brand has this great infographic
*  about the layers of human society.
*  And I think it starts with the natural sciences
*  and physics at the bottom,
*  and it goes through all these layers,
*  and it's like economics,
*  and then fashion is at the top,
*  it's the fastest moving part of human culture.
*  And I think I really like that because it's so dynamic
*  and so short in its temporal longevity,
*  contrasted with studying the laws of physics,
*  which are the deep structure reality
*  that I feel like bridging those scales
*  tells me much more about the structure
*  of the world that I live in.
*  That said, there's certain kinds of fashions,
*  like a dude in a black suit with a black tie
*  seems to be less dynamic.
*  It seems to persist through time.
*  Are you embodying this?
*  Yeah, I think so.
*  I think it's just-
*  I'd like to see you wear yellow legs.
*  I wouldn't even know what to do with myself.
*  I would freak out.
*  I wouldn't know how to act in the world.
*  You wouldn't know how to be you.
*  I know this is amazing though, isn't it?
*  Amazing, like you have the choice to do it.
*  But one of my favorite, just on the question of beauty,
*  one of my favorite fashion designers of all time
*  is Alexander McQueen.
*  And he was really phenomenal, but his early-
*  And actually, I kind of used what happened to him
*  in the fashion industry as a coping mechanism
*  with our paper, like the Nature paper in the fall
*  when everyone was saying it was controversial
*  and how terrible that, but controversial is good, right?
*  But when Alexander McQueen first came out
*  with his fashion lines, he was mixing horror and beauty.
*  And people were horrified.
*  It was so controversial.
*  It was macabre.
*  He had like, it looked like there were blood on the models.
*  And like-
*  That's beautiful.
*  Just look at some pictures here.
*  Yeah, no, I mean, his stuff is amazing.
*  His first runway line, I think was called nihilism.
*  I don't know if you could find it.
*  You know, I mean, he was really dramatic.
*  He carried a lot of trauma with him.
*  There you go, that's, yeah.
*  Yeah.
*  Wow.
*  But he changed the fashion industry.
*  His stuff became very popular.
*  That's a good outfit to show off to a party.
*  Right, right.
*  But this gets at the question, like,
*  is that horrific or is it beautiful?
*  And I think, you know, he had a tremendous,
*  he ended up committing suicide,
*  and actually he left his death note on the descent of man.
*  So he was a really deep person.
*  So I mean, great fashion certainly
*  has that kind of depth to it.
*  Yeah, it sure does.
*  So I think it's the intellectual pursuit, right?
*  Like it's not, so this is like very highly intellectual.
*  And I think it's a lot like how I play with language,
*  is the same way that I play with fashion
*  or the same way that I play with ideas
*  in theoretical physics.
*  Like there's always this space
*  that you can just push things just enough.
*  So they're like, they look like something
*  someone thinks is familiar, but they're not familiar.
*  And yeah, and I think that's really cool.
*  It seems like beauty doesn't have much function, right?
*  But it seems to also have a lot of influence
*  on the way we collaborate with each other.
*  It has tons of function.
*  What do you mean it doesn't have function?
*  I guess sexual selection incorporates beauty somehow.
*  But why?
*  Because beauty is a sign of health or something.
*  I don't even.
*  Oh, evolutionarily, maybe.
*  But then beauty becomes a signal of other things, right?
*  So it's really not like,
*  and then beauty becomes an adaptive trait.
*  So it can change with different,
*  like maybe some species would think,
*  well, you thought the frog having babies come out
*  of its back was beautiful and I thought it was grotesque.
*  Like there's not a universal definition of what's beautiful.
*  It is something that is dependent on your history
*  and how you interact with the world.
*  And I guess what I like about beauty,
*  like any other concept is when you turn it on its head.
*  So maybe the traditional conception of why women wear makeup
*  and they dress certain ways is because they wanna look
*  beautiful and pleasing to people.
*  And I just like to do it because it's a confidence thing.
*  It's about embodying the person that I want to be
*  and about owning that person.
*  And then the way that people interact with that person
*  is very different than if I didn't have the,
*  like if I wasn't using that attribute as part of,
*  and obviously that's influenced by the society I live
*  and like what's aesthetically pleasing things.
*  But it's interesting to be able to turn that around
*  and not have it necessarily be about the aesthetics
*  but about the power dynamics that the aesthetics create.
*  But you're saying there's some function to beauty
*  in that way, in the way you're describing,
*  in the dynamic it creates and the social interaction.
*  Well, the point is you're saying it's an adaptive trait
*  for like sexual selection or something.
*  And I'm saying that the adaptation that beauty confers
*  is far richer than that.
*  And some of the adaptation is about social hierarchy
*  and social mobility and just plain social dynamics.
*  Like why do some people dress goth?
*  It's because they identify with a community
*  and a culture associated with that.
*  And they get, and that's a beautiful aesthetic.
*  It's a different aesthetic.
*  Some people don't like it.
*  So it has the same richness as those language.
*  Yes.
*  It's the same kind of.
*  Yes, and I think too few people think about
*  the way that they, the aesthetics they build for themselves
*  in the morning and how they carry it in the world
*  and the way that other people interact with that.
*  Because they put clothes on
*  and they don't think about clothes as carrying function.
*  Let's jump from beauty to language.
*  There's so many ways to explore the topic of language.
*  You called it, you said that language is
*  parts of language or language in itself
*  and the mechanism of language is a kind of living life form.
*  You've tweeted a lot about this in all kinds of poetic ways.
*  Let's talk about the computation aspect of it.
*  You tweeted, the world is not a computation,
*  but computation is our best current language
*  for understanding the world.
*  It is important we recognize this
*  so we can start to see the structure of our future languages
*  that will allow us to see deeper
*  than the computation allows us.
*  So what's the use of language in helping us understand
*  and make sense of the world?
*  I think one thing that I feel like I notice
*  much more viscerally than I feel like
*  I hear other people describe
*  is that the representations in our mind
*  and the way that we use language are not the things.
*  Like, actually, I mean, this is an important point
*  going back to what Gertl did,
*  but also this idea of signs and symbols
*  and all kinds of ways of separating them.
*  There's like the word, right?
*  And then there's like what the word means about the world.
*  And we often confuse those things.
*  And what I feel very viscerally,
*  I almost sometimes think I have some kind of like
*  synesthesia for language or something
*  and I just like don't interact with it
*  like the way that other people do.
*  But for me, words are objects
*  and the objects are not the things that they describe.
*  They have like a different ontology to them.
*  Like they're physical things and they carry causation
*  and they can create meaning,
*  but they're not what we think they are.
*  And also like the internal representations in our mind,
*  like the things I'm seeing about this room are probably,
*  like they're small projection of the things
*  that are actually in this room.
*  And I think we have such a difficult time moving past
*  the way that we build representations in the mind
*  and the way that we structure our language
*  to realize that those are approximations
*  to what's out there and they're fluid
*  and we can play around with them
*  and we can see deeper structure underneath them
*  that I think like we're missing a lot.
*  Yeah, but also the life of the mind is in some ways
*  richer than the physical reality.
*  Sure.
*  What's going on in your mind,
*  it might be a projection of what's actually here,
*  but there's also all kinds of other stuff going on there.
*  Yeah, for sure.
*  I love this essay by Poincare
*  about like mathematical creativity,
*  where he talks about this sort of like frothing
*  of all these things
*  and then like somehow you build theorems on top of it
*  and they become kind of concrete.
*  But like, and I also think about this with language,
*  it's like there's a lot of stuff happening in your mind,
*  but you have to compress it in this few sets of words
*  to try to convey it to someone.
*  So it's a compactification of the space
*  and it's not a very efficient one.
*  And I think just recognizing that there's a lot
*  that's happening behind language is really important.
*  I think this is one of the great things
*  about the existential trauma of large language models
*  I think is the recognition
*  that language is not the only thing required.
*  Like there's something underneath it, not by everybody.
*  Can you just speak to the feeling you have
*  when you think about words?
*  So is there, like what's the magic of words to you?
*  Is it like, do you feel it,
*  it almost sometimes feels like you're playing with it.
*  Like you're-
*  Yeah, I was just gonna say it's like a playground.
*  But you're almost like,
*  I think one of the things you enjoy,
*  maybe I'm projecting, is deviating,
*  like using words in ways that not everyone uses them.
*  Like slightly sort of deviating from the norm a little bit.
*  I love doing that in everything I do,
*  but especially with language.
*  But not so far that it doesn't make sense.
*  Exactly.
*  So you're always like tethered to reality, to the norm,
*  but like are playing with it.
*  Like basically fucking with people's minds a little bit.
*  I mean, like, you know, in so doing,
*  creating a different perspective on a thing
*  that's been previously explored in a different way.
*  Yeah, it's literally my favorite thing to do.
*  Yeah.
*  Use words as one way to make people think.
*  Yeah, so I, you know, a lot of my sort of like,
*  what happens in my mind when I'm thinking about ideas
*  is I've been presented with this information
*  about how people think about things.
*  And I try to go around to different communities
*  and hear the ways that different,
*  whether it's like, you know,
*  hanging out with a bunch of artists or philosophers
*  or scientists thinking about things.
*  Like they all think about it different ways.
*  And then I just try to figure out like,
*  how do you take the structure of the way
*  that we're talking about it and turn it slightly?
*  So you have all the same pieces
*  that everybody sees are there,
*  but the description that you've come up with
*  seems totally different.
*  So they can understand that there's,
*  like they understand the pattern you're describing,
*  but they never heard the structure underlying it
*  describe the way that you describe it.
*  Is there words or terms you remember that
*  disturbed people the most,
*  maybe the positive sense of disturbed?
*  There's assembly theory, I suppose, is one.
*  Yeah, I mean, the first couple sentences of that paper
*  disturbed people a lot.
*  And I think they were really carefully constructed
*  in exactly this kind of way.
*  What was that?
*  Let me look it up.
*  Oh, it was really fun.
*  But I think it's interesting because I do,
*  you know, sometimes I'm very upfront about it.
*  I say I'm gonna use the same word
*  in probably six different ways in a lecture.
*  And I will.
*  You write, scientists have grappled
*  with reconciling biological evolution
*  with the immutable laws of the universe defined by physics.
*  These laws underpin life's origin, evolution, and the-
*  I think you went through this with me
*  when he was here too.
*  The development of human culture.
*  Well, he was, I think your love for words
*  runs deeper than these.
*  Yeah, for sure.
*  I mean, this is part of the sort of brilliant thing
*  about our collaboration is, you know,
*  complimentary skill sets.
*  So I love playing with the abstract space of language.
*  And it's a really interesting playground
*  when I'm working with Lee because he thinks
*  that a much deeper level of abstraction
*  than can be expressed by language.
*  And the ideas we work on are hard to talk about
*  for that reason.
*  What do you think about computation as a language?
*  I think it's a very poor language.
*  A lot of people think it's a really great one,
*  but I think it has some nice properties.
*  But I think the feature of it that is compelling
*  is this kind of idea of universality that like you can,
*  if you have a language,
*  you can describe things in any other language.
*  Well, for me, one of the people who kind of revealed
*  the expressive power of computation,
*  aside from Alan Turing, is Stephen Wolfram.
*  He went through all the explorations
*  of like cellular automata type of objects
*  that he did in a new kind of science and afterwards.
*  So what do you get from that?
*  The kind of computational worlds
*  that are revealed through even something
*  as simple as cellular automata.
*  It seems like that's a really nice way
*  to explore languages that are far outside
*  our human languages and do so rigorously.
*  And understand how those kinds of complex systems
*  can interact with each other,
*  can emerge, all that kind of stuff.
*  I don't think that they're outside our human languages.
*  I think they define the boundary
*  of the space of human languages.
*  They allow us to explore things within that space,
*  which is also fantastic.
*  But I think there is a set of ideas that takes,
*  and Stephen Wolfram has worked on this quite a lot,
*  and contributed very significantly to it.
*  And I really like some of the stuff that Stephen's doing
*  with his physics project,
*  but don't agree with a lot of the foundations of it.
*  But I think the space is really fun that he's exploring.
*  There's this assumption that computation
*  is at the base of reality.
*  And I kind of see it at the top of reality,
*  not at the base,
*  because I think computation was built by our biosphere.
*  It's something that happened
*  after many billion years of evolution.
*  And it doesn't happen in every physical object.
*  It only happens in some of them.
*  And I think one of the reasons that we feel like
*  the universe is computational
*  is because it's so easy for us
*  as things that have the theory of computation
*  in our minds, and actually in some sense,
*  it might be related to the functioning of our minds
*  and how we build languages to describe the world
*  and sets of relations to describe the world.
*  But it's easy for us to go out into the world
*  and build computers.
*  And then we mistake our ability to do that
*  with assuming that the world is computational.
*  And I'll give you a really simple example.
*  This one came from John Conway.
*  I one time had a conversation with him,
*  which was really delightful.
*  He was really fun.
*  But he was pointing out that if you,
*  string lights in a barn,
*  you can program them to have your favorite
*  one dimensional CA,
*  and you might even be able to make them,
*  do like be capable of universal computation.
*  Is universal computation a feature of the string lights?
*  Well, no.
*  No, it's probably not.
*  It's a feature of the fact that you as a programmer
*  had a theory that you could embed
*  in the physical architecture of the string lights.
*  Now what happens though,
*  is we get confused by this kind of distinction
*  between us as agents in the world
*  that actually can transfer things that life does
*  onto other physical substrates with what the world is.
*  And so for example, you'll see people,
*  studying the mathematics of chemical reaction networks
*  and saying, well, chemistry is turning universal
*  or studying the laws of physics and saying,
*  the laws of physics are turning universal.
*  But anytime that you wanna do that,
*  you always have to prepare an initial state.
*  You have to constrain the rule space
*  and then you have to actually be able to demonstrate
*  the properties of computation.
*  And all of that requires an agent or a designer
*  to be able to do that.
*  But it gives you an intuition.
*  If you look at a 1D or 2D cellular automata,
*  it allows you to build an intuition
*  of how you can have complexity emerge
*  from very simple beginnings,
*  very simple initial conditions.
*  I think that's the intuition
*  that people have derived from it.
*  The intuition I get from cellular automata
*  is that the flat space of an initial condition
*  in a fixed dynamical law is not rich enough
*  to describe an open-ended generation process.
*  And so the way I see cellular automata
*  is they're embedded slices
*  in a much larger causal structure.
*  And if you wanna look at a deterministic slice
*  of that causal structure,
*  you might be able to extract a set of consistent rules
*  that you might call a cellular automata,
*  but you could embed them as much larger space.
*  That's not dynamical and is about the causal structure
*  and the correlations between all of those computations.
*  And that would be the space cellular automata live in.
*  And I think that's the space that Stephen is talking about
*  when he talks about his Ruliat
*  and these hypergraphs of all these possible computations.
*  But I wouldn't take that as my base reality
*  because I think, again, computation itself,
*  this abstract property computation,
*  is not at the base of reality.
*  Can we just linger on that Ruliat?
*  Yeah.
*  One Ruliat to rule them all.
*  Yeah.
*  So this is part of Wolfram Physics Project.
*  It's what he calls the entangled limit of everything
*  that is computationally possible.
*  So what's your problem with the Ruliat?
*  Well, it's interesting.
*  So Stephen came to a workshop we had in the Beyond Center
*  in the fall and the workshop theme was mathematics.
*  Is it evolved or eternal?
*  And he gave a talk about the Ruliat
*  and he was talking about how,
*  a lot of the things that we talk about in the Beyond Center
*  is like, does reality have a bottom?
*  If it has a bottom, what is it?
*  I need to go.
*  We'll have you know one sometime.
*  This is great.
*  Does reality have a bottom?
*  Yeah.
*  So we had one that was,
*  it was called infinite turtles or ground truth.
*  And it was really just about this issue.
*  But the thing that was interesting,
*  I think Stephen was trying to make the argument
*  that fundamental particles aren't fundamental,
*  gravitation is not fundamental.
*  These are just turtles and computation is fundamental.
*  And I just, I remember pointing out to him,
*  I was like, well, computation is your turtle.
*  And I think it's a weird turtle to have.
*  First of all, isn't it okay to have a turtle?
*  It's totally fine to have a turtle.
*  Everyone has a turtle.
*  You can't build a theory without a turtle.
*  Yeah.
*  It's just, so it depends on the problem you wanna describe.
*  And I actually, the reason I can't get behind
*  Stephen's ontology is I don't know what question
*  he's trying to answer.
*  And without a question to answer,
*  I don't understand why you're building a theory of reality.
*  And the question you're trying to answer is?
*  What life is.
*  What life is, which another simpler way of phrasing that
*  is how did life originate?
*  Well, I started working on the origin of life.
*  And I think what my challenge was there
*  was no one knew what life was.
*  And so you can't really talk about the origination
*  of something if you don't know what it is.
*  And so the way I would approach it is
*  if you wanna understand what life is,
*  then proving that physics is solving the origin of life.
*  So there's the theory of what life is,
*  but there's the actual demonstration that that theory
*  is an accurate description of the phenomena
*  you aim to describe.
*  So again, they're the same problem.
*  It's not like I can decouple origin of life
*  from what life is.
*  It's like, that is the problem.
*  And the point I guess I'm making about having a question
*  is no matter what slice of reality you take,
*  what regularity of nature you're gonna try to describe,
*  there will be an abstraction that unifies
*  that structure of reality, hopefully.
*  And that will have a fundamental layer to it, right?
*  Cause you have to explain something
*  in terms of something else.
*  But so if I wanna explain life, for example,
*  then my fundamental description of nature
*  has to be something I think that has to do
*  with time being fundamental.
*  But if I wanted to describe, I don't know,
*  the sort of interactions of matter and light,
*  I have elementary particles be fundamental.
*  If I wanna describe electricity and magnetism
*  in the 1800s, I have to have waves be fundamental, right?
*  So like you are in quantum mechanics,
*  like it's a wave function that's fundamental
*  cause that's the sort of explanatory paradigm of your theory.
*  So I guess I don't know what problem saying computation
*  is fundamental solves.
*  Doesn't he want to understand how does the basic
*  quantum mechanics and general relativity emerge
*  and cut his time?
*  Right, so I think-
*  But then that doesn't really answer
*  an important question for us?
*  Well, I think that the issue is general relativity
*  and quantum mechanics are expressed
*  in mathematical languages.
*  And then computation is a mathematical language.
*  So you're basically saying that maybe there's
*  a more universal mathematical language
*  for describing theories of physics that we already know.
*  That's an important question.
*  And I do think that's what Steven's trying to do and do well.
*  But then the question becomes, does that formulation
*  of a more universal language for describing
*  the laws of physics that we know now,
*  tell us anything new about the nature of reality?
*  Or is it a language?
*  NTU languages can't be fundamental.
*  The language itself is never the fundamental thing.
*  It's whatever it's describing.
*  So one of the possible titles you were thinking about
*  originally for the book is the hard problem of life.
*  Sort of reminiscent of the hard problem of consciousness.
*  So you're saying that assembly theory is supposed
*  to be answering the question about what is life.
*  So let's go to the other hard problems.
*  You also say that's the easiest of the hard problems
*  is the hard problem of life.
*  So what do you think is the nature of intelligence
*  and consciousness?
*  We think something like assembly theory
*  can help us understand that.
*  I think if assembly theory is an accurate depiction
*  of the physics of life, it should shed a lot of light
*  on those problems.
*  And in fact, I sometimes wonder if the problems
*  of consciousness and intelligence are at all different
*  than the problem of life generally.
*  And I'm of two minds of it, but I in general try to,
*  the process of my thinking is trying to regularize
*  everything into one theory.
*  So pretty much every interaction I have is like,
*  oh, how do I fold that into?
*  And like, so I'm just building this giant abstraction
*  that's basically trying to take every piece of data
*  I've ever gotten in my brain into a theory of what life is.
*  And consciousness and intelligence are obviously
*  some of the most interesting things that life has manifest.
*  And so I think they're very telling about some
*  of the deeper features about the nature of life.
*  It does seem like they're all flavors of the same thing,
*  but it's interesting to wonder at which stage
*  does something that we would recognize as life
*  in a sort of canonical, silly, human way
*  and something that we would recognize as intelligence,
*  at which stage does that emerge?
*  Like at which assembly index does that emerge
*  and at which assembly index is it consciousness?
*  Something that we would canonically recognize
*  as consciousness.
*  Is this the use, like this use of flavors
*  the same as you meant when you were talking
*  about flavors of alien and like alien life?
*  Yeah, sure, yeah.
*  I mean, it's the same as the flavors of ice cream
*  and the flavors of fashion.
*  Yeah, like, but we were talking about in terms of colors
*  and like very nondescript, but the way that you just talked
*  about flavors now was more in like the space
*  of consciousness and intelligence.
*  It was kind of like much more specific.
*  It'd be nice if there was a formal way of expressing.
*  Quantifying flavors.
*  Quantifying flavors.
*  Yeah.
*  It seems like I would order it life, consciousness,
*  intelligence probably, as like the order in which things
*  emerge and they're all just the same.
*  They're the same.
*  We're using the word life differently here.
*  I mean, life sort of, when I'm talking about
*  what is a living versus non-living thing at a bar
*  with a person, I'm already like four or five drinks in,
*  that kind of thing.
*  Just that.
*  Like we're not being too philosophical.
*  Like there's a thing that moves
*  and here's a thing that doesn't move.
*  But maybe consciousness precedes that.
*  It's a weird dance there.
*  We're like, is life precede consciousness
*  or consciousness precede life?
*  And I think that understanding of what life is
*  in the way you're doing will help us disentangle that.
*  Depending on what you wanna explain,
*  as I was saying before, you have to assume
*  something's fundamental.
*  And so because people can't explain consciousness,
*  there's a temptation for some people
*  to wanna take consciousness as fundamental
*  and assume everything else is derived out of that.
*  And then you get some people that wanna assume
*  consciousness preceded life.
*  And I don't find either of those views
*  particularly illuminating.
*  I think, because I don't wanna assume a feminology
*  before I explain a thing.
*  And so what I've tried really hard to do
*  is not assume that I think life is anything,
*  except hold on to sort of the patterns and structures
*  that seem to be the sort of consistent ways
*  that we talk about this thing
*  and then try to build a physics that describes that.
*  And I think that's a really different approach
*  than saying consciousness is this thing we all feel
*  and experience about things.
*  I would wanna understand the regularities
*  associated with that and build a deeper structure
*  underneath that and build into it.
*  I wouldn't wanna assume that thing
*  and that I understand that thing,
*  which is usually how I see people talk about it.
*  And I think that's the difference
*  between life and consciousness, which comes first.
*  Yeah, so I think if you're thinking about
*  this sort of thinking about living things
*  as these giant causal structures or these objects
*  that are deep in time or whatever language
*  we end up using to describe it,
*  it seems to me that consciousness
*  about the fact that we have a conscious experience
*  is because we are these temporally extended objects.
*  So consciousness and the abstraction that we have
*  in our minds is actually a manifestation
*  of all the time that's rolled up in us.
*  And it's just because we're so huge
*  that we have this very large inner space
*  that we're experiencing that's not,
*  and it's also separated off from the rest of the world
*  because we're the separate thread in time.
*  And so our consciousness is not exactly shared
*  with anything else because nothing else
*  occupies the same part of time that we occupy,
*  but I can understand something about you
*  maybe being conscious because you and I didn't separate
*  that far in the past in terms of our causal histories.
*  So in some sense, we can even share experiences
*  with each other through language
*  because of that sort of overlap in our structure.
*  Well, then if consciousness is merely temporal separateness,
*  then that comes before life.
*  It's not merely temporal separateness,
*  it's about the depth in that time.
*  So it's the reason that my conscious experience
*  is not the same as yours is because we're separated in time.
*  The fact that I have a conscious experience
*  is because I'm an object that's super deep in time.
*  So I'm huge in time.
*  And that means that there's a lot that I am basically
*  in some sense, a universe onto myself
*  because my structure is so large relative
*  to the amount of space that I occupy.
*  But it feels like that's possible to do
*  before you get anything like bacteria.
*  I think there's a horizon,
*  and I don't know how to articulate this yet.
*  It's a little bit like the horizon at the origin of life
*  where the space inside a particular structure becomes so large
*  that it has some access to a space that's not,
*  that doesn't feel as physical.
*  It's almost like this idea of counterfactuals.
*  So I think the past history of your horizon
*  is just much larger than can be encompassed
*  in a small configuration of matter.
*  So you can pull this stuff into existence.
*  This property is maybe a continuous property,
*  but there's something really different
*  about human level physical systems
*  and human level ability to understand reality.
*  I really love David Deutsch's conception
*  of universal explainers,
*  and that's related to the theory of universal computation.
*  And I think there's some transition that happens there.
*  But maybe to describe that a little bit better,
*  what I can also say is what intelligence is
*  in this framework.
*  So you have these objects that are large in time.
*  They were selected to exist by constraining
*  the possible space of objects to this particular,
*  all of the matter is funneled into this particular
*  configuration of object over time.
*  And so these objects arise through selection,
*  but the more selection that you have embedded in you,
*  the more possible selection you have on your future.
*  And so selection and evolution,
*  we usually think about in the past sense
*  where selection happened in the past,
*  but objects that are high density configurations of matter
*  that have a lot of selection in them
*  are also selecting agents in the universe.
*  So they actually embody the physics of selection
*  and they can select on possible futures.
*  And I guess what I'm saying with respect to consciousness
*  and the experience we have is that there's something
*  very deep about that structure and the nature
*  of how we exist in that structure that has to do
*  with how we're navigating that space
*  and how we generate that space
*  and how we continue to persist in that space.
*  Is there shortcuts we can take
*  to artificially engineering living organisms,
*  artificial life, artificial consciousness,
*  artificial intelligence?
*  So maybe just looking pragmatically
*  at the LLMs we have now,
*  do you think those can exhibit qualities of life,
*  qualities of consciousness, qualities of intelligence
*  in the way we think of intelligence?
*  I think they already do,
*  but not in the way I hear popularly discussed.
*  So there are obviously signatures of intelligence
*  and a part of a ecosystem of intelligence systems,
*  but I don't know that individually,
*  I would assign all the properties to them that people have.
*  It's a little like,
*  so we talked about the history of eyes before
*  and how eyes scaled up into technological forms
*  and language has also had a really interesting history
*  and got much more interesting,
*  I think once we started writing it down
*  and then inventing books and things.
*  But every time that we started storing language
*  in a new way, we were kind of
*  existentially traumatized by it.
*  So the idea of written language was traumatic
*  because it seemed like the dead were speaking to us,
*  even though they were deceased and books were traumatic
*  because suddenly there were lots of copies
*  of this information available to everyone
*  and it was gonna somehow dilute it.
*  And large language models are kind of interesting
*  because they don't feel as static, they're very dynamic.
*  But if you think about language
*  in the way I was describing before,
*  is language is this very large in time structure.
*  And before it had been something that was distributed
*  over human brains as a dynamic structure.
*  And occasionally we store components of that
*  very large dynamic structure in books
*  or in written language.
*  Now we can actually store the dynamics of that structure
*  in a physical artifact, which is a large language model.
*  And so I think about it almost like the evolution
*  of genomes in some sense where there might've been
*  really primitive genes on the first living things
*  and they didn't store a lot of information
*  or they were really messy.
*  And then by the time you get to the eukaryotic cell,
*  you have this really dynamic genetic architecture
*  that's rewritable.
*  And has all of these different properties.
*  And I think large language models are kind of like
*  the genetic system for language in some sense
*  where it's allowing and a sort of archiving
*  that's highly dynamic.
*  And I think it's very paradoxical to us
*  because obviously in human history,
*  we haven't been used to conversing
*  with anything that's not human.
*  But now we can converse basically with a crystallization
*  of human language in a computer.
*  That's a highly dynamic crystal because it's a crystallization
*  in time of this massive abstract structure
*  that's evolved over human history
*  and is now put into a small device.
*  I think crystallization kind of implies
*  that a limit on its capabilities.
*  I think there's not, I mean it very purposefully
*  because a particular instantiation of a language model
*  trained on a particular data set becomes a crystal
*  of the language at that time it was trained.
*  But obviously we're iterating with the technology
*  and evolving it.
*  I guess the question is when you crystallize it,
*  when you compress it, when you archive it,
*  you're archiving some slice of the collective intelligence
*  of the human species.
*  That's right.
*  And the question is like how powerful is that?
*  Right, it's a societal level technology, right?
*  We've actually put collective intelligence in a box.
*  Yeah, I mean how much smarter is the collective intelligence
*  of humans versus a single human?
*  And that's the question of AGI versus human level intelligence.
*  Superhuman level intelligence
*  versus human level intelligence.
*  Like how much smarter can this thing when done well
*  when we solve a lot of the complexity,
*  computation complexities, maybe there's some data complexities
*  and how to really archive this thing,
*  crystallize this thing really well.
*  How powerful is this thing gonna be?
*  Like what's your thought?
*  I actually, I don't like the sort of language
*  we use around that.
*  And I think the language really matters.
*  So I don't know how to talk about how much smarter
*  one human is than another, right?
*  Like usually we talk about abilities
*  or particular talents someone has.
*  And going back to David Dresch's idea
*  of universal explainers, like adopting the view
*  that we're the first kinds of structures our biosphere
*  has built that can understand the rest of reality.
*  We have this universal comprehension capability.
*  He makes an argument that basically we're the first things
*  that actually are capable of understanding anything.
*  It doesn't matter, it doesn't mean an individual
*  understands everything, but like we have that capability.
*  And so there's not a difference between that
*  and what people talk about with AGI.
*  In some sense, AGI is a universal explainer.
*  But it might be that a computer is much more efficient
*  at doing, I don't know, prime factorization or something
*  than a human is, but it doesn't mean that it's necessarily
*  smarter or has a broader reach of the kind of things
*  that can understand than a human does.
*  And so I think we really have to think about
*  is it a level shift or is it we're enhancing
*  certain kinds of capabilities humans have in the same way
*  that we can enhance eyesight by making telescopes
*  and microscopes, are we enhancing capabilities
*  we have into technologies and the entire global ecosystem
*  is getting more intelligent?
*  Or is it really that we're building some super machine
*  in a box that's gonna be smart and kill everybody?
*  Like that sounds like a science,
*  it's not even a science fiction narrative,
*  it's a bad science fiction narrative.
*  I just don't think it's actually accurate
*  to any of the technologies we're building
*  or the way that we should be describing them.
*  It's not even how we should be describing ourselves.
*  So the benevolent story is there's a benevolent system
*  that's able to transform our economy, our way of life
*  by just 10Xing the GDP of culture.
*  Well these are human questions, right?
*  I don't think they're necessarily questions
*  that we're gonna outsource to an artificial intelligence.
*  I think what is happening and will continue to happen
*  is there's a coevolution between humans and technology
*  that's happening and we're coexisting
*  in this ecosystem right now
*  and we're maintaining a lot of the balance.
*  And for the balance to shift to the technology
*  would require some very bad human actors,
*  which is a real risk, or some sort of,
*  I don't know, some sort of dynamic that favors,
*  like I just don't know how that plays out
*  without human agency actually trying
*  to put it in that direction.
*  It could also be how rapid the rate.
*  The rapid rate is scary.
*  So I think the things that are terrifying
*  are the ideas of deep fakes or all the kinds of issues
*  that become legal issues
*  about artificial intelligence technologies
*  and using them to control weapons
*  or using them for child pornography
*  or faking out that someone's loved one was kidnapped
*  or killed and there's all kinds of things
*  that are super scary in this landscape
*  and all kinds of new legislation needs to be built
*  and all kinds of guardrails on the technology
*  to make sure that people don't abuse it need to be built.
*  And that needs to happen.
*  And I think one function of sort of
*  the artificial intelligence doomsday sort of part
*  of our culture right now is it's sort of our immune response
*  to knowing that's coming and we're over scaring ourselves.
*  So we try to act more quickly, which is good.
*  But I just, it's about the words that we use
*  versus the actual things happening behind the words.
*  I think one thing that's good is when people are talking
*  about things different ways, it makes us think about them.
*  And also when things are existentially threatening,
*  we wanna pay attention to those.
*  But the ways that they're existentially threatening
*  and the ways that we're experiencing existential trauma,
*  I don't think that we're really gonna understand
*  for another century or two if ever.
*  And I certainly think they're not the way
*  that we're describing them now.
*  Well, creating existential trauma is one of the things
*  that makes life fun, I guess.
*  Yeah, it's just what we do to ourselves.
*  It gives us really exciting big problems to solve.
*  Yeah, for sure.
*  Do you think we will see these AI systems become conscious
*  or convince us that they're conscious?
*  And then maybe we'll have relationships with them,
*  romantic relationships?
*  Well, I think people are gonna have
*  romantic relationships with them.
*  And I also think that some people will be convinced already
*  that they're conscious.
*  But I think in order, what does it take to convince people
*  that something is conscious?
*  I think that we actually have to have an idea
*  of what we're talking about.
*  We have to have a theory that explains
*  when things are conscious or not that's testable.
*  And we don't have one right now.
*  So I think until we have that,
*  it's always gonna be this sort of gray area
*  where some people think it hasn't
*  and some people think it doesn't
*  because we don't actually know what we're talking about
*  that we think it has.
*  So do you think it's possible to get out of the gray area
*  and really have a formal test for consciousness?
*  For sure.
*  And for life?
*  For sure.
*  As we've been talking about for some of you.
*  Consciousness is a tricky one.
*  It is a tricky one.
*  I mean, that's why it's called
*  the hard problem of consciousness because it's hard.
*  And it might even be outside of the purview of science,
*  which means that we can't understand it
*  in a scientific way.
*  There might be other ways of coming to understand it,
*  but those may not be the ones that we necessarily want
*  for technological utility or for developing laws
*  with respect to because the laws are the things
*  that are gonna govern the technology.
*  I think that's actually where
*  the hard problem of consciousness,
*  a different hard problem of consciousness is that
*  I fear that humans will resist.
*  That's the last thing they will resist
*  is calling something else conscious.
*  Oh, that's interesting.
*  I think it depends on the culture though,
*  because I mean, some cultures already think
*  like everything's imbued with a life essence
*  or kind of conscious.
*  I don't think those cultures have nuclear weapons.
*  No, they don't.
*  They're probably not building
*  the most advanced technologies.
*  The cultures that are primed for destroying the other,
*  constructing a very effective propaganda machines
*  of what the other is, the group to hate,
*  are the cultures that I worry would
*  would be very resistant to label something,
*  to sort of acknowledge the consciousness laden
*  in a thing that was created by us humans.
*  And so what do you think the risks are there
*  that the conscious things will get angry with us
*  and fight back?
*  No, that we would torture and kill conscious beings.
*  Oh, yeah.
*  I think we do that quite a lot.
*  Anyway, without, I mean, it goes back to your,
*  and I don't know how to feel about this,
*  but we talked already about the predator prey thing
*  that in some sense being alive requires eating other things
*  that are alive.
*  And even if you're a vegetarian or try to have,
*  you're still eating living things.
*  So maybe part of the story of Earth
*  will involve a predator prey dynamic
*  between humans and human creations.
*  And all of that is part of the type of scare.
*  But I don't like thinking about them as,
*  our technologies as a separate species,
*  because this again goes back to this sort of levels
*  of selection issue.
*  And if you think about humans individually alive,
*  you miss the fact that societies are also alive.
*  And so I think about it much more in the sense of,
*  an ecosystem is not the right word,
*  but we don't have the right words for these things of like,
*  and this is why I talk about the technosphere.
*  It's a system that is both human and technological.
*  It's not human or technological.
*  And so this is the part that I think we're really good for,
*  and this is driving in part a lot of the sort of attitude
*  of like, I'll kill you first with my nuclear weapons.
*  We're really good at identifying things as other.
*  We're not really good at understanding
*  when we're the same or when we're part
*  of an integrated system that's actually functioning together
*  in some kind of cohesive way.
*  So even if you look at like,
*  the division in American politics or something,
*  for example, it's important that there's multiple sides
*  that are arguing with each other
*  because that's actually how you resolve society's issues.
*  It's not like a bad feature.
*  I think like some of the sort of extreme positions
*  and like the way people talk about it are maybe not ideal.
*  But that's how societies solve problems.
*  What it looks like for an individual is really different
*  than the societal level outcomes.
*  And the fact that like, there is,
*  I don't wanna call it cognition or computation.
*  I don't know what you call it,
*  but like there is a process playing out
*  in the dynamics of societies
*  that we are all individual actors in.
*  And like, we're not part of that, you know,
*  like it requires all of us acting individually,
*  but like this higher level structure
*  is playing out some things and like things are getting solved
*  for it to be able to maintain itself.
*  And that's the level that our technologies live at.
*  They don't live at our level.
*  They live at the societal level
*  and they're deeply integrated with the social organism,
*  if you wanna call it that.
*  And so I really get upset when people talk about
*  the species of artificial intelligence.
*  I'm like, you mean we live in an ecosystem
*  of all these kinds of intelligent things
*  and these animating technologies that were,
*  you know, in some sense helping to come alive.
*  We are generating them,
*  but it's not like the biosphere
*  limited all of its past history
*  when it invented a new species.
*  All of these things get scaffolded.
*  And we're also augmenting ourselves
*  at the same time that we're building technologies.
*  I don't think we can anticipate
*  what that system's gonna look like.
*  So in some fundamental way,
*  you always wanna be thinking about the planet
*  as one organism.
*  The planet is one living thing.
*  What happens when it becomes multi-planetary?
*  Is it still just the-
*  Still the same causal chain.
*  Same causal chain.
*  It's like when the first cell split into two.
*  That's what I was talking about.
*  When a planet reproduces itself,
*  the technosphere emerges enough understanding.
*  It's like this recursive,
*  like the entire history of life is just recursion, right?
*  So you have an original life event.
*  It evolves for four billion years,
*  at least on our planet.
*  It evolves a technosphere.
*  The technologies themselves start to become
*  having this property we call life,
*  which is the phase we're undergoing now.
*  It solves the origin of itself,
*  and then it figures out how that process all works,
*  understands how to make more life,
*  and then can copy itself onto another planet
*  so the whole structure can reproduce itself.
*  And so the original life is happening again right now
*  on this planet in the technosphere
*  with the way that our planet is undergoing
*  another transition, just like at the origin of life
*  when geochemistry transitioned to biology,
*  which is the global, for me,
*  it was a planetary scale transition.
*  It was a multi-scale thing that happened
*  from the scale of chemistry all the way to planetary cycles.
*  It's happening now all the way from individual humans
*  to the internet, which is a global technology
*  and all the other things.
*  Like there's this multi-scale process that's happening
*  and transitioning us globally.
*  And it is really like, it's a dramatic transition.
*  It's happening really fast.
*  And we're living in it.
*  And you think this technosphere that we created,
*  this increasingly complex technosphere
*  will spread to other planets?
*  I hope so.
*  I think so.
*  You think we'll become a type two Kardashev civilization?
*  I don't really like the Kardashev scale.
*  And it goes back to,
*  I don't like a lot of the narratives about life
*  because they're very like survival of the fittest,
*  energy consuming, this, that, and the other thing.
*  It's very like, I don't know, sort of old world.
*  Conqueror mentality.
*  What's the alternative to that?
*  Exactly.
*  I mean, I think it does require life
*  to use new energy sources in order to expand the way it is.
*  So that part's accurate.
*  But I think this sort of process of life,
*  like being the mechanism that the universe
*  creatively expresses itself, generates novelty,
*  explores the space of the possible,
*  is really the thing that's most deeply intrinsic to life.
*  And so, these sort of energy consuming scales of technology
*  I think is missing the sort of actual feature
*  that's most prominent about any alien life
*  that we might find, which is that it's literally
*  our universe, our reality,
*  trying to creatively express itself
*  and trying to find out what can exist
*  and trying to make it exist.
*  See, but past a certain level of complexity,
*  unfortunately, maybe you can correct me,
*  but we're built, all complex life on earth
*  is built on a foundation of that predator-prey dynamic.
*  Yes.
*  And so, I don't know if we can escape that.
*  I don't know. No, we can't.
*  But this is why I'm okay with having a finite lifetime.
*  And one of the reasons I'm okay with that, actually,
*  goes back to this issue of the fact
*  that we're resource bound.
*  We live in a, we have a finite amount of material,
*  whatever way you wanted to find material.
*  I think, for me, material is time,
*  material is information,
*  but we have a finite amount of material.
*  If time is a generating mechanism,
*  it's always gonna be finite because the universe is,
*  it's a resource that's getting generated,
*  but it has a size,
*  which means that all the things that could exist
*  don't exist, and in fact, most of them never will.
*  So death is a way to make room in the universe
*  for other things to exist
*  that wouldn't be able to exist otherwise.
*  So if the universe, over its entire temporal history,
*  wants to maximize the number of things,
*  wants as a hard word, maximize a hard word,
*  approximate, but wants to maximize
*  the number of things that can exist,
*  the best way to do it is to make recursively
*  embedded stacked objects like us
*  that have a lot of structure and a small volume of space,
*  and to have those things turn over rapidly
*  so you can create as many of them as possible.
*  So there for sure is a bunch of those kinds of things
*  throughout the universe.
*  Hopefully.
*  Hopefully our universe is teeming with life.
*  This is like early on in the conversation,
*  you mentioned that we really don't understand
*  much, like there's mystery all around us.
*  Yes.
*  If you had to like bet money on it, like what percent?
*  So like say a million years from now,
*  the story of science and human understanding
*  that started on earth is written.
*  Like what chapter are we on?
*  Are we like, is this like 1%, 10%, 20%, 50%?
*  90%?
*  How much do we understand?
*  Like the big stuff, not like the details of like
*  big important questions and ideas.
*  I think we're in our 20s.
*  And the- 20% of the 20.
*  No, like age wise, let's say we're in our 20s,
*  but the lifespan is gonna keep getting longer.
*  You can't do that.
*  I can.
*  You know why I use that though?
*  I'll tell you why.
*  Why my brain went there is because, you know,
*  anybody that gets an education in physics, you know,
*  has this sort of trope about how all the great physicists
*  did their best work in their 20s.
*  And then you don't do any good work after that.
*  And I always thought it was kind of funny
*  because for me, physics is not complete.
*  It's not nearly complete, but most physicists think
*  that we understand most of the structure of reality.
*  And so I think I actually, I think I put this
*  in the book somewhere, but like this idea to me
*  that societies would discover everything while they're young
*  is very consistent with the way we talk
*  about physics right now.
*  But I don't think that's actually the way
*  that things are gonna go.
*  And you're finding that people that are making
*  major discoveries are getting older in some sense
*  than they were, and our lifespan is also increasing.
*  So I think there is something about age
*  and your ability to learn and how much of the world
*  you can see that's really important over a human lifespan,
*  but also over the lifespan of societies.
*  And so I don't know how big the frontier is.
*  I don't actually think it has a limit.
*  I don't believe in infinity as a physical thing,
*  but I think as a receding horizon,
*  I think because the universe is getting bigger,
*  you can never know all of it.
*  Well, I think it's about 1.7%.
*  1.7, where does that come from?
*  Finite, I don't know, I just made it up.
*  That number had to come from somewhere.
*  I think seven is the thing that people usually pick.
*  7%.
*  So I wanted to say 1%, but I thought it'd be funnier
*  to add a point, so inject a little humor in there.
*  So the seven is for the humor,
*  one is for how much mystery I think there is out there.
*  99% mystery, 1% known.
*  In terms of really big, important questions.
*  It's like the list, say there's gonna be like 200 chapters.
*  Like the stuff that's gonna remain true.
*  But you think the book has a finite size.
*  Yeah, yeah.
*  And I don't.
*  I mean, not that I believe in infinities,
*  but I think the size of the book is growing.
*  Well, the fact that the size of the book is growing
*  is one of the chapters in the book.
*  Oh, there you go.
*  Ooh, we're being recursive.
*  I think you have to, you can't have an ever-growing book.
*  Yes, you can.
*  I mean, you just, I mean, I don't even, because then.
*  Well, you couldn't have been asking this
*  at the origin of life, right?
*  Because obviously, you wouldn't have existed
*  at the origin of life, but the question of intelligence
*  and artificial general, those questions did not exist then.
*  And so, and they in part existed because the universe
*  invented a space for those questions to exist.
*  Through evolution.
*  But like, I think that question will still stand
*  a thousand years from now.
*  It will, but there will be other questions
*  we can't anticipate now that we'll be asking.
*  Yeah, and maybe we'll develop the kinds of languages
*  that we'll be able to ask much better questions.
*  Right, or like the theory of like, gravitation, for example.
*  Like when we invented that theory,
*  like we only knew about the planets in our solar system,
*  right, and now, you know, many centuries later,
*  we know about all these planets around other stars
*  and black holes and other things
*  that we could never have anticipated.
*  And then we can ask questions about them.
*  You know, like we wouldn't have been asking
*  about singularities and like, can they really be
*  physical things in the universe several hundred years ago?
*  That question couldn't exist.
*  Yeah, but it's not, I still think those are chapters
*  in a book, like I don't get a sense from that.
*  So do you think the universe has an end?
*  If you think it's a book with an end.
*  I think the number of words required to describe
*  how the universe works has an end, yes.
*  Meaning, like, I don't care if it's infinite or not.
*  Right.
*  As long as the explanation is simple and it exists.
*  Oh, I see.
*  And I think there is a finite explanation
*  for each aspect of it.
*  The consciousness, the life.
*  Yeah.
*  I mean, very probably there's like some,
*  the black hole thing is like, what's going on there?
*  Where's that going?
*  Like, where are they?
*  And then, you know, why the Big Bang?
*  Like, what?
*  Right.
*  Probably there's just a huge number of universes
*  and it's like, universes inside universes.
*  I think universes inside universes is maybe possible.
*  I just think it's, every time we assume this is all there is,
*  it turns out there's much more.
*  The universe is a huge place.
*  And we mostly talked about the past
*  and the richness of the past, but the future.
*  I mean, with many worlds,
*  interpretation of quantum mechanics.
*  Oh, I am not a many worlds person.
*  You're not.
*  No, are you?
*  How many Lexus are there?
*  Depending on the day.
*  Well.
*  Do some of them wear yellow jackets?
*  At the moment, the moment we asked the question,
*  there was one.
*  At the moment I'm answering it,
*  there's now near infinity, apparently.
*  I mean, the future is,
*  the future is bigger than the past, yes?
*  Yes.
*  Okay, well there you go.
*  The future is bigger than the past, according to you.
*  It's already gigantic.
*  Yeah, but yeah, I mean,
*  that's consistent with many worlds, right?
*  Cause like there's this constant branching.
*  But it doesn't really have a directionality to it.
*  It's, I don't know, many worlds is weird.
*  So my interpretation of reality is like,
*  if you fold it up, like all that bifurcation of many worlds,
*  and you just fold it into the structure that is you,
*  and you just said you are all of those many worlds,
*  and like that sort of, you know, like your history,
*  like converged on you, but like you're,
*  you're actually an object exists that's like,
*  that, you know, was selected to exist.
*  And you're self-consistent with the other structures.
*  So like the quantum mechanical reality
*  is not the one that you live in.
*  It's this very deterministic classical world.
*  And you're carving a path through that space.
*  But I don't think that you're constantly branching
*  into new spaces.
*  I think you are that space.
*  Wait, so to you at the bottom, it's deterministic.
*  I thought you said the universe.
*  No, it's random at the bottom, right?
*  But like this randomness that we see at the bottom
*  of reality, that is quantum mechanics.
*  I think like people have assumed that that is reality.
*  And what I'm saying is like all those things you see
*  in many worlds, all those versions of you,
*  just collect them up and bundle them up.
*  And like, they're all you.
*  And what has happened is, you know,
*  like elementary particles don't have,
*  they don't live in a deterministic universe.
*  The things that we study in quantum experiments,
*  they live in this fuzzy random space.
*  But as that structure collapsed and started
*  to build structures that were deterministic
*  and evolved into you, you are a very deterministic
*  macroscopic object.
*  And you can look down on that universe
*  that doesn't have time in it, that random structure.
*  And you can see that all of these possibilities
*  look possible, but they don't look,
*  they're not possible for you because you're constrained
*  by this giant like causal structural history.
*  So you can't live in all those universes.
*  You'd have to go all the way back to the very beginning
*  of the universe and retrace everything again
*  to be a different you.
*  So where's the source of the free will
*  for the macro object?
*  It's the fact that you're a deterministic structure
*  living in a random background.
*  And also all of that selection bundled in you
*  allows you to select on possible futures.
*  So that's where your will comes from.
*  And there's just always a little bit of randomness
*  because the universe is getting bigger.
*  And this idea that the past is in the present
*  is not large enough yet to contain the future,
*  the extra structure has to come from somewhere.
*  And some of that is because outside of those giant
*  causal structures that are things like us,
*  it's fucking random out there.
*  And it's scary and we're all hanging onto each other
*  because the only way to hang onto each other,
*  the only way to exist is to cling on
*  to all of these causal structures
*  that we happen to co-inhabitate existence with
*  and try to keep reinforcing each other's existence.
*  All the selection bundled in.
*  Hold up, enough.
*  But free will's totally consistent with that.
*  I don't know what I think about that.
*  That's complicated to imagine.
*  Just that little bit of randomness is enough.
*  Okay.
*  Well, it's also, it's not just the randomness.
*  There's two features.
*  One is the randomness helps generate some novelty
*  and some flexibility.
*  But it's also that because you're the structure
*  that's deep in time,
*  you have this combinatorial history that's you.
*  And I think about time and assembly theory,
*  not as linear time, but as combinatorial time.
*  So if you have all of this structure
*  that you're built out of,
*  you in principle, your future can be combinations
*  of that structure.
*  You obviously need to persist yourself as a coherent you.
*  So you wanna optimize for a future
*  in that combinatorial space that still includes you
*  most of the time for most of us.
*  And when you make those kinds,
*  and then that gives you a space to operate in,
*  and that's your sort of horizon
*  where your free will can operate.
*  And your free will can't be instantaneous.
*  So for example, like I'm sitting here talking to you right
*  now, I can't be in the UK and I can't be in Arizona,
*  but I could plan, I could execute my free will over time
*  because free will is a temporal feature of life
*  to be there tomorrow or the next day if I wanted to.
*  But what about like the instantaneous decisions you're making
*  like to, I don't know, to put your hand on the table.
*  I think those were already decided a while ago.
*  I don't think free will is ever instantaneous.
*  But on a longer time horizon,
*  there's some kind of staring going on.
*  Hmm, and who's doing the staring?
*  You are.
*  And you being this macro object that's encompasses.
*  Or you being Lex.
*  Whatever you wanna call it.
*  There you are saying words to things once again.
*  I know.
*  Why does anything exist at all?
*  You've kind of taken that as a starting point.
*  Yeah.
*  I think that's the hardest question.
*  Isn't it just hard questions stack on top of each other?
*  Wouldn't it be the same kind of question of what is life?
*  It is the same.
*  Well, that's sort of like, I try to fold all of the questions
*  into that question because I think that one's really hard.
*  And I think the nature of existence is really hard.
*  You think actually like answering what is life
*  will help us understand existence?
*  Maybe there's turtles all the way down.
*  It'll just, understanding the nature of turtles
*  will help us kind of march down.
*  Even if we don't have the experimental methodology
*  of reaching before the big bang.
*  Right.
*  So, well, I think there's sort of two questions
*  embedded here.
*  I think the one that we can answer by answering life
*  is why certain things exist and others don't.
*  But I think this sort of ultimate question,
*  the sort of like prime mover question
*  of why anything exists, we will not be able to answer.
*  What's outside the universe?
*  Oh, there's nothing outside the universe.
*  So I have a very, I am a very,
*  I am like the most physicalist that anyone could be.
*  So for me, everything exists in our universe.
*  I like to think everything exists here.
*  So even when we talk about the multiverse,
*  I don't, to me it's not like there's all these other
*  universes outside of our universe that exist.
*  The multiverse is a concept that exists in human minds here
*  and it allows us to have some counterfactual reasoning
*  to reason about our own cosmology
*  and therefore it's causal in our biosphere
*  to understanding the reality that we live in
*  and building better theories.
*  But I don't think that the multiverse is something like,
*  and also math, like I don't think there's a platonic world
*  that mathematical things live in.
*  I think mathematical things are here on this planet.
*  Like I don't think it makes sense to talk about things
*  exist outside of the universe.
*  If you're talking about them, you're already talking about
*  something that exists inside the universe
*  and is part of the universe and is part of like
*  what the universe is building.
*  It all originates here, it all exists here in some.
*  I mean, what else would there be?
*  That could be things you can't possibly understand
*  outside of all of this that we call the universe.
*  And you can say that and that's an interesting philosophy
*  but again, this is sort of like pushing on the boundaries
*  of like the way that we understand things.
*  I think it's more constructive to say the fact
*  that I can talk about those things is telling me something
*  about the structure of where I actually live
*  and where I exist.
*  Just because it's more constructive doesn't mean it's true.
*  Well, it may not be true.
*  It may be something that allows me to build better theories
*  I can test to try to understand something objective.
*  And in the end, that's a good way to get to the truth.
*  Exactly.
*  Even if you realize you were wrong in the past.
*  Yeah.
*  There's no such thing as experimental Pletanism.
*  But if you think math is an object that emerged
*  in our biosphere, you can start experimenting with that idea.
*  And that to me is really interesting.
*  Like to think about, well, people, I mean,
*  mathematicians do think about math sometimes
*  as an experimental science, but to think about math itself
*  as an object for study by physicists
*  rather than a tool physicists use to describe reality.
*  It becomes the part of reality they're trying to describe
*  to me as a deeply interesting inversion.
*  What to you is most beautiful about this kind of exploration
*  of the physics of life that you've been doing?
*  I love the way it makes me feel.
*  And then you have to try to convert the feelings
*  into visuals and the visuals into words?
*  Yeah.
*  So I think I love, yeah, I love the way it makes me feel
*  to have ideas that I think are novel.
*  And I think that the dual side of that
*  is the painful process of trying to communicate that
*  with other human beings to test if they have
*  any kind of reality to them.
*  And I also love that process.
*  I love trying to figure out how to explain
*  really deep abstract things that I don't think
*  that we understand and trying to understand them
*  with other people.
*  And I also love the shock value of this kind of idea
*  we were talking about before of being on the boundary
*  of what we understand.
*  And so people can kind of see what you're seeing,
*  but they haven't ever saw it that way before.
*  And I love the shock value that people have,
*  that immediate moment of recognizing that there's something
*  beyond the way that they thought about things before.
*  And being able to deliver that to people,
*  I think is one of the biggest joys that I have,
*  is just to like, maybe it's that sense of mystery,
*  like to share that there's something beyond the frontier
*  of how we understand and we might be able to see it.
*  And you get to see the humans transformed by the new idea?
*  Yes.
*  And I think my greatest wish in life
*  is to somehow contribute to an idea
*  that transforms the way that we think.
*  Like, I have my problem I wanna solve,
*  but like the thing that gives me joy about it
*  is really changing something.
*  And ideally getting to a deeper understanding
*  of how the world works and what we are.
*  Yeah, I would say understanding life at a deep level.
*  Yeah.
*  Is probably one of the most exciting problems,
*  one of the most exciting questions.
*  So I'm glad you're trying to answer just that
*  and doing it in style.
*  That's the only way to do anything.
*  Thank you so much for this amazing conversation.
*  Thank you for being you, Sarah.
*  This was awesome.
*  Thanks, Lex.
*  Thanks for listening to this conversation with Sarah Walker.
*  To support this podcast,
*  please check out our sponsors in the description.
*  And now let me leave you with some words from Charles Darwin.
*  In the long history of humankind and animal kind too,
*  those who learn to collaborate
*  and improvise most effectively have prevailed.
*  Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
