---
Date Generated: July 03, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 11048s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence', 'elon musk', 'ivanka trump', 'joe rogan', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex friedman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex pod', 'lex podcast']
Video Views: 217556
Video Rating: None
Video Description: Ivanka Trump is a businesswoman, real estate developer, and former senior advisor to the President of the United States.

TRANSCRIPT:
https://lexfridman.com/ivanka-trump-transcript

Please support this podcast by checking out our sponsors:
- Cloaked: https://cloaked.com/lex and use code LexPod
- Shopify: https://shopify.com/lex 
- NetSuite: http://netsuite.com/lex
- Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/lex 
- ExpressVPN: https://expressvpn.com/lexpod 

EPISODE LINKS:
Ivanka's Instagram: https://instagram.com/ivankatrump
Ivanka's X: https://x.com/IvankaTrump
Ivanka's Facebook: https://facebook.com/IvankaTrump
Ivanka's books:
Women Who Work: https://amzn.to/45yHAgj
The Trump Card: https://amzn.to/3xB22jS

PODCAST INFO:
Podcast website: https://lexfridman.com/podcast
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/2lwqZIr
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/2nEwCF8
RSS: https://lexfridman.com/feed/podcast/
Full episodes playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLrAXtmErZgOdP_8GztsuKi9nrraNbKKp4
Clips playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLrAXtmErZgOeciFP3CBCIEElOJeitOr41

OUTLINE:
0:00 - Introduction
1:57 - Architecture
14:12 - Modern architecture
21:45 - Philosophy of design
30:01 - Lessons from mother
53:07 - Lessons from father
1:01:39 - Fashion
1:12:35 - Hotel design
1:23:44 - Self-doubt
1:26:07 - Intuition
1:29:17 - The Apprentice
1:33:51 - Michael Jackson
1:35:26 - Nature
1:40:20 - Surfing
1:42:31 - Donald Trump
1:56:53 - Politics
2:13:05 - Work-life balance
2:19:33 - Parenting
2:34:40 - 2024 presidential campaign
2:38:17 - Dolly Parton
2:40:02 - Adele
2:40:32 - Alice Johnson
2:45:56 - Stevie Ray Vaughan
2:48:41 - Aretha Franklin
2:49:51 - Freddie Mercury
2:50:56 - Jiu jitsu
2:58:01 - Bucket list
3:02:30 - Hope

SOCIAL:
- Twitter: https://twitter.com/lexfridman
- LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/lexfridman
- Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/lexfridman
- Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/lexfridman
- Medium: https://medium.com/@lexfridman
- Reddit: https://reddit.com/r/lexfridman
- Support on Patreon: https://www.patreon.com/lexfridman
---

# Ivanka Trump: Politics, Family, Real Estate, Fashion, Music, and Life | Lex Fridman Podcast #436
**Lex Fridman:** [July 02, 2024](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2oxdDKHdcM8)
*  The following is a conversation with Ivanka Trump, businesswoman, real estate developer,
*  and former senior advisor to the President of the United States.
*  I've gotten to know Ivanka well over the past two years. We've become good friends,
*  hitting it off right away over our mutual love of reading, especially philosophical writings from
*  Marcus Aurelius, Joseph Campbell, Alan Watts, Victor Franco, and so on.
*  She is a truly kind, compassionate, and thoughtful human being.
*  In the past, people have attacked her, in my view, to get indirectly at her dad,
*  Donald Trump, as part of a dirty game of politics and clickbait journalism.
*  These attacks obscured many projects and efforts, often bipartisan, that she helped get done.
*  And they obscured the truth of who she is as a human being.
*  Through all that, she never returned the attacks with anything but kindness,
*  and always walked through the fire of it all with grace.
*  For this, and much more, she is an inspiration, and I'm honored to be able to call her a friend.
*  Oh, and for those living in the United States, happy upcoming Fourth of July.
*  It's both an anniversary of this country's Declaration of Independence,
*  and an anniversary of my immigrating here to the U.S.
*  I am forever grateful for this amazing country, for this amazing life, for all of you
*  who have given a chance to a silly kid like me.
*  From the bottom of my heart, thank you. I love you all.
*  This is the Lex Friedman Podcast. To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description.
*  And now, dear friends, here's Ivanka Trump.
*  You said that ever since you were young, you wanted to be a builder, that you loved the idea
*  of designing beautiful city skylines, especially in New York City. I love the New York City skyline.
*  So, describe the origins of that love of building.
*  You know, I think there's both an incredible confidence and a total insecurity that comes
*  with youth. So, I remember at 15, I would look out over the city skyline from my bedroom window
*  in New York and imagine where I could contribute and add value in a way that I look back on and
*  and completely laugh at how confident I was. But I've known since some of my earliest memories,
*  it's something I've wanted to do. And I think I fundamentally, I love art. I love expressions
*  of beauty in so many different forms. With architecture, there's the tangible. And I think
*  that marriage of function and something that exists beyond yourself is very compelling.
*  I also grew up in a family where my mother was in the real estate business working alongside my
*  father. My father was in the business and I saw the joy that it brought to them. So, I think I had
*  these natural positive associations. They used to send me as a little girl renderings of projects
*  they were about to embark on with notes asking if I would hurry up and finish school so I could come
*  join them. So, I had these positive associations. But it came from something within myself. I think
*  that as I got older and as I got involved in real estate, I realized that it was so
*  multidisciplinary. You have, of course, the design, but you also have engineering, the brass tax of
*  construction, there's time management, there's project planning, just the duration of time to
*  complete one of these iconic structures. It's enormous. You can contribute a decade of your life
*  to one project. So, while you have to think big picture, it means you really have to care deeply
*  about the details because you live with them. So, it allowed me to flex a lot of areas of interest.
*  I love that confidence of youth.
*  It's funny because we're all so insecure, right? In the most basic interactions, but yet our
*  ambitions are so unbridled in a way that kind of like makes you blush as an adult. And I think
*  it's fun. It's fun to tap into that energy. Yeah, where everything is possible. I think
*  some of the greatest builders I've ever met kind of always have that little flame of everything
*  is possible still burning. That is a silly notion from youth, but it's not so silly.
*  Everybody tells you something is impossible, but if you continue believing that it's possible and
*  have that sort of naive notion that you could do it even if it's exceptionally difficult,
*  that naive notion turns into some of the greatest projects ever done.
*  100%.
*  Going out to space or building a new company where like everybody said it's impossible,
*  taking on a gigantic company and disrupting them and revolutionizing how stuff is done
*  or doing huge building projects where like you said, so many people are involved in making that
*  happen. We get conditioned out of that feeling. We start to become insecure and we start to
*  rely on the input or validation of others and it takes us away from that sort of core drive and
*  ambition. So it's fun to reflect on that and also to smile, right? Because whether you can execute
*  or not, time will tell. But yeah, no, that was very much my childhood.
*  Yeah, of course it's important to also have the humility once you get humbled and realize
*  that it's actually a lot of work to build. I still am amazed just looking at big buildings,
*  big bridges that human beings are able to get together and build those things. That's one of
*  my favorite things about architecture is just like, wow, it's a manifestation of the fact that
*  humans can collaborate and do something like Epic much bigger than themselves. And it's like a
*  statue that represents that and it can be there for a long time.
*  I think in some ways you look out at different city skylines and it's almost like a visual
*  depiction of ambition realized, right? Like it's a testament to somebody's dream, not somebody,
*  whole ensemble of people's dreams and visions and triumphs and in some cases failures if the
*  projects weren't properly executed. So you look at these skylines and it's a testament to that.
*  I actually heard once architecture described as frozen music that really resonated with me.
*  I love thinking about a city skyline as an ensemble of dreams realized.
*  Yeah. I remember the first time I went to Dubai and I was watching them dredging
*  out and creating these man-made islands. And I remember somebody once saying to me,
*  they're an architect, an architect actually who collaborated with us on our tower in Chicago.
*  He said that the only thing that limited what an architect could do in that area was
*  gravity and imagination. So it's, you know.
*  Yeah, but gravity is a tricky one to work against. And that's where civil engineers,
*  one of my favorite things, they used to build bridges in high school for physics classes.
*  You have to build bridges and you compete on how much weight they can carry relative to their own
*  weight. You study how good it is by finding its breaking point. And that was a deep appreciation
*  for me on the miniature scale of, on a large scale, what people are able to do with civil
*  engineering. Because gravity is a tricky one to fight against.
*  It definitely is. And bridges, I mean, some of the iconic designs in our country are incredible
*  bridges. So if we think of Skylines as ensembles of dreams realized, you spent quite a bit of time
*  in New York. What do you love about and what do you think about the New York City skyline?
*  What's a good picture? We're looking here at a few. I mean, looking over the water.
*  Well, I think the water is an unbelievable feature of the New York skyline. As you see the island
*  on approach, and oftentimes you'll see like in these images, you'll see these
*  towers reflecting off of the water surface. So I think there's something very beautiful and
*  unique about that. When I look at New York, I see this unbelievable sort of tapestry of different
*  types of architecture. So you have the Gothic form as represented by buildings like the Woolworth
*  building, or you'll have Art Deco as represented by buildings like 40 Wall Street or the Chrysler
*  building or Rockefeller Center. And then you'll have these unbelievable super modern examples,
*  or modernist examples like Lever House and Seagram's House. So you have all of these
*  different styles. And I think to build in New York, you're really building the best of the best.
*  So nobody's giving New York their second rate work. And especially when a lot of those buildings
*  were built, there was this incredible competition happening between New York and Chicago for
*  dominance of the sky and for who could create the greatest skyline, this race to the sky when
*  skyscrapers were first being built starting in Chicago and then New York surpassing that in
*  terms of height at least with the Empire State Building. So I love sort of contextualizing
*  the skylines as well and thinking back to when different components that are so iconic were
*  added and the context in which they came into being. I gotta ask you about this. There's a
*  pretty cool page that I've been following on X Architecture and Tradition and they celebrate
*  sort of traditional schools of architecture. And you mentioned Gothic, the tapestry. This is in
*  Chicago, the Tribune Tower in Chicago. So what do you think about that? Sort of the old and then new
*  mixed together. Do you like Gothic? I think it's hard to look at something like the Tribune Tower
*  and not be completely in awe. Like this is an unbelievable building. Look at those buttresses
*  and you've got gargoyles hanging off of it. And this style was reminiscent of the cathedrals
*  of Europe, which was very kind of in vogue in like the 1920s here in America. Actually,
*  I mentioned the Woolworth Tower before. The Woolworth Tower was actually referred to as
*  the Cathedral of Commerce because it also was in that Gothic style.
*  Amazing. So this was built maybe a decade before the Tribune Building.
*  But the Tribune Building to me is almost not replicable. It personally really resonates with
*  me because one of the first projects I ever worked on was building Trump Chicago, which was this
*  beautiful, elegant, super modern, all glass skyscraper right across the way. So it was right
*  across the river. So I would look out the windows as it was under construction or be standing
*  quite literally on rebar of the building, looking out at the Tribune and incredibly inspired. And
*  now the reflective glass of the building reflects back not only the river, but also
*  the Tribune Building and other buildings on Michigan Avenue. Do you like it when the glass,
*  the reflective properties of the glass is part of the architecture? I think it depends. Like they
*  have super reflective glass that sometimes doesn't work. It's distracting. And I think
*  it's one component of sort of a composition that comes together. I think in this case,
*  the glass on Trump Chicago is very beautiful. It was designed by Adrian Smith of Skidmore,
*  Owings & Merrill, a major architecture firm who actually did the Burj Khalifa in Dubai,
*  which is I think, like an awe-inspiring example of modern architecture. But glass is tricky.
*  You have to get the shade, right? You know, some glass has a lot of iron in it and gets super green.
*  And that's a choice. And sometimes you have more blue properties, blue silver like you see here,
*  but it's part of the character. How do you know what it's actually going to look like when it's
*  done? Like, is it possible to imagine that? Because it feels like there's so many variables.
*  I think so. I think if you have a vivid imagination, if you sit with it, and then if you
*  also go beyond the rendering, right? You have to live with the materials. So you don't build
*  a 92-story building glass curtain wall and not deeply examine the actual curtain wall before
*  purchasing it. So you have to spend a lot of time with the actual materials, not just the beautiful
*  artistic renderings, which can be incredibly misleading. The goal is actually that the end
*  result is much, much more compelling than what the architect or artist rendered. But oftentimes,
*  that's very much not the case. Sometimes also you mention context. Sometimes I'll see renderings
*  of buildings. I'm like, wait, what about the building right to the left of it that's blocking
*  80% of its views? The architects, they'll remove things that are inconvenient. So you have to be
*  rooted in reality. Exactly. And I love the notion of living with the materials in contrast to
*  living in the imagined world of the drawings. So both are probably important because you have to
*  dream the thing into existence, but you also have to be rooted in what the thing is actually going
*  to look like in the context of everything else. 100%. One of the underlying principles of the page
*  I just mentioned, and I hear folks mention this a lot, is that modern architecture is kind of boring,
*  that it lacks soul and beauty. And you just spoke with admiration for both modern and for Gothic,
*  for older architecture. So do you think there's truth that modern architecture is boring?
*  I'm living in Miami currently, so I see a lot of super uninspired glass boxes on the waterfront,
*  but I think exceptional things shouldn't be the norm. They're typically rare. And I think in modern
*  architecture, you find an abundance of amazing examples of super compelling and innovative
*  building designs. I mentioned the Burj Khalifa. It is awe-inspiring. This is an unbelievably striking
*  example of modern architecture. You look at some older examples, the Sydney Opera House.
*  So I think there's unbelievable... There you go. I mean, it's like a needle in the sky.
*  Yeah, reaching out to the stars. It's huge. And in the context of a city where there's a lot of height.
*  So it's unbelievable. But I think one of the things that's probably exciting me the most about
*  architecture right now is the innovation that's happening within it. There's example of robotic
*  fabrication, there's 3D printing. Your friend and who you introduced me to not too long ago,
*  Neri Oxman, what she's doing at the intersection of biology and technology and thinking about how
*  to create more sustainable development practices, quite literally trying to create materials that
*  will biodegrade back into the earth. I think there's something really cool happening now with
*  the rediscovery of ancient building techniques. So you have self-healing concrete that was used
*  by the Romans, an art and a practice of using volcanic ash and lime that's now being rediscovered
*  and is more critical than ever as we think about how much of our infrastructure relies on concrete
*  and how much of that is failing on the most basic level. So I think actually it's a really,
*  really exciting time for innovation in architecture. And I think there are some
*  incredible examples of modern design that are really exciting. But generally, I think Roosevelt
*  said that comparison is the thief of joy. So it's hard. You look at the Tribune building,
*  you look at some of these iconic structures. One of the buildings I'm most proud to have worked on
*  was the historical post office building in Washington, DC. You look at a building like that
*  and it feels like it has no equal. Also, there's a psychological element where people tend to want
*  to complain about the new and celebrate the old. It's like the history of time. People are always
*  skeptical and concerned about change. And it's true that there's a lot of stuff that's new,
*  that's not good, that's not going to last, that's not going to stand the test of time,
*  but some things will. And there's just like in modern art and modern music, there's going to be
*  artists that stand the test of time and we'll later look back and celebrate them. Those are the
*  good times. When you just step back, what do you love about architecture? Is it the beauty,
*  is it the function? I'm most emotionally drawn, obviously, to the beauty. But
*  I think as somebody who's built things, I really believe that the form has to follow the function.
*  Like there's nothing uglier than a space that is ill-conceived, that otherwise it's decoration.
*  And I think that after that initial reaction to seeing something that's
*  aesthetically really pleasing to me when I look at a building or a project,
*  I love thinking about how it's being used. So having been able to build so many things
*  in my career and worked on so many incredible projects, I mean, it's really, really rewarding
*  after the fact to have somebody come up to you and tell you that they got engaged in the lobby
*  of your building or they got married in the ballroom and share with you some of those
*  experiences. So to me, that's equally as beautiful, the use cases for these unbelievable
*  projects. But I think it's all of it. I love that you've got the construction and you've got the
*  design and you've got then the interior design and you've got the financing elements,
*  the marketing elements, and it's all wrapped up in this one effort. So to me, it's exciting to
*  flex in all those different ways. Yeah, like you said, it's dreams realized, hard work realized,
*  I mean, probably on the bridge side is why I love the function. In terms of function being primary,
*  you just think of like the millions of bridges. Go down, you had, look at that.
*  Yeah, this is Devil's Bridge in Germany. Yeah. I wouldn't say it's like the most practical design,
*  but look how beautiful that is. Yeah. So this is probably, well, we don't know. We need to
*  interview some people whether the function holds up, but in terms of beauty and then like what
*  we're talking about, using the water for the reflection and the shape that creates, I mean,
*  there's an elegance to the shape of a bridge. See, it's interesting that they call it Devil's
*  Bridge because to me, this is very ethereal. I think about the ring, the circle, life.
*  There's nothing about this that makes me feel, maybe they're just being ironic in the names.
*  Functions really flop. Yeah, exactly. Maybe. Nobody's ever successfully crossed.
*  Who crossed the bridge, yeah. But I mean, to me, there's just iconic, I love looking at bridges
*  because of the function. It's the Brooklyn Bridge or the Golden Gate Bridge. I mean, those are
*  probably my favorites in the United States. Just in a city to be able to look out and see the skyline
*  combined with the suspension bridge and thinking of all the millions of cars that pass, like the
*  busyness, us humans getting together and going to work, building cool stuff and just the bridge
*  kind of represents the turmoil and the busyness of a city as it creates. It's cool. And the
*  connectivity as well. Yeah. The network of roads all come together. So there, the bridge is the
*  ultimate combination of function and beauty. Yeah. I remember when I was first learning about bridges,
*  studying the cable stay versus the suspension bridge. I mean, you actually built many replicas,
*  so I'm sure you'll have a point of view on this, but they really are so beautiful. And you mentioned
*  the Brooklyn Bridge, but growing up in New York, that was as much a part of the architectural story
*  and tapestry of that skyline as any building that's seen in it. What in general is your
*  philosophy, philosophy of design and building in architecture? Well, some of the most recent
*  projects I worked on prior to government service were the old post office building and almost
*  simultaneously Trump-Durall in Miami. So these were both two just massive undertakings, both
*  redevelopments, which in a lot of cases, having worked on ground up construction, redevelopment
*  projects are in a lot of ways much more complicated because you have existing attributes,
*  but also a lot of limitations you have to work within, especially when you're repurposing a use.
*  So this, the old post office building on Pennsylvania Avenue was- So beautiful.
*  It's unbelievable. So this was a Romanesque revival building built in the 1890s on America's
*  Main Street to symbolize American grandeur. And at the time there were post offices being built
*  in the style across the country, but this being really the defining one, still to this day,
*  the tallest habitable structure in Washington, the tallest structure being the monument,
*  the nation's only vertical park, which is that clock tower, but you've got these thick granite
*  walls, those carved granite turrets, just an unbelievable building. You've got this massive
*  atrium that runs through the whole center of it that is topped with glass. So having the opportunity
*  to spearhead a project like that was so exciting and actually was my first renovation project. So
*  I came to it with a tremendous amount of energy, vigor, and humility about how to do it properly,
*  ensuring I had all the right people. We had countless federal and local government agencies
*  that would oversee every single decision we made. But in advance of even having the opportunity to
*  do it, there was a close to two year request for proposal, like a process that was put out by
*  the general services administration. So it was this really arduous government procurement process
*  that we were competing against so many different people for the opportunity,
*  which a lot of people said it was a gigantic waste of time. But I looked at that and I think
*  so did a lot of the other bidders and say it's worth trying to put the best vision for it.
*  So you fell in love with this project.
*  I fell in love, yeah.
*  Is there some interesting details about what it takes to do renovation?
*  Is there about some of the challenges or opportunities? Because you want to maintain
*  the beauty of the old and now upgrade the functionality, I guess, and maybe
*  modernize some aspects of it without destroying what made the building magical in the first place.
*  So I think the greatest asset was already there, the exterior of the building, which we
*  meticulously restored. And any addition to it had to be done sort of very gently in terms of any
*  signage additions. And the interior spaces were completely dilapidated. It had been in a post
*  office. Then it was used for a really run down food court and government office spaces. It was
*  actually losing $6 million a year when we got the concession to build it and when we won and became
*  one of, I think, a great example of public-private partnerships working together. But I think the
*  biggest challenge in having such a radical use conversion is just how you lay it out.
*  So the amount of time, I would get on that Accela twice a week, three times a week to spend day trips
*  down in Washington. And we would walk every single inch of the building, laying out the floor plans,
*  debating over the configuration of a room. There were almost 300 rooms and there were
*  almost 300 layouts. So nothing could be repeated. Whereas when you're building from scratch,
*  you have a box and you decide where you want to add potential elements and you kind of can stack
*  the floor plan all the way up. But when you're working within a building like this,
*  every single room was different. You see the setback. So the setback then required you
*  to move the plumbing. So it was really a labor of love. And to do something like this,
*  and that's why I think renovation, we had it with Doral as well. It was 700 rooms over 650 acres
*  of property. And so every single unit was very different and complicated. Not as complicated
*  in some ways. The scale of it was so massive, but not as complicated as the old post office.
*  It required a level of precision. And I think in real estate, you have a lot of people who design
*  on plan and a lot of people who are in the business of acquiring and flipping. So it's more
*  financial engineering than it is building. And they don't spend the time sweating these details
*  that make something great and make something functional. And you feel it in the end result.
*  But I mean, blood, sweat, tears, years of my life for those projects. And it was worth it. I enjoyed
*  almost every minute of it.
*  So to you, it's not about the flipping. It's about the art and the function of the thing
*  that you're creating.
*  100%.
*  What's design on plan? I'm learning new things today.
*  When proposals are put forth by an architect and really just the plan is accepted. And in the case
*  of a renovation, if you're not walking those rooms, the number of times a beautifully laid out room
*  was on a blueprint. And then I'd go to Washington and I'd walk that floor and I'd realize that there
*  was a column that ran right up through the middle of the space where the bed was supposed to be or
*  the toilet was supposed to be or the shower. So there's a lot of things that are missed
*  when you do something conceptually without sort of rooting it in the actual structure.
*  And that's why I think even with ground up construction as well, people who aren't constantly
*  on their job sites, constantly walking the projects, there's just a lot that's missed.
*  I mean, there's a wisdom to the idea that we talked about before, live with the materials and
*  walking the construction site, walk in the rooms. I mean, that's what you hear from people like Steve
*  Jobs, like Elon. That's why you live on the factory floor. That's why you constantly obsess
*  about the details, the actual, not of the plans, but the physical reality of the product. I mean,
*  the insanity of Steve Jobs and Johnny I working together on making it perfect, making the iPhone,
*  the early designs, prototypes, making that perfect, what it actually feels like in the hand.
*  You have to be there as close to the metal as possible to truly understand.
*  And you have to love it in order to do that.
*  Right. It shouldn't be about how much it's going to sell for and all that kind of stuff. You have
*  to love the art. Because for the most part, you can probably get 90, maybe even 95% of the end
*  results unless something has terribly gone awry by not caring with that level of
*  almost like maniacal precision. But you'll notice that 10% for the rest of your life.
*  I think that extra effort, that passion, I think that's what separates good from great.
*  If we go back to that young Ivanka, the confidence of youth, and if we could talk about your mom,
*  she had a big influence on you. You told me she was an adventurer.
*  Olympic skier and a businesswoman. What did you learn about life from your mother?
*  So much. She passed away two years ago now. And she was a remarkable, remarkable woman. She was a
*  trailblazer in so many different ways. As an athlete and growing up in communist Czechoslovakia,
*  as a fashion mogul, as a real estate executive and builder, just this all around trailblazing
*  businesswomen. I also learned from her, aside from that element, how to really enjoy life.
*  I look back and some of my happiest memories of her are in the ocean, just lying on her back,
*  looking up at the sun and just so in the moment, or dancing. She loved to dance.
*  So she really taught me a lot about living life to its fullest. She had so much courage,
*  so much conviction, so much energy, and a complete comfort with who she was.
*  What do you think about that? Olympic athlete, the trade-off between ambition and just wanting
*  to do big things and pursuing that and giving your all to that and being able to relax and just
*  throw your arms back and enjoy every moment of life. That trade-off. What do you think about
*  that trade-off? I think because she was this unbelievable, formidable athlete and because of
*  the discipline she had as a child, I think it made her value those moments more as an adult.
*  I think she was a great balance of the two that we all hope to find. And she was able to find both
*  incredibly serious and formidable. I remember as a little girl, I used to literally traipse behind her
*  at the Plaza Hotel, which she oversaw and actually kind of was her old post office.
*  It was this unbelievable historic hotel in New York City. And I'd follow her around at construction
*  meetings and on job sites and there she is, dancing. See? That's funny that that's the picture
*  you pull up. I'm sorry. That's great. You just look great in that picture. That's great.
*  She had such a joy to her and she was so unabashed in her perspective and her opinions. I mean,
*  you know, she made my father look reserved. Whatever she was feeling, she was just very
*  expressive and a lot of fun to be around. So she, as you mentioned, grew up during the Prague Spring
*  in 1968. And that had a big impact on human history. I mean, my family came from the Soviet
*  Union and then, you know, the 20th century, the story of the 20th century is a lot of Eastern Europe,
*  the Soviet Union tried the ideas of communism and it turned out that a lot of those ideas
*  resulted into a lot of suffering. So why do you think the communist ideology failed?
*  I think fundamentally, as people, we desire freedom. We want agency. You know, and my mom
*  was like a lot of other people who grew up in similar situations where she didn't like to talk
*  about it that often. So one of my real regrets is that I didn't push her harder. You know, so,
*  but I think back to the conversations we did have and I try to imagine what it's like. She was at
*  Charles University in Prague, which was really like a focal point of the reforms that were ushered in
*  during the Prague Spring and the liberalization agenda that was happening. The dance halls were
*  opening, the student activists, and she was attending university there right at that same
*  time. So the contrast to this feeling of freedom and progress and liberalization in the spring,
*  and then it's so quickly being crushed in the fall of that same year when the Warsaw Pact countries
*  and the Soviet Union rolled in to put down and ultimately roll back all those reforms.
*  So for her to have lived through that, you know, she didn't come to North America until she was
*  23 or 24. So that was her life. As a young girl, she was on the Junior National Ski Team for
*  Czechoslovakia. My grandfather used to train her. They used to put the skis on her back and walk up
*  the mountain in Czechoslovakia because there were no ski lifts. She actually made me jump
*  when I was a child just to let me know what her experience had been. If I complained that it was
*  cold out, she's like, well, you didn't have to walk up the mountain. You'd be plenty warm if you
*  had carried the skis up on your back up the last run. I feel like they made people tougher back
*  then. Like my grandma, you mentioned, it's funny, they go through some of the darkest things that a
*  human being can go through and they don't talk about it and they have a general positive outlook
*  on life that's deeply rooted in the knowledge of what life could be. Like how bad it could get.
*  My grandma survived a holodomor in Ukraine, which was the mass starvation brought on by the
*  collectivist policies of the Stalin regime. And then she survived the Nazi occupation of Ukraine,
*  never talked about it, probably went through extremely dark, extremely difficult times,
*  and then just always had a positive outlook on life. And also made me do very difficult
*  physical activity, like you mentioned, just to humble you. Like kids these days are soft kind
*  of energy, which I'm deeply, deeply grateful for. On all fronts, including just having
*  hardship, and including just physical hardship flung at me. I think that's really important.
*  Yeah. You wonder how much of who they were was a reaction to their experience.
*  Would she have naturally had that sort of forward looking, grateful, optimistic orientation? Or was
*  it a reaction to her childhood, I think about that. I look at this picture of my mom and she was
*  unabashedly herself. She loved flamboyance and glamour. And in some ways, I think it probably
*  was a direct reaction to this very austere, controlled childhood. This was one expression
*  of it. I think her, how she dressed and how she presented. I think her entrepreneurial spirit
*  and love of capitalism and all things American was another manifestation of it and one that I grew up
*  with. I remember the story she used to tell me about when she was 14 and she was going to
*  neighboring countries. As an athlete, you were given additional freedoms that you wouldn't
*  otherwise be afforded in these societies under communist rules. So she was able to travel where
*  most of her friends never would be able to leave Czechoslovakia. And she would come back from all
*  of these trips and the first place where she'd do ski races in Austria and elsewhere. And the
*  first thing she had to do was check in at the local police. And she'd sit down and she had enough
*  wisdom at 14 to know that she couldn't appear to be lying by not being impressed by what she saw
*  and the fact that you could get an orange in the winter, but she couldn't be too excited by it.
*  That she'd become a flight risk. So give enough details that you're believable, but not so many
*  that you're not trusted. And imagine that as a 14-year-old, that experience and having to
*  navigate the world that way. And she told me that eventually all those local police officers,
*  they came to love her because one of the things she'd do is smuggle that stuff back from these
*  countries and give it to them to give their wives perfume and stockings. So she figured out
*  the system pretty quickly. But it's a very different experience from what I was navigating and the
*  pressures and challenges me as a 14-year-old was dealing with. So I have so much respect and
*  admiration for her. Yeah. Hardship clarifies what's important in life. You and I have talked about
*  Man's Search for Meaning, that book. Having kind of an ultimate hardship clarifies that finding
*  joy in life is not about the environment, it's about your outlook on that environment. And there's
*  beauty to be found in any situation. And also in that particular situation, when everything is taken
*  from you, the thing you start to think about is the people you love. So in the case of Man's Search
*  for Meaning, Victor Frankl thinking about his wife and how much he loves her. And that love was
*  the flame, the warmth that kept him excited. The fun thing to think about when everything else is
*  gone. So we sometimes forget that with the busyness of life, get all this fun stuff we're talking
*  about, like building and being a creative force in the world. At the end of the day, what matters is
*  just like the other humans in your life, the people you love. 100%. It's the simple stuff.
*  Victor Frankl is somebody, I mean, that book and just his philosophy in general is so inspiring to
*  me. But I think so many people, they say they want happiness, but they want conditional happiness.
*  When this and this thing happens or under these circumstances, then I'll be happy.
*  And I think what he showed is that we can sort of cultivate these virtues within ourselves,
*  regardless of the situation we find ourselves in. And in some ways, I think the meaning of life is
*  the search for meaning in life. It's the relationships we have and we form. It's the experience
*  we have. It's how we deal with the suffering that life inevitably presents to us. And Victor
*  Frankl does an amazing job highlighting that under the most horrific circumstances. And I think it's
*  just super inspiring to me. He also shows that you can get so much from just like small joys,
*  like getting a little more soup today than you did yesterday. I mean, it's like it's the little stuff.
*  If you allow yourself to love the little stuff of life, it's all around you. It's all there. So you
*  don't need to like have these ambitious goals and the comparison being a thief of joy, that kind of
*  stuff. Just like it's all around us, the ability to eat. When I was in the jungle
*  and I got severely dehydrated because there's no water, you run out of water real quick.
*  And I mean, the joy I felt when I got to drink. I didn't care about anything else.
*  Speaking of things that matter in life, I would start to fantasize about water and that was bringing
*  me joy. You can tap into this feeling at any time. Exactly. I was just tapping in just to stay
*  positive. Just go into your bathroom, turn on the sink, watch the water. Oh, for sure. For sure. I
*  mean, people really, it's good to have stuff taken away for time. That's why struggle is good, to
*  make you appreciate, to have a deep gratitude for when you have it. And water and food is a big one,
*  but water is the biggest one. I wouldn't recommend it necessarily to get severely dehydrated to
*  appreciate water, but maybe every time you take a sip of water, you can have that kind of gratitude.
*  There's a prayer in Judaism you're supposed to say every morning, which is basically
*  thanking God for your body working. It's something so basic, but it's when it doesn't
*  that we're grateful. So just reminding ourselves every day the basic things of a functional
*  body, of our health, of access to water, which so many millions of people around the world do not
*  have reliably is very clarifying and super important. Yeah. Health is a gift. Water is a gift.
*  Is there a memory with your mom that had a defining effect on your life?
*  I have these vignettes in my mind, seeing her in action in different capacities.
*  A lot of times in the context of things that I would later go on to do myself. So
*  I would go every day, almost every day after school, and I'd go to the Plaza Hotel and I'd
*  follow her around as she'd walk the hallways and just observe her. And she was so impossibly
*  glamorous. She was doing everything in four and a half inch heels with this
*  bouffant. And so it's almost like an inaccessible visual. But I think for me,
*  when I saw her experience, the most joy tended to be by the sea, almost always, not a pool.
*  And I think I get this from her. I'm like, pools? They're fine. I love the ocean. I love saltwater.
*  I love the way it makes me feel. And I think I got that from her. So we would just swim together
*  all the time. And it's a lot of what I love about Miami actually, being so close to the ocean. I
*  find it to be super cathartic. But a lot of my memories of my mom seeing her really just in her
*  bliss is floating around in a body of saltwater. Is there also some aspect to her being an example
*  of somebody that could be sort of beautiful and feminine, but at the same time, powerful,
*  a successful businesswoman that showed that it's possible to do that?
*  Yeah, I think she really was a trailblazer. It's not uncommon in real estate for there to be
*  multiple generations of people. And so on job sites, it was not unusual for me to run into
*  somebody whose grandfather had worked with my grandfather in Brooklyn or Queens, or whose father
*  had worked with my mother. And they'd always tell me these stories about her rolling in and they'd
*  hear the heels first. And a lot of times the story would be like, oh gosh, really, it's two
*  days after Christmas. We thought we'd get a reprieve. But she was very exacting. So I have
*  this visual in my mind of her walking on rebar on the balls of her feet in these foreign shields.
*  I'm assuming she actually carried flats with her, but I don't know. That's not the visual I have.
*  But I loved the fact that she so embodied femininity and glamour and was so comfortable
*  being tough and ambitious and determined and this unbelievable businesswoman and entrepreneur
*  at a time when she was very much alone, even for me in the development world and so many of the
*  different businesses that I've been in, there really aren't women outside of sales and of
*  marketing. You don't see as many women in the development space and the construction space,
*  even in the architecture and design space, maybe outside of interior design. And she was decades
*  ahead of me. So I love hearing these stories. I love hearing somebody who's my peer tell me about
*  their grandfather and their father and their experience with one of my parents. It's amazing.
*  And she did it all in foreign shields.
*  And she did it. She used to say, there's nothing that I can't do better in heels.
*  That would be your exact thing. And when I complain about wearing something,
*  you know, it was like the early 90s. Everything was also like uncomfortable,
*  these fabrics and materials. And I would like go back and forth between being super girly
*  and a total tomboy. But she'd dress me up in these things and I'd be complaining about it.
*  And she'd say, Ivanka, pain for beauty, which I happened to totally disagree with,
*  because I think there's nothing worse than being uncomfortable. So I haven't accepted
*  or internalized all of this wisdom, so to speak. But it was just funny. She had a very specific
*  point of view. And full of good lines, pain for beauty.
*  It's funny because, I mean, just even in fashion, if something's uncomfortable,
*  to me, there's nothing that looks worse than when you see somebody like tottering around
*  and like their heels hurt them. So they're kind of walking oddly. And, you know, it doesn't,
*  they're not embodying their confidence in that regard. So I'm like kind of the opposite. I start
*  with, well, I want to be comfortable. And that helps me be confident and in command.
*  A foundation for fashion for you is comfort. And on top of that, you build things that are beautiful.
*  And it's not comfort, like dowdy. You know, there's that level of comfort, but-
*  Functional comfort.
*  But I think you have to, for me, I want to feel confident. And you don't feel confident when
*  you're like pulling out a garment or hobbling on heels that don't fit you properly. And she
*  was never doing those things either. So I don't know how she was wearing stuff like that. That's
*  like a 40 pound feet of dress. And I know this because I have it and I wore it recently. And,
*  I mean, I got a workout walking to the elevator. Like this is a heavy dress. And you know what?
*  It was worth it. It was great. She's making it look easy. But she makes it look very, very easy.
*  Do you miss her?
*  I'm so much. It's unbelievable how dislocating the loss of a parent is. And
*  her mother lives with me still, my grandmother who helped raise us. So that's very special.
*  And I can ask her some of the questions that I would have, sorry,
*  I wanted to ask my own mom, but it's hard.
*  It was beautiful to see. I've gotten a chance to spend time with your family to see
*  so many generations together at the table. And there's so much history there.
*  She's 97. And until she was around 94, she lived completely on her own. No help, no anything,
*  no support. And now she requires really sort of 24 hour care. And I feel super grateful that I'm
*  able to give her that because that's what she did for me. It's amazing for me to have my children
*  be able to grow up and know her stories, know her recipes, check dumplings and goulash and
*  quetzalitsa and all the other things she used to make me in my childhood. But she really,
*  she was a major force in my life. My mom was working. So my grandmother was the person who
*  was always home every day when I came back from school. I remember I used to shower and it would
*  almost be like comical. I feel like in my memory, and there is no washing machine I've seen on the
*  planet that can actually do this, but in my memory, I'd go to shower and I'd drop something
*  on the bed and I'd come back into the room after my shower and it was like folded, pressed. It was
*  all my grandmother. She was just running after me, taking care of me. And so it's nice to be able to
*  do that for her. I got from her reading. My grandmother, she devoured books, devoured books.
*  She loved the more sensational ones. So some of these romance novels, I would pick them up,
*  the covers, but she could tell you, she could look at any royal lineage across Europe and tell you
*  all the mistresses, all the drama. She loved it. But her face was always buried in a book.
*  My grandfather, Deddo, he was the athlete. He swam professionally on the national team for
*  Czechoslovakia and he helped train my mom, as I was saying before, in skiing. So he was a great
*  athlete and she was at home and she would read and cook. So that's something I remember a lot
*  from my childhood and she would always say, I got reading from her. Speaking of drama, I had my
*  English teacher in high school recommended a book for me by D.H. Lawrence. It's supposed to be a
*  classic. She's like, this is a classic you should read. It's called Lady's Shadow A's Lover.
*  I've read a lot of classics, but that one is straight up like a romance novel about a wife
*  who likes cheating with a gardener. I remember reading this. In retrospect, I understand why
*  it's a classic because it was so scandalous to talk about sex in a book 100 years ago, whatever.
*  In retrospect, do you know why she recommended it?
*  I think maybe she's just sending a signal, hey, you need to get out more or something. I don't know.
*  Maybe she was seeking to inspire you, Lex.
*  Yeah, exactly. Anyway, I mean, I love that kind of stuff too, but I love all the classics.
*  And they get, there's a lot of drama, human nature, drama is part of it. So
*  what about your dad growing up? What did you learn about life from your father?
*  I think my father's sense of humor is sometimes underappreciated. So he had an amazing and has
*  an amazing sense of humor. He loved music. I think my mom loved music as well, but
*  my father always used to say that in another life he would have been a Broadway musical producer,
*  which is hilarious to think about, but he loves music.
*  That is funny you think about.
*  Right? Now he DJs at Mar-a-Lago. So people get a sense of, he loves Andrew Lloyd Webber and all of
*  it, Pavarotti, Elton John. I mean, these were the same songs on repeat my whole childhood. So
*  I know the playlist.
*  Probably Sinatra and all that.
*  Loves Sinatra, loves Elvis, a lot of the greats. So I think I got a little bit of my love for music
*  from him, but my mom shared that as well. I think one of the things in looking back that I think I
*  inherited from my father as well is his sort of interest or understanding of the importance of
*  asking questions and specifically questions of the right people. And I saw this a lot on job sites.
*  So I remember with the old post office building, there was this massive glass topped atrium. So
*  heating and cooling the structure was like a Herculean lift. We had the mechanical engineers
*  provide their thoughts on how we could do it efficiently and so that the temperature never
*  varied. And it was enormously expensive as an undertaking. And I remember one of his first
*  times on the site because he had really empowered me with this project and he trusted me to execute
*  and to also rope him in when I needed it. But the first time he visits, we're walking the hallway
*  and we're talking about how expensive this cooling system would be and heating system would be. And
*  he starts stopping and he's asking duct workers as we walk what they think of the system
*  that the mechanical engineer has designed. First few, fine, not great answers. The third guy
*  goes, sir, if you want me to be honest with you, it's obscenely over designed. In the circumstance
*  of a 1,000 year storm, you will have the exact perfect temperature. If there's a massive blizzard
*  or if it's unbearably hot, but 99.9% of the time you'll never need it. And so I think it's just
*  an enormous waste of money. And so he kept asking that guy questions and we ended up overhauling
*  the design pretty well into the process of the whole system, saving a lot of money, creating a
*  great system that's super functional. And so I learned a lot and that's just one example of
*  countless. That one really sticks out in my head because I'm like, oh my gosh, we're redesigning
*  the whole system. We were actively under construction. But I would see him do that
*  on a lot of different issues. He would ask people on the work level what their thoughts were,
*  ideas, concepts, designs. And there was almost like a Socratic first principles type of
*  way he questioned people, trying to get down to sort of trying to reduce complex things to
*  something really fundamental and simple. So I try to do that myself to the best I can. And I think
*  it's something I very much learned from him. Yeah. I've seen great engineers, great leaders do
*  just that. You see, you want to do that a lot, which is basically ask questions
*  to push simplification. Can we do this simpler? The basic question is like, why are we doing it
*  this way? Can this be done simpler? And not taking as an answer that this is how we've always done it.
*  Sort of not allowing yourself, it doesn't matter that's how it was done. What is the right way to
*  do it? And usually the simpler it is, the more correct the way. It has to do with costs, has to
*  do with production manufacture, but usually simple is best. And it's oftentimes not the
*  architecture, the engineers, it's, you know, in Elon's case, probably the line worker who sees
*  things more clearly. So I think making sure it's not just that you're asking good questions,
*  you're asking the right people those same good questions. That's why like a lot of the
*  companies are really flat in terms of organizational design, where the the agency is
*  designed where the the any anybody on the factory floor can talk directly to you on
*  to just there's no there's not there's not this managerial class this hierarchy where to travel
*  up and down the hierarchy, which large companies often construct this hierarchy of managers where
*  no one manager if you ask them the question of like, what have you done this week? The answer is
*  like, it's really hard to come up with. Usually it's going to be a bunch of paperwork. Yeah.
*  So you like nobody knows what they actually do. So when it's flat, you can actually get as quickly
*  as possible when problems arise. You can solve those problems as quickly as possible. And also,
*  you have a direct, rapid, iterative process where you're making things simpler, making them more
*  efficient, and constantly improving. So yeah, it's interesting. Well, when large, I mean, you see this
*  in government, a lot of people get together, a hierarchy is developed, and that somehow,
*  sometimes it's good, but very often just slows things down. You see great companies, great,
*  great companies, Apple, Google, Metta, they have to fight against that bureaucracy that builds the
*  slowness that large organizations have. And to still be a big organization and act like a startup
*  is the big challenge. It's super difficult to deconstruct that as well once it's in place,
*  right? It's circumventing layers and asking questions, probing questions of people on the
*  ground level is a huge challenge to the authority of the hierarchy. And there's tremendous amount of
*  resistance to it. So it's how do you grow something in the case of a company in terms of a culture
*  that can scale, but doesn't lose its connection to real and meaningful feedback. It's not easy.
*  I've had a lot of conversations with Jim Keller, who's this legendary engineer and leader,
*  and he has talked about, you often have to be a little bit of an asshole in the room,
*  not in a mean way, but it's uncomfortable. A lot of these questions, they're uncomfortable. They
*  break the kind of general politeness and civility that people have in communication. When you get a
*  meeting, nobody wants to be like, can we do it way different? Everyone wants just to like,
*  this lunch is coming up, I have this trip planned on the weekend with the family. Everyone just
*  wants comfort. When humans get together, they kind of gravitate towards comfort. Nobody wants that
*  one person that comes in and says, hey, can we do this way better and way different? And everything
*  we've gotten comfortable with, throw it out. Not only do they not want that, but the one person
*  who comes in and does that puts a massive target on their back and is ultimately seen as a threat.
*  Nobody really gets fired for maintaining the status quo. Even if things go poorly,
*  it's the way it was always done. Yeah, humans are fascinating. But in order to actually do great,
*  big projects to reach for the stars, you have to have those people. You have to constantly disrupt
*  and have those uncomfortable conversations. And really have that first principles type of
*  orientation, especially in those large bureaucratic contexts. So amongst many other things,
*  you created a fashion brand. What was that about? What was the origin of that?
*  I always loved fashion as a form of self-expression, as a means to communicate
*  either a truth or an illusion, depending on what kind of mood you were in, but
*  this sort of second body, if you will. So I loved fashion. My mother was a big part of the reason
*  I did. But I never thought I would go into fashion. In fact, I was graduating from Warden.
*  It was the day of my graduation. And winter calls me up and offered me a job at Vogue, which
*  is a dream in so many ways. But I was so focused. I wanted to go into real estate and I wanted to
*  build buildings. And I told her that. So I really thought that that was going to be the path I was
*  taking. And then very organically, fashion was part of my life, but it came into my life in a
*  more professional capacity by talking with my first of many different partners that I had in
*  the fashion space about. He actually had showed me a building to buy. His family had some real
*  estate holdings and I passed on the real estate deal, but we forged a friendship. And we started
*  talking about how in the space that he was in, fine jewelry, there was this lack of product
*  and brands that were positioned for self-purchasing females. So everything was about the man buying
*  the Christmas gift, the man buying the engagement ring. The stores felt like that. They were all
*  tailored towards the male aesthetic. The marketing felt like that. And what about the woman who
*  had a salary and was really excited to buy herself a great pair of earrings or had just received a
*  great bonus and was going to use it to treat herself? So we thought there was a void in the
*  marketplace. And that was the first category I launched, Ivanka Trump Fine Jewelry. And
*  we just caught lightning in a bottle. It was really quickly after that. I met my partner
*  who had founded Nine West Shoes, really capable partner. And we launched a shoe collection,
*  which took off and did enormously well. And then a clothing collection and handbags and sunglasses
*  and fragrance. So we caught a moment and we found a positioning for the self-purchasing
*  multi-dimensional woman. And we made dressing for work aspirational. At the time we launched,
*  if you wanted to buy something for an office context, the brands that existed were the opposite
*  of exciting. Nobody was taking pictures of what they were wearing to work and posting it online
*  with some of these classic legacy brands. Really, it felt very much like it was designed by a team
*  of men for what a woman would want to wear to the office. So we started creating this clothing that
*  was feminine, that was beautiful, that was versatile. That would take a woman from the boardroom
*  to an afterschool soccer game, to a date night with a boyfriend, to a walk in the park with
*  her husband. All the different ways women live their lives and creating a wardrobe for that
*  woman who works at every aspect of their life, not just the siloed professional part.
*  It was really compelling. We started creating great brand content and we had incredible
*  contributors like Adam Grant, who was blogging for us at the time and creating aspirational content
*  for working women. It was actually kind of a funny story, but I now had probably close to 11
*  different product categories and we were growing like wildfire. I started to think about what would
*  be a compelling way to create interesting content for the people who are buying these
*  different categories. We came up with a website called Women Who Work. I went to a marketing
*  agency, one of the fancy firms in New York, and I said, we want to create a brand campaign around
*  this multidimensional woman who works. What do you think? Can you help us? They come
*  back and they say, we don't like the word work. We think it should be women who do.
*  I just started laughing because I'm like, women who do. The fact that they couldn't conceive of
*  it being exciting and aspirational and interesting to lean into working at all aspects of our lives
*  was just fascinating to me, but that was part of the problem. I think that's why ultimately,
*  when the business grew to be hundreds of millions of dollars in sales, we were distributed
*  at all the best retailers across the country from Neiman Marcus to Saks to Bloomingdale's and beyond.
*  It really resonated with people in an amazing way and probably not dissimilar to how I
*  have this incredible experience every time somebody comes up to me and
*  tells me that they were married in a space that I had painstakingly designed. I have that experience
*  now with my fashion company. The number of women who will come up tell me that they loved my shoes
*  or they loved the handbags. I've had women show me their engagement rings. They got engaged with us.
*  It's really rewarding. It's really beautiful. Yeah. When I was hanging out with you in Miami,
*  the number of women that came up to you saying they love the clothing, they love the shoes is
*  awesome. All these years later. All these years later. Yeah. What does it take to make a shoe
*  where somebody would come up to you years later and just be just full of love for this thing you've
*  created? What does that mean? What does it take to do that? Well, I still wear the shoes.
*  I mean, that's a good starting point, right? To create a thing that you want to wear.
*  I feel like the product, I think first and foremost, you have to have the right partner.
*  Building a shoe, if you talk to a great shoe designer, it's architecture. Making a heel that's
*  four inches that feels good to walk in for eight hours a day, that is an engineering feat. I found
*  great partners in everything that I did. My shoe partner had founded Nine West. He really knew what
*  went into making a shoe wearable and comfortable. Then you overlay that with great design.
*  We also created this really comfortable, beautifully designed, super feminine
*  product offering that was also affordably priced. I think it was like the trifecta of those three
*  things that made it stand out for so many people. Can you speak to, I don't know if it's possible
*  to articulate, but can you speak to the process you go through from idea to the final thing?
*  What you go through to bring an idea to life? Not being a designer, and this is true in real
*  estate as well, I was never the architect. I didn't necessarily have the pen and in fashion
*  the same. I was kind of like a conductor. I knew what I liked and didn't like, and I think that's
*  really important. That became honed for me over time. I would have to sit a lot longer with
*  something earlier on than later when I had more refined my aesthetic point of view.
*  I think, first of all, you have to have a pretty strong sense of what resonates with you.
*  And then as in the case of my fashion business, as it grew and became quite a large business,
*  and I had so many different categories, everything had to work together. I had individual partners
*  for each category, but if we were selling at Neiman Marcus, we couldn't have a pair of shoes
*  that didn't relate to a dress, that didn't relate to a pair of sunglasses and handbags all on the
*  same floor. In the beginning, it was much more collaborative. As time passed, I really took the
*  point on deciding, and this is the aesthetic for the season. These are the colors we're going to
*  use. These are fabrics. And then working with our partners on the execution of that, but I
*  needed to create an overlay that allowed for cohesion as the collection grew. That was
*  actually really fun for me because that was a little different. I was typically initially
*  responding to things that were put in front of me, and towards the end, it was my partners
*  who were responding to the things that myself and my team. But I always wanted to bring the
*  best talent in, so I was hiring great designers and printmakers and copywriters. And so I had this
*  almost like that conductor analogy. I had this incredible group of, in this case, women assembled
*  who had very strong points of view themselves, and it created a great team.
*  So yeah, I mean, great team is really essential. It's the essential thing behind any successful
*  story. But there's this thing of taste, which is really interesting because it's hard to articulate
*  what it takes, but basically knowing A versus B what looks good, or without A-B comparison to say,
*  if we change this part, that would make it better. That sort of designer taste, it's hard to
*  make explicit what that is, but the great designers have that taste. This is going to look good.
*  And it's not actually, again, the Steve Jobs thing, it's not the opinion poll. You can't
*  poll people and ask them what looks better. You have to have the vision of that. And as you said,
*  you also have to develop eventually the confidence that your taste is good such that you can
*  curate, you can direct teams, you can argue that no, no, no, this is right. Even when there's
*  several people that say this doesn't make any sense. If you have that vision, have the confidence,
*  this will look good. That's how you come up with great designs. It's a mixture of great tastes
*  as you develop over time and the confidence. And that's a really hard thing, especially,
*  I think one of the things that I love most about all of these creative pursuits is that ability to
*  work with the best people. Right now, I'm working with my husband. We have this 1400
*  acre island in the Mediterranean and we're bringing in the best architects and the best brands.
*  But to have a point of view and to challenge people who are such artists, respectfully,
*  but not to be afraid to ask questions, it takes a lot of confidence to do that.
*  And it's hard. So these are actually just internal early renderings. So we're in the process of doing
*  the master planning now. But- This is beautiful. I mean, it's an aside-
*  Yeah, this is an early vision. Yeah. It's going to be extraordinary. Amman's going to
*  operate the hotel for us and there are going to be villas and we have Carbone who's going to be
*  doing the food and beverage. But it's amazing to bring together all of this talent. And for me to
*  be able to play around and flex the real estate muscles again and have some fun with it is-
*  The real estate, the design, the art. How hard is it to bring something like that to life?
*  Because that looks surreal out of this world. Well, especially on an island. It's challenging,
*  meaning the logistics and even getting the building materials to an island are no joke,
*  but we will execute on it. And it may not be this, this is sort of, as I said, early conceptual
*  drawings, but it gives a sense of sort of wanting to honor the topography that exists. And this is
*  obviously very modern, but making it feel right in terms of the context of the vegetation and
*  and the terrain that exists is, and not just have, you know, a beautiful glass box. Obviously,
*  you want glass, you want to look out and see that gorgeous blue ocean. But how do you do that in a
*  way that doesn't feel generic and isn't a squandered opportunity to create something new? Yeah. And
*  it's integrated with the natural landscape. It's a celebration of the natural landscape around it.
*  So I guess you start from this dream-like, because this feels like a dream. And then when
*  you're faced with the reality of the building materials and all the actual constraints of the
*  building, then it evolves from there. Right? Yeah. And so much, I mean, so much of architecture,
*  you don't see, but it's decisions made. So how do you, how do you create independent structures
*  where you look out of one and don't see the other? You know, how do you ensure the sort of the
*  stacking and the master plan works in a way that's harmonious and view corridors and
*  all of those elements, all of those components of decision-making are super appreciated,
*  but not often thought about. What's a view corridor? Like to make sure that the top unit,
*  you're not looking out and seeing a whole bunch of units, you're looking out and seeing the ocean.
*  So that's where you take this and then you start angling everything and you start thinking about,
*  well, in this context, do we have green roofs? So if there's any hint of a roof,
*  it's camouflaged by vegetation that matches what already exists on the island, where the engineers
*  become very important. How do you build into a mountainside while being sensitive to the beauty
*  of the island? It's almost like a mathematical problem. I took a class computational geometry
*  in grad school where you have to think about these view corridors. It's like a math problem.
*  Well, but it's also an art problem because it's not just about making sure that there's no
*  occlusions to the view. You have to figure out when there is occlusions, like what is the vegetation?
*  You have to figure all that out. So every single room, every single building is a
*  thing that adds extra complexity. And then the choice is like, how does the sunrise and set?
*  Yeah. So how do you want to angle the hotel in relation to the sunrise and the sunset?
*  Do you obviously want people to experience those? So which do you favor? The directionality of the
*  wind on an island and in this case, the wind's coming from the north and the vegetation is
*  less lush on the northern end. So do you focus more on the southern end and have the horseback
*  riding trails and amenities up towards the north? So there are these really interesting
*  decisions and choices you get to reflect on. That's a fascinating sort of discussion to be
*  having. And probably there's actual constraints on infrastructure issues. So all of those are
*  constraints. Yeah, well, the grade of the land, right? If it's super steep. So also finding the
*  areas of topography that are flatter but still have the great views. So it's fun. I think real
*  estate and building, it's like a giant puzzle. And I love puzzles. Every piece relates to another
*  and it's all sort of interconnected. Yeah. Like you said, in the old post office,
*  every single room is different. So every single room is a puzzle when you're doing the renovation.
*  That's fascinating. And if you're not thoughtful, it gets like, at best, really quirky.
*  At worst, completely ridiculous. Quirky is such a funny word.
*  It's such a... I'm sure you've walked into your fair share of quirky rooms. And sometimes that's
*  charming. But most often it's charming when it's intentional through smart design. Yeah, you can
*  tell if it's by accident or if it's intentional. You can tell. So much, I mean, the whole hospitality
*  thing. So it's not just how it's designed. It's how, once the thing is operating, if it's a hotel,
*  how everything comes together, the culture of the place. And the warmth. I think with spaces,
*  you can feel the soul of a structure. And I think on the hotel side, you have to think about flow
*  of traffic, use of all these things. When you're building condominiums or your own home, you want
*  to think about the warmth of a space as well. And especially with super modern designs, sometimes
*  warmth is sacrificed. And I think there is a way to marry both. And that's where you get into the
*  interior design elements and disciplines and how fabrics can create tremendous warmth in a space,
*  which is otherwise colder, raw building materials. And that's a really interesting, how texture
*  matters, how color matters. And I think oftentimes interior design is not,
*  it doesn't take the same priority. And I think that underestimates the impact it can have
*  on how you experience a room or a space. Yeah, especially when it's working together with the
*  architecture. Yeah. Yeah, fabrics and color. That's so interesting.
*  Finishes the choice of wood. That's making me feel horrible about the space we're sitting in.
*  It's like black curtains, the warmth. I need to work on this. No comment. This is a big two-do item.
*  You're making me feel... I'll listen back to this over and over. I think you may need, there may be
*  a woman's touch needed. A lot. But I actually, I appreciate the vegetation. Yeah, fake plants.
*  You know what I love about this space though is it's, is like you come through. Every single
*  element, there's a story behind it. So it's not just some, you didn't have some interior designer
*  curate your bookshelf. Nobody came in here with books by the yard. This is basically an Ikea,
*  this is not deeply thought through, but it does bring me joy. Yeah. Which is one way to do design,
*  as long as you're happy. That usually means if your taste is decent enough, that means others
*  will be happy or we'll see the joy radiate through it. But I appreciate you were grasping
*  for compliments and you eventually got that. No, I actually, I love it. I love it. Do you have like a
*  little, I love this guy. Yeah. You're holding onto a monkey looking at a human skull, which is
*  particularly irrelevant. And this, I mean, I feel like you've really thought about all of these.
*  Yeah. There's robot. I don't know if, I mean, I don't know how much you looked into robots,
*  but there's, there's a way to communicate love and affection from a robot that I'm really fascinated
*  by. And a lot of cartoonists do this too. You have to, when you create cartoons and non-human like
*  entities, you have to bring out the joy. So with Wally or robots and, and star wars,
*  to be able to communicate emotion to anger and excitement through a robot is really interesting
*  to me. And people that do it successfully are awesome. To make you smile. Yeah. That makes
*  you smile for sure. There's a longing there. How do you do that successfully as you, as you bring them
*  your projects to life? I think there's, there's so many detailed elements that I think artists know
*  well. But one basic one is something that people know and you now know, cause you have a dog,
*  is the excitement that a dog has when it, when you first show up, just recognizing you and like
*  catching your eye and just showing his excitement by wiggling his butt and tail and all this kind of,
*  this, this intense joy that overtakes his body, that, that moment of recognizing something,
*  it's the double take that you're that, that moment of like, where this joy of recognition takes
*  over your whole cognition and you're just like, there and there's a connection. And then the other
*  person gets excited and you both get excited together. It's kind of like that feeling.
*  What would I put it? You know, like when you go to airports and you get to see people
*  who haven't seen each other for a long time, all of a sudden recognize each other in their meeting
*  and they're all like run towards each other and a hug and that moment. But that's awesome to watch.
*  There's so much joy. And, and dogs though, we'll have that every time you could walk into the other
*  room to get a glass of milk and you come back and your dog sees you like it's the first time.
*  So I love replicating that in robots. They actually say children, like one of the reasons
*  why peekaboo is so successful is that they actually don't remember not having seen you a few seconds
*  prior. There's a, there's a term for it, but I remember as when, when my kids were younger,
*  you leave the room and you walk back in 30 seconds later and they experienced the same joy as if you
*  had been, you know, gone for four hours and we grew out of that. We become very used to one another.
*  I kind of want to forever be excited by the peekaboo phenomena. The simple joys, we're talking
*  about on fashion, having the confidence of taste to be able to sort of push through on this idea
*  of design. But you've also mentioned, and somebody who admires Rick Rubin in his book, The Creative Act,
*  it has some really interesting ideas and one of them is to accept self-doubt and imperfection.
*  So is there some battle within yourself that you have on sort of striving for perfection and for
*  the confidence and always kind of having it together versus like accepting that things are
*  always going to be imperfect? I think every day, I think I wake up in the morning and, you know,
*  I want to be better. I want to be a better mom. I want to be a better wife. I want to be
*  more creative. I want to be physically stronger. And so that very much lives within me all the time.
*  You know, I think I also grew up in the context of being the child of two extraordinarily successful
*  parents. And that could have been debilitating for me. And I saw that in a lot of my friends who
*  grew up in circumstances similar to that. They were afraid to try for fear of not measuring up.
*  And I think somehow early on, I learned to kind of harness the fear of not being good enough,
*  not being competent enough. And I harnessed it to make me better and to push me outside of my
*  comfort zone. So I think that's always lived with me. And I think it probably always will. I think
*  you have to have humility in anything you do that you could be better and strive for that.
*  I think as you get older, it softens a little bit as you have more reps,
*  as you have more examples of having been thrown in the deep end and figured out how to swim.
*  You get a little bit more comfortable in your sort of abstract competency.
*  But if that fear is not in you, I think you're not challenging yourself enough.
*  Harness the fear. The other thing he writes about is intuition.
*  That you need to trust your instincts and intuition. That's a very recruitment thing,
*  to say. So what percent of your decision making is intuition and what percent is through rigorous,
*  careful analysis? What did you say?
*  I think it's both. It's like trust but verify. I think that's also where
*  age and experience comes into play because I think you always have sort of a gut instinct,
*  but I think intuition, like well-honed intuition, comes from a place of accumulated knowledge.
*  So oftentimes when you feel really strongly about something, because you've been there,
*  you know what's right. Or on a personal level, if you're acting in accordance
*  with your core values, it just feels good. And even if it would be the right decision for others,
*  if you're acting outside of your integrity or core values, it doesn't feel good.
*  Your intuition will signal that to you. You'll never be comfortable. So I think because
*  of that, I start oftentimes with my intuition and then I put it through a rigorous test of
*  whether that is in fact true. Very seldom do I go against what my initial instinct was,
*  at least at this point in my life. Yeah, I had actually a discussion yesterday with a big time
*  business owner investor who's talking about being impulsive and following that.
*  Like on a phone call shifting the entire, everything, like giving away a very large
*  amounts of money and moving it in another direction on an impulse, making a promise
*  that he can't at that time deliver, but knows if he works hard, he'll deliver and all doing,
*  following that impulsive feeling. And he said now that he has a family that probably some of that
*  impulse has quieted down a little bit, he's more rational and thoughtful and so on, but wonders
*  whether it's sometimes good to just be impulsive and to just trust your gut and just go with it.
*  Don't deliberate too long because then you won't do it. It's interesting. It's the confidence,
*  the stupidity maybe of youth that leads to some of the greatest breakthroughs. And it's like,
*  there's a cost to wisdom and deliberation. There is, but I actually think in this case,
*  as you get older, you may act less impulsively, but I think you're more like attuned with,
*  you have more experience, so your gut is like more well honed.
*  So your instincts are more well honed. I think
*  I found that to be true for me. It doesn't feel as like reckless as when I was younger.
*  Amongst many other things, you were on The Apprentice. People love you on there. People
*  love the show. So what did you learn about business, about life from the various contestants on there?
*  Well, I think you can learn everything about life from Joe Rivers. So I'm just, I'm
*  going to go with that. She was amazing. But it was such a wild experience for me because I was
*  quite young when I was on it, just getting started in business. And it was the number one
*  television show in the country. And it went on to be syndicated all over the world. And it was just
*  this wild, phenomenal success. A business show had never crossed over in this sort of way.
*  So it was really a moment in time. And you had regular apprentice and then the celebrity
*  apprentice. But the tasks, they went on to be studied at business schools across the country.
*  So every other week I'd be reading case studies of how the apprentice was being examined and
*  taught to classes in this university in Boston. So it was extraordinary. And this was like a real
*  life classroom I was in. So I think because of the nature of the show, you learn a lot about
*  teamwork and you're watching it and analyzing it real time. You learned a lot about
*  a lot of the tasks were very marketing oriented because of the short duration of time they had to
*  execute. You learned a lot about time management because of that short duration. So almost every
*  episode would devolve into people hysterical over the fact that they had 10 minutes left to
*  with this Herculean lift ahead of them. So it was a fascinating experience for me
*  and we would be filming. I mean, we would film first thing in the morning at like five or six AM
*  in Trump Tower oftentimes, like in the lobby of Trump Tower. That's where the war rooms
*  and board rooms of the candidates were, the contestants were. And then we would go up in
*  the elevator to our office. We would work all day and then we'd come down and we'd evaluate the
*  tasks. It was this weird like real life television thing experience in the middle of our sort of on
*  the bookends of our workday. So it was intense. So you're like curating the television version of
*  it and also living it. And oftentimes there was like an overlay. Like there were episodes that
*  they came up with brand campaigns for my shoe collection or my clothing line
*  or design challenges related to a hotel I was responsible for building. So there was this
*  unbelievable crossover that was obviously great for us from a business perspective,
*  but it's sometimes surreal to experience. What was it like? Was it scary to be in front of a
*  camera when you know so many people watch? I mean that's a new experience for you at that time,
*  just the number of people watching. Was that weird? It was really weird. I really struggled
*  watching myself on the episodes. I still to this day, like television as a medium,
*  like the fact that we're taping this, I'm more self-conscious than if we weren't. I just
*  it's, um, hey, I have to watch myself as after, after we record this, before I publish it,
*  I have to listen to my stupid self talk. So, and so you're saying it doesn't get better.
*  It doesn't get better. I still, I feel myself. I'm like, does my voice really sound like that?
*  You know, why do I do this thing or that thing? And I find it, some people are super at ease and
*  who knows, maybe they're not either, but some people feel like they're super. You know,
*  my father was, I think like who you saw is who you get. And I think that made him so effective
*  in that medium because he was just himself and he was totally unself-conscious. I was not,
*  I was totally self-conscious. So it was, it was extraordinary, but also a little challenging for
*  me. I think certain people are just like born to be entertainers, like Elvis, like on stage,
*  they come to life. This is where they, this is where they're truly happy. I've met guys like
*  that, like great rock stars. This is where they feel like they belong on stages. It's not just
*  the thing they do and they, there's certain aspects they love, certain aspects they don't know. This
*  is where, this is where they're alive. This is where they, they've always dreamed of being. This
*  is where they want to be forever. Michael Jackson was like that. Michael Jackson.
*  Some pictures of you hanging out with Michael Jackson, that was cool.
*  He came once to a performance. I wanted to be, one moment in time, I wanted to be a professional
*  ballerina. Okay, yes. And I was working really hard. I was going to the School of American Ballet.
*  I was dancing at the Lincoln Center in the Nutcracker. I was super serious,
*  nine, 10 year old. And my parents came to a Christmas performance of the Nutcracker and my
*  father brought Michael Jackson with him. And everyone was so excited that all the dancers,
*  they wore one glove. But I remember he was so shy. He was so quiet when you'd see him in smaller
*  group settings. And then you'd watch him walk onto stage. And it was like a completely different
*  person. Like the vitality that came into him. And you say that's like someone who was born to do
*  what he did. And I think there are a lot of performers like that. And I just in general
*  love to see people that have found the thing that makes them come alive. Yeah. Like I,
*  as I mentioned, went to the jungle recently with Paul Rosley. And he's a guy who just belongs in
*  the jungle. Yeah. Like that's the guy where, like when I saw, I got a chance to go with him from the
*  city to the jungle. And you just see this person change of the happiness, the joy he has when he
*  first is able to jump in the water of the Amazon River and to feel like he's home with the crocodiles
*  and all that. He's calling friends and probably dances around in the trees with the monkeys.
*  So this is where he belongs. I love seeing that. You felt that. I mean, I watched the interview
*  you did with him and you felt that. Like his passion and enthusiasm, like it radiated and
*  capped. I mean, I love animals. Like I love all animals. Never loved snakes so much.
*  And he almost made me, now I appreciate the beauty of them much more than I did prior to
*  listening to him speak about them, but it's an infectious thing. He actually, we were talking
*  about skyscrapers before. I loved, he called trees skyscrapers of life. And I thought that was so
*  great. Yeah. And they are, they're so big. I mean, just like skyscrapers or large buildings,
*  they also represent a history, especially in Europe. I like to think, look at all these ancient
*  buildings. You like to think of all the people throughout history that have looked at them,
*  have admired them, have been inspired by them. You know, great leaders of history in France,
*  it's like Napoleon, just the history that's contained within a building. You almost feel
*  the energy of that history. You could feel the stories emanate from the buildings. And that same
*  way, when you look at giant trees that have been there for decades, for centuries in some cases,
*  you feel the history, the stories emanate. I got you as a client, some of them. So you feel like
*  there's a visceral feeling of the power of the trees. It's cool. Yeah. That's an experience
*  I'd love to have. Be that disconnected. Yeah. Being in the jungle, among the trees, among the
*  animals, you remember that you're forever a part of nature. You're fundamentally our nature, that
*  earth is a living organism and you're a part of that organism. And that's humbling, that's
*  beautiful. And you get to experience that in a real, real way. It sounds simple to say,
*  but when you actually experience it, it stays with you for a long time. Especially if you're
*  out there alone, I got a chance to spend time in the jungle solo, just by myself. And you sit
*  in the fear of that, in the simplicity of that, all of it, and just no sounds of humans anywhere.
*  You're just sitting there and listening to all the monkeys and the birds trying to have sex with
*  each other, all around you, just screaming. And there's like romantic, I mean, I romanticize
*  everything. There's like birds that are monogamous for life, like macaws. You could see like two of
*  them flying. They're also, by the way, screaming at each other. I always wonder, like, are they
*  arguing or is this their love language? That's very funny. You just have these like two birds
*  that you know have been together for a long time, and they're just screaming at each other.
*  And the important- That's really funny, because there aren't that many animal species that are
*  monogamous. And you highlighted one example, but they literally sound like they're bickering.
*  But maybe to them it's beautiful. I don't want to judge, but they do sound very loud and very
*  obnoxious. But amidst all of that, it's just, I don't know. I think it's so humbling to feel so
*  small, too. I feel like when we get busy and when we're running around, it's easy to feel,
*  we're so in our head and we feel sort of so consequential, like in the context of even
*  our own lives. And then you find yourself in a situation like that. And I think you feel so much
*  more connected knowing how minuscule you are in the broader sense. And I feel that way when I'm
*  on the ocean on a surfboard. It's really humbling to be so small amidst that vast sea. And it feels
*  really beautiful with no noise, no chatter, no distractions, just being in the moment.
*  And it sounds like you experienced that in a very, very real way in the Amazon.
*  Yeah, the power of the waves is cool. I love swimming out into the ocean and feeling the
*  power of the ocean underneath you. You're just like this speck.
*  And you can't fight it, right? You just have to sort of be in it. And I think in surfing,
*  one of the things I love about it is I feel like a lot of water sports are manipulating
*  the environment. And there's something that can be a little violent about it. You look at windsurfing
*  and whereas with surfing, you're in harmony with it. So you're not fighting it, you're
*  flowing with it. And you still have the agency of choosing which waves you're going to surf.
*  And you sit there and you read the ocean and you learn to understand it, but you can't control it.
*  What's it like to fall on your face when you're trying to surf?
*  Like what? I haven't surfed before. It just feels like,
*  I always see videos of when everything goes great. I just wonder when it doesn't.
*  Those are the ones people post. Well, I actually had the unique experience of one of my first
*  times surfing. I only learned a couple of years ago, so I'm not good. I just love it.
*  I love everything about it. I love the physicality. I love being in the ocean. I love everything about
*  it. The hardest thing with surfing is paddling out because when you're committing, you catch a
*  wave. Obviously, sometimes you flip over your board and that doesn't feel great. But when you're in
*  the line of impact and you've maybe surfed a good wave in and now you're going out for another set
*  and you get stuck in that impact line, there's nothing you can do. You just sit there and you
*  try to dive underneath it and it will pound you and pound you. So I've been stuck there while
*  four, five, six waves just crash on top of your head. The worst thing you can do is get
*  reactive and scared and try and fight against it. You kind of just have to flow with it until
*  inevitably there's a break and then paddle like hell back out to the line or to the beach,
*  whatever you're feeling. To me, that's the hardest part, the paddling out.
*  AC How did life change when your father decided to run for president?
*  BT Wow, everything changed. Almost overnight,
*  we learned that he was planning to announce his candidacy two weeks before he actually did.
*  AC And nothing about our lives had been constructed with politics in mind.
*  Most often when people are exposed to politics at that level, that sort of national level,
*  there's first like city council run and then maybe a state level run and maybe Congress,
*  Senator, ultimately the presidency. So it was unheard of for him never to have run a campaign
*  and then run for president and win. So it was an extraordinary experience. There was so much
*  intensity and so much scrutiny and so much noise. So that took for sure like a moment to acclimate
*  to. I'm not sure I ever fully acclimated, but it definitely was a super unusual experience.
*  But I think then the process that unfolded over the next couple of years was also like the most
*  extraordinary growth experience of my life. Suddenly I was going into communities that
*  I probably never would have been to. And I was talking with people who in 30 seconds
*  would reveal to me their deepest insecurity, their gravest fear, their wildest ambitions,
*  all of it with the hope that in telling me that story, it would get back to a potential future
*  president of the United States and have impacts for their family, for their community. So the
*  level of candor and vulnerability people have with you is unlike anything I've ever experienced.
*  And I had done The Apprentice before. People may know who I was in some of these situations
*  that I was going into, but they wouldn't have shared with me these things that you got the
*  impression that oftentimes their own spouses wouldn't know. And they wouldn't do so within
*  30 seconds. So you learn so much about what motivates people, what drives people,
*  what their concerns are, and you grow so much as a result of it.
*  So when you're in the White House, people, unlike in any other position, people have a sense that
*  all the troubles they're going through, maybe you can help.
*  Yeah.
*  So they put it all out there.
*  And they do so in such a raw, vulnerable, and real way. It's shocking and eye-opening
*  and super motivating. I remember once I was in New Hampshire early on, right after my father had
*  announced his candidacy, and a man walks up to me in the greeting line. And within
*  around five seconds, he had started to tell me a story about how his daughter had died of an
*  overdose and how he was worried his son was also addicted to opioids, his daughter's friends,
*  his son's friends. And it's heartbreaking. It's heartbreaking. And it's something that
*  I would experience every day in talking with people.
*  And those stories just stay with you?
*  Always.
*  You know, I took a long road trip around the United States in my 20s. And I'm kind of thinking of
*  doing it again, just for like a couple of months for that exact purpose. And you can get these
*  stories when you go to like a bar in the middle of nowhere and just sit and talk to people,
*  and they start sharing. And it reminds you of like how beautiful the country is. It reminds
*  you several things. One, that people, it shows you that there's a lot of different accents,
*  that's for one. But aside from that, that people are struggling with all the same stuff.
*  And at least at that time, I wonder what it is now. But at that time, I don't remember,
*  on the surface, there's like political divisions, there's Republicans and Democrats and so on. But
*  underneath it, there are people who are all the same, the concerns are all the same, there's
*  not that much of a division. Right now, the surface division has been amplified even more,
*  maybe because of social media, I don't know why. So I would love to see what the country is like
*  now. But I suspect probably it's still not as divided as it appears to be on the surface,
*  what the media shows, what the social media shows. But what did you experience in terms of the
*  division? I think a couple reactions to what you just said. I think the first is
*  you're, when you connect with people like that, you are so inspired by their courage in the face
*  of adversity and their resilience. And it's like a truly remarkable experience for me. The campaign
*  lifted me out of a bubble I didn't even know I was in. I grew up on the Upper East Side of New York
*  and I felt like I was well traveled and well educated. And I believed at the time that I'd
*  been exposed to divergent viewpoints. And I realized during the campaign how limited my
*  exposure had been relative to what it was becoming. So there was a lot of growth in that as well.
*  But I do think, you think about the vitriol on politics and whether it's worse than it's been
*  in the past or not, I think that's up for debate. I think there have been duels and there's been
*  screaming and there's, politics has always been a bloodsport and it's always been incredibly vicious.
*  I think in the toxic swirl of social media, it's more amplified and there's more sort of
*  democratization around participating in it perhaps. And it seems like the voices are louder,
*  but it's always been, it feels like it's always been that. But I don't believe most people are
*  like that. And you meet people along the way and they're not leading with what their politics are.
*  They're telling you about their hopes for themselves and their communities.
*  And it makes you feel that we are a whole lot less divided than
*  the media and others would have us believe. Although I have to say, having duels sounds
*  pretty cool. Maybe I just romanticize Westerns. Anyway, all right. I miss Clint Eastwood movies.
*  Okay. But it's true. You read some of the stuff in terms of what politics used to be in the history
*  in the United States. Those folks went pretty rough, like way rougher actually,
*  but they didn't have social media. So they had to go like real hard. And the media was rough too.
*  So all like the fake news, all of that, that's not recent. It's been nonstop. You know, I look
*  at the surface division, the surface bickering, and that might be like just a feature of democracy.
*  That's, it's not a bug of democracy. It's a feature. We're in a constant conflict and it's
*  the way we resolve, we try to figure out the right way forward. So in the moment,
*  it feels like people are just tearing each other apart, but really we're trying to find the way.
*  We're like in the long arc of history, it will look like progress, but in the short term,
*  it just sounds like people making stories up about each other and calling each other names and
*  all this kind of stuff. But in the, there's a purpose to it. I mean, that's what freedom looks
*  like, I guess is what I'm trying to say, and it's better than the alternative.
*  Well, I think that the vast majority of people aren't participating in it.
*  Sure. Yes, that's true. You know, I think there's a minority of people that are doing most of the
*  yelling and screaming and the majority of Americans just want to send their kid to a great school
*  and want their communities to thrive and want to be able to realize their dreams and aspirations.
*  So I saw a lot more of that than it would feel obvious if you looked at like a Twitter feed.
*  What went into your decision to join the White House as an advisor?
*  You know, the campaign, I never thought about joining. It was kind of like get to the end of it.
*  And when it started, I was like everything in my life was almost firing on all cylinders. I had
*  two young kids at home. During the course of the campaign, I ended up, I was pregnant with my third.
*  So this young family, my businesses, real estate and fashion and working alongside my brothers,
*  running the Trump Hotel collection. And we had so many, my life was full and busy. And so there was
*  a big part of me that was just wanted to get through, just get through it without really
*  thinking forward to what the implications were for me. But when my father won, he asked Jared and I
*  to join him. And in asking that question, you know, keep in mind he was a total outsider. So
*  there was no bench of people as he would have today. He had never spent the night in Washington,
*  DC before staying in the White House. And so when he asked us to join him, he trusted us. He
*  trusted in our ability to execute. And there wasn't a part of me that could imagine
*  the 70 or 80 year old version of myself looking back and having been okay with having said no
*  and going back to my life as I knew it before. I mean, in retrospect, I realized there is no life,
*  as you know it before, you know. But just the idea of not saying yes, wherever that would lead me.
*  And so I dove in. You know, I was also, during the course of the campaign, I was just much more
*  sensitive to the problems and experiences of Americans. I gave you an example before of the
*  father in New Hampshire. But even just in my consumption of information, I had a business
*  that was predominantly young women, many of which were thinking about having a kid, had just had a
*  child, were planning on that life event. And I knew what they needed to be able to show up every
*  day and realize this dream for themselves and the support structures they would need to have in place.
*  And I remember reading this article at the time in one of the major newspapers of a woman. She had
*  had a very solid job working at one of the blue chip accounting firms. And the recession came.
*  She lost her job around the same time as her partner left her. And over a matter of months,
*  she lost her home. So she wound up with her two young kids after bouncing around between neighbors
*  living in their car. She gets a call back from one of the many interviews she had done
*  for a second interview where she was all but guaranteed the job, should that go well.
*  And she had arranged childcare for her two young children with a neighbor
*  in her old apartment block. And the morning of the interview, she shows up and the neighbor doesn't
*  answer the doorbell. And stands there five, 10 minutes, doesn't answer. So she has a choice.
*  Does she go to the interview with her children or does she try to cancel? She gets in her car,
*  drives to the interview, leaves her two children in the backseat of the car with the window cracked,
*  goes into the interview and gets pulled out of the interview by police because somebody had called
*  the cops after seeing her children in the backseat of the car. She gets thrown in jail.
*  Her kids get taken from her. And she spends years fighting to regain custody. And I think about,
*  that's an extreme example, but I think about something like that. And I say, if I was the
*  mother and we were homeless, would I have gone to that interview? And I probably would have.
*  And that is not an acceptable situation. So you hear stories like that and
*  then you get asked, will you come with me? And it's really hard to say no. I spent four
*  years in Washington. I feel like I left it all in the field. I feel really good about it.
*  And I feel really privileged to have been able to do what I did.
*  A chance to help many people. Saying no means you're kind of turning away from those people.
*  Felt like that to me.
*  Yeah. Yeah. But then there's the turmoil of politics that you're getting into. And
*  it really is a leap into the abyss. What was it like trying to get stuff done in Washington?
*  And this place where politics is a game, it feels that way maybe from an outsider perspective.
*  And you go in there trying, giving some of those stories, trying to help people.
*  What's it like to get anything done? It's an incredible cognitive lift.
*  That's a nice way to put it. Yeah. To get things done. There are a lot of people who
*  would prefer to cling to the problem and they're talking points about how they're going to solve
*  it rather than roll up their sleeves and do the work it takes to build coalitions of support and
*  find people who are willing to compromise and move the ball. And so it's extremely difficult. And
*  Jared and I talk about all the time, it probably should be because these are highly consequential
*  policies that impact people's lives at scale. It shouldn't be so easy to do them and they are
*  doable, but it's challenging. One of the first experiences I had where it really was just a full
*  grind effort was with tax cuts and the work I did to get the child tax credit doubled as part of it.
*  And it just meant meeting after meeting after meeting after meeting with lawmaker convincing
*  them of why this is good policy, going into their districts, campaigning in their districts, helping
*  them convince their constituents of why it's important, of why child care support is important,
*  of why paid family leave is important, of different policies that impact working American families. So
*  it's hard, but it's really rewarding. And then to get it done, I mean, just the child tax credit
*  alone, 40 million American families got an average of $2,200 each year as a result of
*  the doubling of the child tax credits. That's one component of tax cuts.
*  Jared Ranere When I was researching this stuff, you just get to think the scale of things,
*  the scale of impact is 40 million families. Each one of those is a story, is a story of struggle,
*  of trying to give a large part of your life to a job while still being able to give love and
*  support and care to a family, to kids, and to manage all of that. Each one of those is a little
*  puzzle that they have to solve and it's a life and death puzzle. You can lose your home, your security,
*  you can lose your job, you can screw stuff up with parenting. So you can mess all that up and you're
*  trying to hold it together and government policies can help make that easier or can,
*  in some cases, make that possible. And you get to do that at a scale not of like five or 10 families,
*  but like 40 million families. And that's just one thing.
*  Lacey Hough Yeah, the people who shared with me their experience. And during the campaign,
*  it was what they hoped to see happen. Once you were in there, it was what they were seeing,
*  what they were experiencing, the result of the policies. And that was the fuel. On the hardest
*  days, that was the fuel. Child tax credit, I remember visiting with a woman, Brittany
*  Houseman. She came to the White House. She had two small children. She was pregnant with her third.
*  Her husband was killed in a car accident. She was in school at the time. Her dream was to become
*  a criminal justice advocate that was no longer on the table for her after he passed away. And she
*  became the sole earner and provider for her family. And she couldn't afford child care.
*  She couldn't afford to stay in school. So she ended up creating a child care center in her home.
*  And her center was so successful because in part of different policies we worked on, including
*  the child care block grants that went to the state, she ended up opening additional centers.
*  I visited her at one of them in Colorado. Now, she has a huge focus on helping teenage moms
*  who don't have the resources to afford quality child care for their kids come into her centers
*  and programs. And it's stories like that of the hardships people face, but also what they do
*  with opportunity when they're given it that really powers you through tough moments when
*  you're in Washington. What can you say about the process of bringing that to life? So the child tax
*  credits, so doubling them from a thousand to two thousand per child. What are the challenges of that
*  getting people to compromise? I'm sure there's a lot of politicians playing games with that
*  because maybe it's a Republican that came up with an idea or a Democrat that came up with an idea.
*  And so they don't want to give credit to the idea. And there's probably all kinds of games happening
*  when the game is happening, you'll probably forget about the families. Each politician thinks about
*  how they can benefit themselves. You forget the serving part of the role you're supposed to be in.
*  There were definitely people I met with in Washington who I felt that was true of.
*  But they all go back to their districts. And I assume that they all have similar experiences to
*  what I had where people share their stories. So there'd be something really cynical about
*  thinking they forget, but some do. You help get people together. What's that take? Trying to get
*  people to compromise, trying to get people to see the common humanity. I think first and foremost,
*  you have to be willing to talk with them. So one of the policies I advocated for was paid family leave.
*  We left and nine million more Americans had it through a combination of securing it for our
*  federal workforce. I had people in the White House who were pregnant who didn't have access to paid
*  leave. So we want to keep people attached to the workforce, yet when they have an important life
*  event like a child, we create an impossibility for that. Some people don't even have access to
*  unpaid leave if they're part-time workers. And then we also put in place the first ever
*  national tax credit for workers making under $72,000 a year where employers could then offer it to
*  their workers. That was also part of tax cuts. So part of it is really taking the arguments as to
*  why this is good, smart, well-designed policy to people. And it was one of my big surprises that
*  on certain policy issues that I thought would have been well-socialized, the policies that existed
*  were never shared across the aisle. So people just lived with them, maybe in hopes that one day they
*  would have the votes to get exactly what they want. But I was surprised by how little discussion
*  there was. So I think part of it is be willing to have those tough discussions with people who may
*  not share your viewpoint and be an active listener when they point out flaws and they have suggestions
*  for changes, not believing that you have a monopoly on good ideas. And I think there has to be a lot
*  of humility in architecting these things. And a policy should benefit from that type of well-rounded
*  input. Yeah, be able to see, like you said, well-designed policies. There's probably the
*  details that are important too. Just like with architecture and you walk the rooms, there's
*  probably really good designs of policies, economic policy that helps families, that delivers the
*  maximum amount of money or resources to families that are needed and is not a waste of money. So
*  there's probably really nice designs there and nice ideas that are bipartisan that has nothing
*  to do with politics, has to do with just great economic policy, just great policies. And that
*  requires listening. It requires trust too. I learned tax cuts was really interesting for me because
*  I met with so many people across the political spectrum on advancing that policy. I really
*  figured out who was willing to deviate from their talking points when the door was closed and who
*  wasn't. And it takes some courage to do that, especially without surety that it would actually
*  get done, especially if they've campaigned on something that was slightly different.
*  And not everyone has that courage. So through tax cuts, I learned the people who did have that
*  courage. And I went back to that well time and time again on policies that I thought were important.
*  Some were bipartisan. The Great American Outdoors Act is something. It's incredible policy.
*  I love that one. Yeah, it's amazing. It's one of the largest pieces of conservation legislation
*  since the national park system was created. And over 300 million people visit our national parks,
*  the vast majority of them being Americans every year. So this is something that is real and
*  beneficial for people's lives, getting rid of the deferred maintenance, permanently funding them.
*  But there are other issues like that that just weren't being prioritized, modernizing Perkins CTE
*  and vocational education. And it's something I became super passionate about and helped lead
*  the charge on. I think in America for a really long period of time, we've really believed that
*  education stops when you leave high school or college. And that is not true. And that's a
*  dangerous way to think. So how can we both galvanize the private sector to ensure that they
*  continue to train workers for the jobs they know are coming and how they train their existing
*  workforce into the new jobs with robotics or machinery or new technologies that are coming
*  down the pike? So galvanizing the private sector to join us in that effort. So whether it's the
*  legislative side, like the actual legislation of Perkins CTE, which was focused on vocational
*  education, or whether it's the ability to use the White House to galvanize the private sector,
*  we got over 16 million commitments from the private sector to retrain or reskill workers
*  into the jobs of tomorrow. Yeah, there's so many aspects of education that you're helped on.
*  Access to STEM and computer science education. So the CT thing you're mentioning, modernizing
*  career and technical education, that's millions, millions of people. The Act provided nearly
*  $1.3 billion annually to more than 13 million students to better align the employer needs and
*  all that kind of stuff. Very large scale policies that help a lot of people. It's fascinating.
*  Education often isn't like the bright, shiny object everyone's running towards. So one of
*  the hard things in politics when there's something that is good policy, sometimes it has no momentum
*  because it doesn't have a cheerleader. So where are areas of good policy that you can literally
*  just carry across the finish line? Because people tend to run towards what's the news of the day,
*  to try to address whatever issues being talked about on the front pages of papers. There's so
*  many issues that need to be addressed. Education is one of them that's just under prioritized.
*  You know, human trafficking. That's an issue that I didn't go to the White House thinking I would
*  work on. But you hear a story of a survivor and you can't not want to eradicate one of the greatest
*  evils that the mind can even imagine. You know, the trafficking of people, the exploitation of children.
*  And I think for so many, they assume that this is a problem that doesn't happen on our shores.
*  You know, it's something that you may experience at far-flung destinations across the world,
*  but it's happening there and it's happening here as well. And so through a coalition of people that
*  on both sides of the aisle that I came to trust and to work well with, we were able to get
*  legislation, which the president signed, passed nine pieces of legislation, combating trafficking
*  at home and abroad and digital exploitation of children. How much of a toll does that take,
*  seeing all the problems in the world at such a large scale, the immensity of it all? Was that
*  hard to walk around with that, just knowing how much suffering there is in the world?
*  As you're trying to help all of it, as you're trying to design government policies to help all
*  of that, it's also a very visceral recognition that there is suffering in the world. How difficult
*  is that to walk around with? You feel it intensely. You know, we were just talking
*  about human trafficking. I mean, you don't design these policies in the absence of the input of
*  survivors themselves, so you hear their stories. I remember a woman who was really influential in
*  my thinking, Andrea Hibwell, who she was in college where she was lured out by a guy she
*  thought was a good guy, started dating him. He gets her hooked on drugs, convinces her to drop
*  out of college, and spends the next five years selling her. She only got out when she was arrested,
*  and all too often that's happening too, that the victim's being targeted,
*  not the perpetrator. So we did a lot with DOJ around changing that. But now she's helping
*  other survivors get skills and job training and the therapeutic interventions they need.
*  But you speak with people like Andrea and so many others. I mean, you can't not. Your
*  heart gets seized by it. It's motivating and it's hard. It's really hard.
*  I was just talking to a brain surgeon. Many of the surgeries he has to do,
*  he knows the chances are very low of success. He says that that wears at his armor. It chips away.
*  It's like only so many times can you do that.
*  And thank God he's doing it because I bet you there are a lot of others that don't choose
*  that particular field because of those low success rates.
*  But you can see the pain in his eyes. Maintaining your humanity while doing all of it,
*  you can see the story, you can see the family that loves that person. You feel the immensity of that
*  and you feel the heartbreak involved with mortality in that case and with suffering also in that case
*  and in general in all these human trafficking. But even helping families try to stay afloat,
*  trying to break out or escape poverty, all of that, you get to see those stories of struggle.
*  It's not easy. But the people that really feel the humanity of that, feel the pain of that,
*  are probably the right people to be politicians. But it's probably also why you can't stay in there
*  too long. It's the only time in my life where
*  you actually feel like there's always a conflict between work and life and making sure.
*  You know, as a woman, I'd often get asked about, you know, how do you balance work and family?
*  I never liked that question because balance, it's like elusive, right? Your one fever away from like,
*  no balance, you know, like your child's sick one day, what do you do? There goes balance.
*  Or, you know, you have a huge project with a deadline, there goes balance. I think
*  a better way to frame it is, am I living in accordance with my priorities? Maybe not every
*  day, but every week, you know, every month and reflecting on have you architected a life that
*  aligns with your priorities so that more often than not, you're where you need to be in that moment.
*  And service at that level was the one time where you really, you feel incredibly conflicted about
*  having any priorities other than serving. It's finite. You know, in every business I've built,
*  you're building for duration, you know? And then you go into the White House and it is
*  sand through an hourglass, whether it's four years or eight years. It's a finite period of time.
*  You have, and most people don't last four years. I think the average in the White House is 18 months.
*  It's exhausting. But it's the only time when you're at home with your own children that you feel,
*  think about all the people you've met and you feel guilty about any time that's spent
*  not advancing those interests to the best of your capacity. And that's a hard thing. That's a really
*  hard feeling as a parent. And it's really challenging then to be present, to always need
*  to answer your phone. You know, to always need to be available. It's very difficult. It's taxing,
*  but it's also the greatest privilege in the world. So through that, the turmoil of that,
*  the hardship of that, what was the role of family through all of that? Jared and the kids,
*  what was that like? That was everything. You know, to have that, to have the support systems I had
*  in place with my husband. And we had left New York and wound up in Washington. In New York,
*  I lived 10 blocks away from my mother-in-law, who if I wasn't taking my kids to school, she was. So
*  we lost some of that, which was very hard, but we had what mattered, which was each other.
*  And you know, my kids were young when I got to Washington. Theo, my youngest, was eight months
*  old. And Arabella, my oldest, my daughter, was five years old. So they were still quite young.
*  We have a son, Joseph, who's three. And I think for me, like the dose of levity coming home at
*  night and having them there and just joyful. And it was super grounding and important for me. I
*  still remember Theo, when he was around three, three and a half years old, Jared used to make
*  me coffee every morning. And it was like my great luxury that I would sit there. He still makes it
*  for me every morning. I told him I'm never, even though I secretly know how to actually work the
*  coffee machine. But I've convinced him that I have no idea how to work the coffee machine.
*  Now I'm going to be busted. But it's a skill I don't want to learn because it's one of his acts
*  of love. He brings me coffee every morning in bed while I read the newspapers. And Theo would watch
*  this. And so he got Jared to teach him how to make coffee. And Theo learned how to make a full blown
*  cappuccino. And he had so much joy in every morning bringing me this cappuccino. And I
*  remember the sound of his little steps, like the slide. It was so cute coming down the hallway
*  with my perfectly foamed cappuccino. Now I try to get him to make me coffee and he's like,
*  come on, mom. That was a moment in time. But we had a lot of little moments like that that
*  were just amazing. Yeah, I got a chance to chat with him and his silliness and sense of humor.
*  Yeah, it's really joyful. I could see how that could be an escape
*  from the madness of Washington of the adult life. And they were young enough. We really kept our
*  home life pretty sheltered from everything else. And we were able to do so because they were so
*  young and because they weren't connected to the internet. They were too young for smartphones,
*  all of these things. We were able to shelter and protect them and allow them to have as normal,
*  as upbringing as was possible in the context we were living. And they brought me and continue
*  to bring me so much joy. But without Jared and without the kids, it would have been
*  much more lonely. So three kids, you've now upgraded, two dogs and a hamster.
*  Well, our second dog, we rescued him thinking he thought he was probably part German shepherd,
*  part lab is what we were told. I don't even know if he qualifies as a dog. He's like the size of
*  a horse, a small horse, Sima. So I don't think he has much lab in him. Joseph has not wanted to
*  do a DNA test because he really wanted a German shepherd. He's a German shepherd. He's gigantic.
*  And we also have a hamster who's the newest edition because my son Theo, he tried to get
*  a dog as well. Our first dog, Winter, became my daughter's dog as she wouldn't let her brothers
*  play with him or sleep with him and was old enough to bully them into submission.
*  So then Joseph wanted a dog and got Simba. Theo now wants a dog and has Buster the hamster in the
*  interim. So we'll see. What advice would you give to other mothers just planning on having kids
*  and maybe advice yourself figuring out this puzzle?
*  I think being a parent, you have to cultivate within yourself
*  like hide in levels of empathy. You have to really look at each child and see them for who they are,
*  what they enjoy, what they love and meet them where they're at. And I think
*  that can be enormously challenging when your kids are so different in temperament. As they
*  get older, that difference in temperament may be within the same child depending on the moment of
*  the day. But I think it's actually made me a much softer person, a much better listener.
*  I think I see people more truly for who they are as opposed to how I want them to be sometimes.
*  And I think being a parent to three children who are all exceptional and all incredibly different
*  has enabled that in me. I think for me though, they've also been some of my greatest teachers
*  in that we were talking about the presence you felt when you were in the jungle
*  and the connectivity you felt and sort of the simple joy. And I think for us as we grow older,
*  we kind of disconnect from that. My kids have taught me how to play again.
*  And that's beautiful. I remember just a couple of weeks ago, we had one of these crazy Miami
*  torrential downpours and Arabella comes down, it's around eight o'clock at night, it's really raining
*  and she's got rain boots and pajama pants on and she's going to take the dogs for a walk in the
*  rain. She had all day to walk, but she wasn't doing it because they needed to go for a walk.
*  She was like, this would be fun. And I'm standing at the doorstep watching her and she goes out with
*  Simba and Wincher, this massive dog and this little tiny dog. And I'm watching her walk to
*  the end of the driveway and she's just dancing and it's pouring. And I took off my shoes and I
*  went out and I joined her and we danced in the rain. And even as like a preteen who normally,
*  she allowed me to experience the joy with her. And it was amazing. We can be so much more fun
*  if we allow ourselves to be more playful. We can be so much more present. I look at,
*  Theo loves games. So we play a whole lot of board games, any kind of game. So it started with board
*  games. We do a lot of puzzles, then it became card games. I just taught him how to play poker.
*  Nice. He loves backgammon,
*  any kind of game. And he's so fully in them. When he plays, he plays. My son Joseph, he loves nature.
*  And he'll say to me sometimes when I'm taking a picture of something he's observing,
*  like a beautiful sunset, he's like, mom, just experience it. I'm like, yes, you're right,
*  Joseph, just experience it. So those kids have taught me so much about reconnecting with what's
*  real and what's true and being present in the moment and experiencing joy.
*  They always give you permission to sort of reignite the inner child, to be a kid again.
*  It's interesting what you said, the puzzle of noticing each human being, what makes them
*  beautiful, the unique characteristics, what they're good at, the way they want to be
*  be mentored. I often see that, especially with coaches and athletes, young athletes aspiring
*  to be great, each athlete needs to be trained in a different way. For example,
*  with some you need a softer approach. With me, I always like a dictatorial approach. I like the
*  coach to be this menacing figure. That's what brought out the best in me. I didn't want to be
*  friends with the coach. It's weird to say, but yell that to be pushed, but that doesn't work for
*  everybody. That's a risk you have to take in the coach context because you can't just yell at
*  everybody. You have to figure out what does each person need. When you have kids, I imagine the
*  puzzle is even harder. When they all need different things, but yet coexist and are sometimes
*  competitive with one another. You'll be at a dinner table, the amount of times I get,
*  well, that's not fair. Why did you let? I'm like, life isn't fair. By the way, I'm not here to be
*  fair. I'm trying to give you each what you need. Especially when I've been working really hard.
*  In the White House, I'd say, okay, well, now we have a Sunday and we have these hours and I'll
*  have a grand plan. We're going to make it count. It's going to involve hot chocolate and sleds,
*  whatever it is that like my great adventure, we're going to go play mini golf. Then I come down all
*  psyched up, all ready to go and the kids have zero interest. There have been a lot of times
*  where I've been like, we're doing this thing. Then I realized, wait a second. Sometimes you just plop
*  down on the floor and start playing magnetiles. That's where they need you. Those of us who have
*  alpha personalities, who sometimes it's just witness, like witness what they need. Don't play
*  with them and allow them to lead the play. Don't force them down a road you may think is more
*  interesting or productive or educational or edifying. Just be with them, observe them,
*  and then show them that you are genuinely curious about the things that they are genuinely curious
*  about. I think there's a lot of love when you do that. Also, there's just fascinating puzzles.
*  I was talking to a friend yesterday and she has four kids and they fight a lot. She generally
*  wants to break up the fights, but she's like, I'm not sure if I'm just supposed to let them fight.
*  Can they figure it out? You always break them up because I'm told that it's okay for them to fight.
*  Kids do that. They figure out their own situation. That's part of the growing up process.
*  Especially if it's physical, they're pushing each other. You want to stop it, but at the same time,
*  it's also part of the play, part of the dynamics. That's a puzzle you also have to figure out.
*  Plus, you're probably worried that they're going to get hurt.
*  When it gets physical, that's like, okay, we have to intervene. I know you're into martial arts,
*  but that's normally the red line once it tips into that. There is always that. You have to
*  allow them to problem solve for themselves. A little interpersonal conflict is good.
*  It's really hard when you try to navigate something because everyone thinks you're taking
*  their side. You have oftentimes incomplete information. I think for parents, what tends
*  to happen too is we see our kids fighting with each other in a way that all kids do,
*  and we start to project into the future and catastrophize. If my two sons are going through
*  a moment where they're like oil and water, anything one wants to do, the other doesn't want to do,
*  it's a very interesting moment. My instinct is they're not going to like each other when
*  they're 25. You project into the future as opposed to recognizing this is a stage that I too went
*  through, and it's normal and it's not building it in your mind into something that's unnecessarily
*  consequential. It's short-term formative conflict.
*  Yeah.
*  Ever since 2016, the number and the level of attacks you've been under has been
*  steadily increasing. It's been super intense. How do you walk through the fire of that? You've been
*  very stoic about the whole thing. I don't think I've ever seen you respond to an attack. You
*  just let it pass over you. You stay positive and you focus on solving problems. You didn't engage
*  while being in DC. You didn't engage into the back and forth fire of the politics.
*  What's your philosophy behind that?
*  I appreciate your saying that I was very stoic about it. I feel things pretty deeply.
*  Initially, some of that really took me off guard, like some of the derivative love and hatred,
*  some of the intensity of the attacks. There were times when it was so easy to counter it,
*  I'd even write something out and say, well, I'm going to press send and never did.
*  I felt that getting into the mud, fighting back, it didn't run true to who I am as a human being.
*  It fell at odds with who I am and how I want to spend my time. I think as a result, I was oftentimes
*  on the receiving end of a lot of cheap shots. I'm okay with that because it's the way I know
*  how to be in the world. I was focused on things I thought mattered more. I think part of me also
*  internalized, there's a concept in Judaism called Lashon Hara, which is translated into
*  literally evil speech. The idea that speaking poorly of another is almost the moral equivalent
*  to murder because you can't really repair it. You can apologize, but you can't repair it.
*  Another component of that is that it does as much damage to the person saying the words
*  than it does to the person receiving them. I think about that a lot. I talk about this concept with
*  my kids a lot. I'm not willing to pay the price of that fleeting and momentary satisfaction
*  of swinging back because I think it would be too expensive for my soul. That's how I made peace
*  with it because I think that feels more true for me. But it is a little bit contrarian in politics.
*  It's definitely a contrarian viewpoint to not get into the fray. Actually,
*  somebody I love, Dolly Parton, says that she doesn't condemn or criticize. She loves and accepts.
*  I like that. It feels right for me. I also like that you said that words have
*  power. Sometimes people say, well, words, when you speak negatively of others, that's just words.
*  But I think there's a cost to that. There's a cost, like you said, to your soul.
*  There's a cost in terms of the damage it can do to the other person,
*  whether it's to their reputation publicly or to them privately. It's just as a human being
*  psychologically and in the place it puts them because they start thinking negatively in general
*  and then maybe they respond and there's this vicious downward spiral that happens.
*  They're almost like we don't intend to, but it destroys everybody in the process.
*  You quoted Alan Watts, I love him, in saying, quote, you're under no obligation to be the same
*  person you were five minutes ago. So how have the years in DC and the years after changed you?
*  I love Alan Watts too. I listen to his lecture sometimes, Falling Asleep. He's got an on planes.
*  He's got the most soothing voice. But I love what he said about you have no obligation to be who
*  you were five minutes ago because we should always feel that we have the ability to evolve and grow
*  and better ourselves. I think further than that, if we don't look back on who we were a few years
*  ago with some level of embarrassment, we're not growing enough. When I look back, I'm like, oh,
*  I feel like that feeling is because you're growing into hopefully a better version of yourself.
*  I hope and feel that that's been true for me as well. I think the person I am today,
*  we spoke in the beginning of our discussion about some of my earliest ambitions in real estate and
*  in fashion. Those were amazing adventures and incredible experiences in government.
*  I feel today that all of those ambitions are more fully integrated into me as a human being.
*  I'm much more comfortable with the various pieces of my personality and that any professional drive
*  is more integrated into more simple pleasures. Everything for me has gotten much simpler and
*  easier in terms of what I want to do and what I want to be. I think that's where my kids have
*  been my teachers, just being fully present and enjoying the little moments. It doesn't mean I'm
*  any less driven than I was before. It's just more a part of me than being the all-consuming
*  energy one has in their 20s. Yeah, just like you said, with your mom, be able to let go and enjoy
*  the water, the sun, the beach, and enjoy the moment, the simplicity of the moment.
*  I think a lot about the fact that for a lot of young people,
*  they really know what they want to do, but they don't actually know who they are.
*  Then I think as you get older, hopefully you know who you are and you're much more comfortable
*  with ambiguity around what you want to do and accomplish. You're more flexible in your thinking
*  around those things. And give yourself permission to be who you are. Yeah.
*  You made the decision not to engage in the politics of the 2024 campaign. If it's okay,
*  let me read what you wrote on the topic. Quote, I love my father very much. This time around,
*  I'm choosing to prioritize my young children and the private life we're creating as a family.
*  I do not plan to be involved in politics. While I will always love and support my father going
*  forward, I will do so outside the political arena. I'm grateful to have had the honor of serving the
*  American people and I will always be proud of many of our administration's accomplishments.
*  Can you explain your thinking, your philosophy behind that decision?
*  I think first and foremost, it was a decision rooted in me being a parent,
*  really thinking about what they need from me now. Politics is a rough business. I think it's one
*  that you also can't dabble in. I think you have to either be all in or all out. And I know today
*  the cost they would pay for me being all in emotionally in terms of my absence at such a
*  formative point in their life. And I'm not willing to make them bear that cost. I served for four
*  years and feel so privileged to have done it. But as their mom, I think it's really important that
*  I do what's right for them. And I think there are a lot of ways you can serve.
*  Obviously, we talked about the enormity, the scale of what can be accomplished in
*  government service. But I think there's something equally valuable about helping
*  within your own community. I volunteer with the kids a lot and we feel really good about that
*  service. It's different, but it's no less meaningful. So I think there are other ways to serve.
*  I also think politics is a pretty dark world. There's a lot of darkness, a lot of negativity,
*  and it's just really at odds with what feels good for me as a human being. And it's a really rough
*  business. So for me and my family, it feels right to not participate.
*  So it wears on your soul. And yeah, there is a bit, at least from an outsider's perspective,
*  a bit of darkness in that part of our world. I wish it didn't have to be this way.
*  Me too.
*  I think part of that darkness is just watching all the legal turmoil that's going on.
*  What's it like for you to see that, your father involved in that, going through that?
*  On a human level, it's my father and I love him very much. So it's painful to experience,
*  but ultimately I wish it didn't have to be this way.
*  I like it that underneath all of this, I love my father is the thing that you lead with.
*  That's so true. It is family. And I hope I missed all this turmoil. Love is the thing that wins.
*  It usually does.
*  In the end, yes. But in the short term, there is, like we were talking about,
*  there's a bit of bickering, but at least no more duels.
*  No more duels.
*  You mentioned Dolly Parton.
*  That's a segue.
*  Listen, I'm not very good at this thing. I'm trying to figure it out. Okay, we both love Dolly Parton.
*  So you're big into live music. So maybe you can mention why you love Dolly Parton.
*  I definitely would love to talk to her. I would love to interview her. She's such an icon.
*  I hope you do.
*  I hope you do. What I love about her, and I've really come to love her in recent years, is
*  she's so authentically herself. And she's obviously so talented and so accomplished
*  and this extraordinary woman, but I just feel like she has no conflict within herself as to
*  who she is. She reminds me a lot of my mom in that way. And it's super refreshing and really
*  beautiful to observe somebody who's so in the public eye, being so fully secure in who they are,
*  what their talent is, and what drives them. So I think she's amazing. And she leads with a lot of
*  love and positivity. So I think she's very cool. I hope you have a long conversation with her.
*  Yeah. So there's many things to say about her. At first, incredibly great musician,
*  songwriter, performer, also can create an image and have fun with it. Have fun being herself over
*  the top. It feels that way, right? She enjoys, after all these years, it feels like she enjoys
*  what she does. And you also have the sense that if she didn't, she wouldn't do it.
*  That's right. And just an iconic country musician, country music singer.
*  Yeah. There's a lot. We've talked about a lot of musicians. What do you enjoy? You mentioned
*  Adele, seeing her perform, hanging out with her. Yeah. I mean, she's extraordinary. Her voice is
*  unreal. So I find her to be so talented. And she's so unique in that three-year-olds love her music.
*  She was actually the first concert Arabella ever went to at Madison Square Garden when she was
*  around four. And nine-year-olds love her music. And that's pretty rare to have that kind of
*  bandwidth of resonance. So I think she's so talented. We actually just saw her. I took all
*  three kids in Las Vegas around a month ago. Alice Johnson, whose case I had worked with in the
*  White House, my father commuted her sentence. Her case was brought to me by a friend, Kim Kardashian.
*  And she came to the show. We all went together with some mutual friends. And it was amazing to
*  see Adele, but it was a very profound experience for me to have with my kids because she rode with
*  us in the car on the way to the show. And she talked to my kids about her experience and her
*  story and how her case found its way to me. And I think for young children, it's very abstract
*  policy. And so for her to be able to share with them this was a very beautiful moment and led to
*  a lot of really incredible conversations with each of my kids about our time in service because
*  they gave up a lot for me to do it. Actually, Alice told them the most beautiful story about
*  the plays she used to put on in prison, how these shows were like the hottest ticket in town. You
*  could not get into them. They always extended their run. But for the people who were in them,
*  a lot of those men and women had never experienced applause. Nobody had ever shown up
*  at their games or at their plays and clapped for them. And the emotional experience of just being
*  able to give someone that, being able to stand and applaud for someone and how meaningful that was.
*  She was showing us pictures from these different productions. It was a beautiful moment, Alice,
*  actually, after her sentence was commuted and she came out of prison. Together, we worked on 23
*  different pardons or commutations. So the impact of her experience and how she was able to take her
*  opportunity and create that same opportunity for others who were deserving and who she believed in
*  was very beautiful. So anyway, that was an extraordinary concert experience for my kids
*  to be able to have that moment. What a story. So just that's the sort of the...
*  Here we are dancing at Adele. Exactly. Exactly. It's like that turning point. Six years later,
*  it was almost to the day. Six years later. Yeah. So that policy, that meeting,
*  meeting of the minds resulted in a major turning point in her life and Alice's life and now you're
*  dancing with Adele. And now we're at Adele. Yeah. I mean, you mentioned also all the I've seen
*  commutations where it's an opportunity to step in and consider the ways that the justice system
*  does not always work well. Like in cases when it's nonviolent crime and drug offenses,
*  there's a case of a person you mentioned that received a life sentence for selling weed.
*  And it's just the number, it's like hundreds of thousands of people are in the federal
*  prison and jail and the system for selling drugs. That's the only thing with no violence
*  on their record whatsoever. And obviously there's a lot of complexity. There's the details matter,
*  but oftentimes the justice system does not do right in the way we think right is. And it's nice
*  to be able to step in and help people like indirectly. They're overlooked and they have
*  no advocate. Jared and I helped in a small way on his effort, but he really spearheaded the effort on
*  criminal justice reform through the First Step Act, which was an enormously consequential piece of
*  legislation that gave so many people another opportunity. And that was amazing. So working
*  with him closely on that was a beautiful thing for us to also experience together. But in the
*  final days of the administration, you're not getting legislation passed. And anything you do
*  administratively is going to be probably overturned by an incoming administration. So how do you use
*  that time for maximum results? And I really dug in on pardons and commutations that I thought
*  were overdue and were worthy. And my last night in Washington, DC, the gentleman you mentioned,
*  Corvin, I was on the phone with his mother at 1230 in the morning telling her that her son would be
*  getting out the next day. And it felt really, it's one person, but you see with Alice, the ripple
*  effect of the commutation granted to her and her ability and the impact she'll have within her
*  family with her grandkids. And now she's an advocate for so many others who are voiceless.
*  It felt like the perfect way to end four years to be able to call those parents and call those kids
*  in some cases and give them the news that a loved one was coming home.
*  And I just love the cool image of you, Kim Kardashian, and Alice just dancing on Adele's
*  show with the kids. I love it. Well, Kim wasn't at the Adele show, but she had connected us.
*  It was beautiful. It was really beautiful. The way Adele can hold just the badassness she has on stage.
*  She does heartbreak songs better than anyone. Or no, it's not even heartbreak. What's that genre
*  of song? Like rolling in the deep, like a little anger, a little love, a little like something,
*  a little attitude, and just like one of the greatest voices ever. All that together just by herself.
*  Yeah. You can strip it down and the power of her voice. I think about that. One of the things we
*  were talking about live music, one of the amazing things now is there's so much incredible concert
*  material that's been uploaded to YouTube. So sometimes I just sit there and watch these old
*  shows. We both love Stevie Ray Vaughan, watching him perform. You can even find old videos of
*  Django Reinhardt. You got me. I got you. You got me, Stevie Ray Vaughan. Texas Flood.
*  We had this moment, which is hilarious, that you said one of the songs you really like
*  of Stevie's is Texas Flood. Well, my bucket list is to learn how to play it. It's a bucket list.
*  This is a bucket list. You made me feel so good because for me, Texas Flood was the first solo on
*  guitar I've ever learned because for me it was like the impossible solo. I worked really hard
*  to learn it. It's like one of the most iconic sort of blues songs, Texas blues songs. Now you made me
*  fall in love with the song again, want to play it out live, at the very least put it up on YouTube.
*  Because it is so fun to improvise and when you lose yourself in the song, it truly is a blues song.
*  You can have fun with it. I hope you do that. Throw on Stevie Ray Vaughan. Regardless,
*  I want you to play it for me. 100%. But he's amazing. There's so many great performers that
*  are playing live now. I just saw Chris Stapleton's show. He's an amazing country artist. He's too
*  good. That guy is so good. Lucas Nelson is one of my favorites to see live. There's so many incredible
*  songwriters and musicians that are out there touring today. I think you also can go online
*  and watch some of these old performances like Django Reinhardt was the first, because I torture
*  myself, was the first song I learned to play on the guitar. It took me like nine months to a year.
*  It was, I mean, I should have chosen a different song, but Uwe Tu Monomour,
*  one of his songs was, and it was like finger style and I was just going through and grinding it out.
*  That's kind of how I started to learn to play by playing that song. But to see these old videos of
*  him playing without all his fingers and the skill and the dexterity. One of my favorite live
*  performances is actually who really influenced Adele is Aretha Franklin.
*  And she did this, she did a version of Amazing Grace. Have you ever seen this video?
*  No.
*  I cry. Look up, it was in LA. It was like the temple missionary Baptist church.
*  Talk about stripped down. She's literally, I mean, just listen to this.
*  Well, you could do one note and you could just kill it.
*  The pain, the soulfulness.
*  The spirit you feel in her when you watch this.
*  That's true. Adele carries some of that spirit also, right?
*  Yeah. And you can take away all the instruments with Adele and just have that voice.
*  And it's so commanding and it's so amazing. Anyway, you watch this and you see
*  the arc of also the experience of the people in the choir and them starting to join in.
*  Anyway, it's amazing.
*  I love watching Queen, like Freddie Mercury Queen performances.
*  In terms of vocals and just like great stage presence.
*  That Live Aid performance is considered one of the best of all.
*  I've watched that so many times. He's so cool.
*  Wait, pull up that for a second.
*  Go to that part where he's saying radio Gaga and they're all mimicking his arm movements. It's so cool.
*  Look at that.
*  So good.
*  So that's an example of a person that was born to be on stage.
*  So good. Well, we were talking surfing, we were talking jiu-jitsu.
*  I think live music is one of those kind of rare moments where you can really be present.
*  Where something about the anticipation of choosing what show you're going to go to
*  and then waiting for the date to come. And normally it happens in the context of community.
*  You go with friends and then allowing yourself to sort of fall into it is incredible.
*  You've been training jiu-jitsu.
*  Yes, trying.
*  I mean, I've seen you do jiu-jitsu. You're extremely athletic. You know how to use your
*  body to commit violence. Maybe there's better ways of phrasing that. But anyway.
*  It's been a skill that's been honed over time.
*  What do you like about jiu-jitsu?
*  Well, first of all, I love the way I came to it. It was my daughter.
*  I think I told you this story. At 11, she told me that she wanted to learn self-defense
*  and she wanted to learn how to protect herself, which I just as a mom, I was so proud about.
*  Because at 11, I was not thinking about defending myself. I loved that she had sort of that desire
*  and awareness. So I called some friends, actually a mutual friend of ours, and asked around for
*  and asked around for people who I could work with in Miami. And they recommended the Valenti
*  Brothers Studio. And you've met all three of them now. They're these remarkable human beings. And
*  they've been so wonderful for our family. I mean, first starting with Arabella, I used to take her
*  and then she'd kind of encourage me and she'd sort of pull me into it. And I started doing it
*  with her. And then Joseph and Theo saw us doing it. They wanted to start doing it. So now they
*  joined and then Jared joined. So now we're all doing jujitsu. And for me, there's something
*  really empowering knowing that I have some basic skills to defend myself. I think it's something
*  as humans we've kind of gotten away from. You look at any other animal and even the giraffe,
*  they'll use their neck, the lion, the tiger, every species. And then there's us, who most of us don't
*  and I didn't know how to protect myself. And I think that it gives you a sense of confidence
*  and also gives you kind of a sense of calm, knowing how to de-escalate rather than escalate
*  a situation. I also think as part of the training, you develop more natural awareness when you're out
*  and about. And I feel like especially, you know, everyone's, you get on an elevator and like the
*  first thing people do is pick up their phone. You're walking down the street. People are getting hit
*  by cars because they're walking into traffic. I think as you start to get this training, you become
*  much more aware of the broader context of what's happening around you, which is really healthy
*  and good as well. But it's been beautiful. They actually, the Valenti brothers, they have this
*  753 code that was developed with some of the sort of samurai principles in mind. And all of my kids
*  have memorized it and they'll talk to me about it. Theo, he's eight years old. He'll be able to recite
*  all 15. So, you know, benevolence and fitness and nutrition and flow and awareness and balance. And
*  it's an unbelievable thing. And they'll actually
*  integrate it into conversations where they'll talk about something that happened. Yeah,
*  rectitude, courage. Benevolence, respect, honesty, honor, loyalty. So, this is not about
*  jiu-jitsu techniques or fighting techniques. This is about a way of life, about the way you interact
*  with the world, with other people. Exercise, nutrition, rest, hygiene, positivity. That's more
*  on the physical side of things. Awareness, balance and flow.
*  It's the mind, the body, the soul, effectively, is how they break it out. And the kids can only
*  advance and get their stripes if they really internalize this. They give examples of each
*  of them. And my own kids will come home from school and they'll tell me examples of how things
*  happen that weren't aligned with the 753 code. So, it's a framework, much like religion is in our
*  house and can be for others. It's a framework to discuss things that happen in their life,
*  large and small, and has been beautiful. So, I do think that body-mind connection is super strong
*  in jiu-jitsu. So, there's many things I love about the Valenti brothers. But one of them is how
*  rooted it is in philosophy and history of martial arts in general. A lot of places, you'll practice
*  the sport of it, maybe the art of it, but to recognize the history and what it means to be
*  a martial artist broadly on and off the mat. That's really great. And the other thing is great is they
*  also don't forget the self-defense route, the actual fighting routes. So, it's not just a sport,
*  it's a way to defend yourself on the street in all situations. And that gives you a confidence
*  in, just like you said, an awareness about your own body and awareness about others.
*  Yeah.
*  It is, sadly, we forget, but it's a world full of violence or the capacity for violence. So,
*  it's good to have an awareness of that and a confidence how to essentially avoid it.
*  100%. I've seen it with all of my kids and myself, how much they've benefited from it. But
*  that self-defense component and the philosophical elements of... Pedro will often tell them about
*  wu-wei and soft resistance and some of these more Eastern philosophies that they get exposed to
*  through their practice there that are non-resistance, that are beautiful and hard
*  concepts to internalize as an adult, but especially when you're 12, 10, and 8, respectively. So,
*  it's been an amazing experience for us all.
*  I love people like Pedro because he's finding books that are in Japanese and translating them
*  to try to figure out the details of a particular history. He's like an ultra
*  scholar of martial arts and I love that. I love when people give everything,
*  every part of themselves to the thing they're practicing. People have been fighting each other
*  for a very long time. And I love from the Coliseum on, you can't fake anything,
*  you can't lie about anything. It's truly honest. You're there and you either win or lose.
*  And it's simple. And it's also humbling. The reality of that is humbling.
*  And oftentimes in life, things are not that simple, not that black and white.
*  So, it's nice to have that sometimes. That's the biggest thing I get from Jiu-Jitsu is getting my
*  ass kicked, which is the humbling. And it's nice to just get humbled in a very clear way. Sports
*  in general are great for that. I think surfing probably, as I can imagine, just face planting.
*  Not being able to stay on the board, it's humbling. And the power of the wave is humbling.
*  Just like your mom, you're an adventurer. Your bucket list is probably like 120 pages.
*  It's so long.
*  Is there things that just pop to mind that you're thinking about,
*  especially in the near future? Just anything?
*  I hope it always is long. I hope I've never exhausted exploring all the things I'm curious
*  about. I always tell my kids whenever they say, Mom, I'm bored. Only boring people get bored.
*  There's too much to learn. There's too much to learn. So, I've got a long one. I think obviously,
*  there are some immediate tactical interesting things that I'm doing. I'm incubating a bunch
*  of businesses. I'm investing in a bunch of companies. Hopefully, I'll always continue to
*  do that. Some of the fun things I'm doing in real estate now. Those are all on the list of things
*  I'm passionate and excited about continuing to explore and learn. But in terms of the ones that
*  are more pure adventure or hobby, I think I'd like to climb Mount Kilimanjaro. Actually, I know I
*  would. The only thing keeping me from doing it in the short term is I feel like it'd be such a
*  great experience to do with my kids. I'd love to have that experience with them. I also told
*  Erabella we were talking about this archery competition that happens in Mongolia and she
*  loves horseback riding. I feel like that would be an amazing thing to experience together.
*  I want to get barreled by a wave and learn how to play Texas Flood. I want to see the northern
*  lights. I want to go and experience that. I feel like that would be really beautiful.
*  I want to get my black belt like you have. I asked you how long did it take? I want to get
*  my black belt in jiu-jitsu. That's going to be a longer term goal, but within the next decade.
*  Um, yeah, a lot of things. You know, I'd love to go to space. Not just space. I think I'd love
*  to go to the moon. Like step on the moon. Yeah. Or float, you know, in close proximity like that
*  famous photo. Yeah. It's just you and the space suit. I feel like Mars is at this point in my life.
*  Well, the moon's like four days feels more, more manageable. I don't know. But the sunset on Mars
*  is blue. It's the opposite color. I hear it's beautiful. Might be worth it. I don't know.
*  You negotiate with Theo. Yeah. Let me know how it goes. Let me know how it goes.
*  I think actually just even going to space where you can look back on earth.
*  Yeah. I think that just to see this little pale blue dot, just all the stuff that ever happened
*  in human civilization is on that. And to be able to look at it and just be in awe.
*  Now I think that's the thing that will go away. I think being interplanetary,
*  my hope is that that heightens for us how rare it is what we have, like how precious the earth is.
*  I hope that it has that effect because I think there's a big component to
*  interplanetary travel that taps into this manifest destiny inclination, like the human desire to
*  conquer territory and expand the footprint of civilization that sometimes feels much more
*  rooted in dominance and conquest than curiosity, wonder. And obviously I think there's maybe
*  an existential imperative for it at some point or a strategic and security one. But I hope that
*  what feels inevitable at this moment, I mean, you know Elon Musk and what he's doing with SpaceX and
*  Jeff Bezos and others, it feels like it's not an if, it's a when at this point. I hope it also
*  underscores the need to protect what we have here.
*  Yeah. And I hope it's the curiosity that drives that exploration and I hope the exploration
*  will give us a deeper appreciation of the thing we have back home and that earth will always be
*  home and it's a home that we protect and celebrate. What gives you hope about the future of this thing
*  we have going on, human civilization, the whole thing? I think I feel a lot of hope when I'm in
*  nature. I feel a lot of hope when I am experiencing people who are good and honest and pure and true
*  and passionate and that's not an uncommon experience. So those experiences give me hope.
*  Yeah, other humans were pretty cool.
*  I love humanity. We're awesome. You know, not always, but we're a pretty good species.
*  Yeah, for the most part on the whole, we do all right. We do all right. We create some beautiful
*  stuff and I hope we keep creating and I hope you keep creating. You've already done a lot of amazing
*  things, build a lot of amazing things and I hope you keep building and creating and doing a lot of
*  beautiful things in this world. Ivanka, thank you so much for talking today. Thank you, Lex.
*  Thanks for listening to this conversation with Ivanka Trump. To support this podcast,
*  please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from
*  Marcus Aurelius. Dwell on the beauty of life. Watch the stars and see yourself running with them.
*  Thank you for listening. I hope to see you next time.
