---
Date Generated: May 27, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 11449s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence', 'charan ranganath', 'elon musk', 'joe rogan', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex friedman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex pod', 'lex podcast']
Video Views: 231872
Video Rating: None
---

# Charan Ranganath: Human Memory, Imagination, Deja Vu, and False Memories | Lex Fridman Podcast #430
**Lex Fridman:** [May 25, 2024](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4iuepdI3wCU)
*  the act of remembering can change the memory. If you remember some event and then I tell you
*  something about the event, later on when you remember the event you might remember some
*  original information from the event as well as some information about what I told you.
*  And sometimes if you're not able to tell the difference, that information that I told you
*  gets mixed into the story that you had originally. So now I give you some more misinformation or
*  you're exposed to some more information somewhere else and eventually your memory becomes totally
*  detached from what happened. The following is a conversation with Charan Ranganath,
*  a psychologist and neuroscientist at UC Davis specializing in human memory. He's the author of
*  Why We Remember, Unlocking Memory's Power to Hold On to What Matters. This is the Lex Friedman
*  podcast. To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now,
*  dear friends, here's Charan Ranganath. Danny Conway describes the experiencing self and the
*  remembering self and that happiness and satisfaction you gain from the outcomes of
*  your decisions do not come from what you've experienced but rather from what you remember
*  of the experience. So can you speak to this interesting difference that you write about in
*  your book of the experiencing self and the remembering self? Danny really impacted me
*  because I was an undergrad at Berkeley and I got to take a class from him long before he won the
*  Nobel Prize or anything and it was just a mind-blowing class. But this idea of the
*  remembering self and the experiencing self, I got into it because it's so much about memory even
*  though he doesn't study memory. So we're right now having this experience, right? And people
*  can watch it presumably on YouTube or listen to it on audio. But if you're talking to somebody else,
*  you could probably describe this whole thing in 10 minutes. But that's going to miss a lot of what
*  actually happened. And so the idea there is that the way we remember things is not the replay of
*  the experience. It's something totally different. And it tends to be biased by the beginning and the
*  end. And he talks about the peaks. There's also the, you know, the best parts, the worst parts.
*  And those are the things that we remember. And so when we make decisions, we usually consult memory
*  and we feel like our memory is a record of what we've experienced, but it's not. It's this kind of
*  very biased sample, but it's biased in an interesting and I think biologically relevant way.
*  So in the way we construct a narrative about our past, you say that it gives us an illusion of
*  stability. Can you explain that? Basically, I think that a lot of learning in the brain
*  is driven towards being able to make sense. I mean, really memory is all about the present
*  and the future. The past is done. So biologically speaking, it's not important unless there's
*  something from the past that's useful. And so what our brains are really optimized for is to learn
*  about the stuff from the past that's going to be most useful in understanding the present
*  and predicting the future. And so cause effect relationships, for instance, that's a big one.
*  Now, my future is completely unpredictable in the sense that like you could,
*  in the next 10 minutes, pull a knife on me and slit my throat. Right.
*  I was planning on it.
*  But having seeds of your work, it just, generally my expectations about life, I'm not expecting that.
*  I have a certainty that everything's going to be fine. We're going to have a great time talking
*  today. Right. But we're often right. It's like, okay, so I go to see a band on stage. I know
*  they're going to make me wait. The show's going to start late. And then they come on,
*  there's a very good chance there's going to be an encore. I have a memory, so to speak,
*  for that event before I've even walked into the show. Right. There's going to be people holding
*  up their camera phones, try to take videos of it now, cause this is kind of the world we live in.
*  So that's like everyday fortune telling that we do though. It's not real. It's imagined.
*  And it's amazing that we have this capability and that's what memory is about.
*  But it can also give us this illusion that we know everything that's about to happen.
*  And I think what's valuable about that, that illusion is when it's broken,
*  it gives us the information. Right. So, I mean, I'm sure being an AI, you know,
*  about information theory and the idea is the information is what you didn't already have.
*  And so those prediction errors that we make based on, you know, we make a prediction based
*  on memory and the errors are where the action is. The error is where the learning happens.
*  Exactly. Exactly. Well, just to linger on Danny Kahneman and just this whole idea
*  of experiencing self versus remembering self, I was hoping you can give a simple answer of how
*  we should live life based on the fact that our memories could be a source of happiness
*  or could be the primary source of happiness. That an event when experienced bears its fruits the most
*  when it's remembered over and over and over and over. And maybe there is some wisdom in
*  the fact that we can control to some degree how we remember it, how we evolve our memory of it,
*  such that it can maximize the long term happiness of that repeated experience.
*  Oh, well, first I'll say I wish I could take you on the road with me. That was such a great
*  description. Can I be your opening act or? Oh my God. No, I'm going to open for you, dude.
*  Otherwise, it's like, you know, everybody leaves after you're done.
*  Believe me, I did that in Columbus, Ohio once. It wasn't fun. Like the opening acts like drank
*  our bar tab. We spent all this money going all the way there. There was only the everybody left
*  after the opening acts were done. And there was just that stoner dude with the dreadlocks hanging
*  out. And then next to you know, we blew like our savings on getting a hotel room. So we should as
*  a small tangent, you're a legit touring act. When I was in grad school, I played in a band
*  and yeah, we traveled. We would play shows. It wasn't like we were in a hardcore touring band,
*  but we did some touring and had some fun times. And yeah, we did. We did a movie soundtrack,
*  nice Henry portrait of serial killer. So that's a good movie. We were on the soundtrack for the
*  sequel, Henry to mask of sanity, which is a terrible movie. How's the soundtrack is pretty
*  good. It's bad. At least that one part where the guy throws up the milkshake.
*  All right. We're going to have to see. We're going to have to see. All right. We're getting back to
*  life advice and happiness. Yeah. One thing that I try to live by, especially nowadays,
*  and since I wrote the book, I've been thinking more and more about this is
*  how do I want to live a memorable life? You know, I think if we go back to like the pandemic,
*  right? How many people have memories from that period, aside from the trauma of being locked up
*  and seeing people die and all this stuff. I think it's like one of these things where we were stuck
*  inside looking at screens all day, doing the same thing with the same people. And so I don't remember
*  much from that in terms of those good memories that you're talking about, right? You know,
*  when I was growing up, my parents worked really hard for us and we went on some vacations, but
*  not very often. And I really try to do now vacations to interesting places as much as
*  possible with my family, because like those are the things that you remember, right? So I really do
*  think about what's going to be like something that's memorable and then just do it even if
*  it's a pain in the ass, because the experiencing self will suffer for that, but the remembering
*  self will be like, yes, I'm so glad I did that. Do things that are very unpleasant in the moment,
*  because those can be reframed and enjoyed for many years to come. That's probably
*  good advice, or at least when you're going through shit, it's a good way to
*  see the silver lining of it. Yeah, I mean, I think it's one of these things where if you have like
*  people who you've gone through, since you said it, I'll just say since you've gone through shit
*  with someone. And it's like, that's a bonding experience often. I mean, that can really bring
*  you together. I like to say it's like there's no point in suffering unless you get a story out of
*  that. So in the book, I talk about the power of the way we communicate with others and how that
*  shapes our memories. And so I had this near death experience, at least that's how I remember it,
*  on this paddleboard where just everything they could have gone wrong, did go wrong almost.
*  So many mistakes were made and ended up at some point just basically away from my board,
*  pinned in a current in this corner, not a super good swimmer. And my friend who came with me,
*  Randy, who's a computational neuroscientist, he had just been pushed down past me so he couldn't
*  even see me. And I'm just like, if I die here, I mean, no one's around. It's like you just die
*  alone. And so I just said, well, failure is not an option. And eventually I got out of it and froze
*  and got cut up. And the things that we were going through were just insane. But a short version of
*  this is my wife and my daughter and Randy's wife, they gave us all sorts of hell about this because
*  they were ready to send out a search party. So they were giving me hell about it. And then I
*  started to tell people in my lab about this and then friends. And it just became a better and
*  better story every time. And we actually had some photos of just the crazy things like this generator
*  that was hanging over the water. We're like ducking under this thing or these metal gratings. And I'm
*  like going flat on, and it was just nuts. But it became a great story. And it was definitely,
*  Randy and I were already tight, but that was a real bonding experience for us. And yeah,
*  I mean, and I learned from that that it's like, I don't look back on that enough actually, because
*  I think we often, at least for me, I don't necessarily have the confidence to think that
*  things will work out, that I'll be able to get through certain things. But my ability to actually
*  get something done in that moment is better than I give myself credit for, I think. And that was the
*  lesson of that story that I really took away. Well, actually, just for me, you're making me
*  realize now that it's not just those kinds of stories, but even things like periods of depression
*  or really low points. To me, at least it feels like a motivating thing that the darker it gets,
*  the better the story will be if you emerge on the other side. That to me feels like a motivating
*  thing. So maybe if people listening to this and they're going through some shit, as we said,
*  one thing that could be a source of light is that it'll be a hell of a good story when it's all over,
*  when you emerge on the other side. Let me ask you about decisions. You've already talked about
*  it a little bit, but when we face the world and we're making different decisions,
*  how much does our memory come into play? Is it the kind of narratives that we've constructed
*  about the world that are used to make predictions that's fundamentally part of the decision making?
*  Absolutely. Yeah. So let's say after this, you and I decided we're going to go for a beer, right?
*  How do you choose where to go? You're probably going to be like, oh yeah, this new bar opened
*  up near me. I had a great time there. They had a great beer selection, or you might say, oh,
*  we went to this place and it was totally crowded and they're playing this horrible EDM or whatever.
*  So right there, valuable source of information, right? And then you have these things like where
*  you do this counterfactual stuff like, well, I did this previously, but what if I had gone
*  somewhere else and said, maybe I'll go to this other place because they didn't try it the
*  previous night. So there's all that kind of reasoning that goes into it too. I think even
*  if you think about the big decisions in life, right? It's like you and I were talking before
*  we started recording about how I got into memory research and you got into AI. And it's like we all
*  have these personal reasons that guide us in these particular directions. And some of it's the
*  environment and random factors in life. And some of it is memories of things that we want to
*  overcome or things that we build on in a positive way, but either way they define us.
*  And probably the earlier in life the memories happen, the more defining,
*  the more defining power they have in terms of determining who we become.
*  I mean, I do feel like adolescence is much more important than I think people give credit for.
*  I think that there is this kind of a sense like the first three years of life is the most important
*  part, but the teenage years are just so important for the brain. And so that's where a lot of mental
*  illness starts to emerge. Now we're thinking of things like schizophrenia as a neurodevelopmental
*  disorder because it just emerges during that period of adolescence and early adulthood.
*  So, and I think the other part of it is that, I guess I was a little bit too firm in saying that
*  memory determines who we are. It's really the self is an evolving construct. I think we kind
*  of underestimate that. And when you're a parent, you feel like every decision you make is consequential
*  in forming this child and plays a role, but so do the child's peers. And so do, there's so much,
*  I mean, that's why I think the big part of education, I think that's so important
*  is not the content you learn. I mean, think of how much dumb stuff we learned in school, right?
*  But a lot of it is learning how to get along with people and learning who you are and how you
*  function. And that can be terribly traumatizing, even if you have a perfect parents working on you.
*  Is there some insight into the human brain that explains why we don't seem to remember anything
*  from the first few years of life? Yeah. Yeah. In fact, actually, I was just talking to my
*  really good friend and colleague, Simona Getty, who studies the neuroscience of child development.
*  And so we were talking about this. And so there are a bunch of reasons I would say. So
*  one reason is there's an area of the brain in the, called the hippocampus, which is very, very
*  important for remembering events or episodic memory. And so the first two years of life,
*  there's a period called infantile amnesia. And then the next couple of years of life after that,
*  there's a period called childhood amnesia. And the differences is that basically in the lab and,
*  you know, even during childhood and afterwards, children basically don't have any episodic memories
*  for those first two years. The next two years, it's very fragmentary. And that's why they call it
*  childhood amnesia. So there's some, but it's not mine. So one reason is that the hippocampus is
*  taking some time to develop. But another is the neocortex. So the whole folded stuff of gray matter
*  all around the hippocampus is developing so rapidly and changing. And a child's knowledge of the world
*  is just massively being built up, right? So I mean, I'm going to probably embarrass myself,
*  but it's like, if you showed like, you know, you trained a neural network and you give it like the
*  first couple of patterns or something like that, and then you bombard it with another like, you
*  know, years worth of data, try to get back those first couple of patterns, right? It's like,
*  everything changes. And so the brain is so plastic, the cortex is so plastic during that time.
*  And we think that memories for events are very distributed across the brain. So imagine you're
*  trying to get back that pattern of activity that happened during this one moment, but the roads
*  that you would take to get there have been completely rerouted, right? So I think that's
*  my best explanation. The third explanation is a child's sense of self takes a while to develop.
*  And so their experience of learning might be more learning what happened, as opposed to having this
*  first person experience of, I remember I was there. Well, I think somebody once said to me that kind
*  of loosely philosophically that the reason we don't remember the first few years of life,
*  infantile amnesia is because how traumatic it is. Basically, the error rate that you mentioned when
*  your brain's prediction doesn't match reality, the error rate in the first few years of life,
*  your first few months, certainly is probably crazy high. It's just nonstop freaking out
*  the collision between your model of the world and how the world works is just so high that you want
*  whatever the trauma of that is, not the linger around. I always thought that's an interesting
*  idea because just imagine the insanity of what's happening in a human brain in the first couple
*  years. You don't know anything. And there's just this stream of knowledge and where somehow,
*  given how plastic everything is, it just kind of molds and figures it out. But it's like an insane
*  waterfall of information. I wouldn't necessarily describe it as a trauma. We can get into this
*  whole stages of life thing, which I just love. Basically those first few years, there are,
*  think about it, a kid's internal model of their body is changing. It's like just learning to move.
*  Like if you ever have a baby, you'll know that the first three months, they're discovering their
*  toes, right? And it's just nuts. So everything is changing. But what's really fascinating is,
*  and I think this is not at all me being a scientist, but it's like one of those things
*  that people talk about when they talk about the positive aspects of children is that they're
*  exceptionally curious and they have this kind of openness towards the world. And so that
*  prediction error is not a negative traumatic thing. I think it's like a very positive thing
*  because it's what they use. They're seeking information. One of the areas that I'm very
*  interested in is the prefrontal cortex. It's an area of the brain that, I mean, I could talk all
*  day about it, but it helps us use our knowledge to say, hey, this is what I want to do now. This is
*  my goal. So this is how I'm going to achieve it and focus everything towards that goal, right?
*  The prefrontal cortex takes forever to develop in humans. The connections are still being tweaked
*  and reformed into late adolescence, early adulthood, which is when you tend to see mental
*  illness pop up, right? So it's being massively reformed. Then you have about 10 years maybe of
*  prime functioning of the prefrontal cortex, and then it starts going down again and you end up
*  being older and you start losing all that frontal function. So look at this and you'd say, okay,
*  you sit around to episodic memory talks and I always say children are worse than adults at
*  episodic memory. Older adults are worse than young adults at episodic memory. I always would say,
*  God, this is so weird. Why would we have this period of time that's so short when we're perfect,
*  right? Or optimal. I like to use that word optimal now because there's such a culture of
*  optimization right now. I realize I have to redefine what optimal is because for most of
*  the human condition, I think we had a series of stages of life where you have basically adults
*  saying, okay, young adults saying, I've got a child and I'm part of this village and I have to
*  hunt and forage and get things done. I need a prefrontal cortex so I can stay focused on the
*  big picture and the long haul goals. Now I'm a child, I'm in this village, I'm kind of wandering
*  around and I've got some safety and I need to learn about this culture because I know so little.
*  What's the best way to do that? Let's explore. I don't want to be constrained by goals as much.
*  I want to really be free, play and explore and learn. So you don't want a super tight prefrontal
*  cortex. You don't even know what the goals should be yet, right? It's like if you're trying to design
*  a model that's based on a bad goal, it's not going to work well, right? So then you go late in life
*  and you say, oh, why don't you have a great prefrontal cortex then? But I think, I mean,
*  if you go back and you think how many species actually stick around naturally long after their
*  childbearing years are over, after the reproductive years are over, like menopause,
*  from what I understand, menopause is not all that common in the animal world, right? So why would
*  that happen? And so I saw Alison Gopnik said something about this. So I started to look into
*  this about this idea that, you know, really when you're older in most societies, your job is no
*  longer to form new episodic memories. It's to pass on the memories that you already have, this
*  knowledge about the world, what we call semantic memory, to pass on that semantic memory to the
*  younger generations, pass on the culture. You know, even now in indigenous cultures, that's the role
*  of the elders. They're respected. They're not seen as, you know, people who are pasted and losing it.
*  And I thought that was a very poignant thing that memories doing what it's supposed to throughout
*  these stages of life. So it is always optimal in a sense. Yeah. Just optimal for that stage of life.
*  Yeah. And for the ecology of the system. So you've got, so I looked into this and it's like
*  another species that has menopause is orcas. Orca pods are led by the grandmothers, right? So
*  not the young adults, not the parents or whatever, the grandmothers. And so they're the ones that
*  pass on the traditions to the, I guess, the younger generation of orcas. And if you, you know, if you
*  look from what little I understand, different orca pods have different traditions. They hunt for
*  different things. They have different play traditions and that's a culture, right? And so
*  in social animals, evolution, I think is designing brains that are really around, you know, it's,
*  it's obviously optimized for the individual, but also for kin. And I think that the kin are part
*  of this, like when they're a part of this intense social group, the brain development should parallel
*  that the nature of the ecology. Well, it's just fascinating to think of the individual orca or human
*  throughout his life in stages doing a kind of optimal wisdom development.
*  So in the early days, you don't even know what the goal is and you figure out the goal and you kind
*  of optimize for that goal and you pursue that goal and then all the wisdom you collect through that,
*  then you share with the others in the system, the other individuals. And as a collective,
*  then you kind of converge towards greater wisdom throughout the generation. So in that sense,
*  it's optimal us humans and orcas got something going on. It works. Apex predators.
*  I just got a Megalyn on tooth. Speaking of apex predators, it's just imagine the size of that
*  thing. Anyway, how does the brain forget and how and why does it remember? So maybe some of the
*  mechanisms you mentioned the hippocampus, what are the different components involved here?
*  So we can think about this on a number of levels. Maybe I'll give you the simplest version first,
*  which is we tend to think of memories as these individual things and we can just access them
*  maybe a little bit like, you know, photos on your phone or something like that.
*  But in the brain, the way it works is you have this distributed pool of neurons and the memories
*  are kind of shared across different pools of neurons. And so what you have is competition
*  where sometimes memories that overlap can be fighting against each other. Right. So sometimes
*  we forget because that competition just wipes things out. Sometimes we forget because there
*  aren't the biological signals, which we can get into. I would promote long-term retention.
*  And lots of times we forget because we can't find the cue that sends us back to the right memory.
*  And we need the right cue to be able to activate it. Right. So, you know, for instance,
*  in a neural network, there is no, you wouldn't go and you'd say, this is the memory, right? It's
*  like the whole network, I mean, the whole ecosystem of memories is in the weights of the neural
*  network. And in fact, you could extract entirely new memories depending on how you feed.
*  You have to have the right query, the right prompt to access that,
*  whatever the part you're looking for. That's exactly right. That's exactly
*  right. And in humans, you have this more complex set of ways memory works. There's,
*  as I said, the knowledge or what you call semantic memory. And then there's these
*  memories for specific events, which we call episodic memory. And so there's different pieces
*  of the puzzle that require different kinds of cues. So that's a big part of it too,
*  is just this kind of what we call retrieval failure. You mentioned episodic memory,
*  you mentioned semantic memory. What are the different separations here? What's working
*  memory, short-term memory, long-term memory? What are the interesting categories of memory?
*  Yeah. And so memory researchers, we love to cut things up and say, you know,
*  is memory one thing or is it two things? Is it two things or is it three things? And so
*  one of the things that there's value in that, and especially experimental value in terms of
*  being able to dissect things, and the real world is all connected. Speak to your question,
*  working memory is a term that was coined by Alan Batley. It's basically thought to be this ability
*  to keep information online in your mind right in front of you at a given time, and to be able to
*  control the flow of that information, to choose what information is relevant, to be able to
*  manipulate it and so forth. And one of the things that Alan did that was quite brilliant was he said,
*  there's this ability to kind of passively store information, you know, see things in your mind's
*  eye or hear your internal monologue, but you know, we have that ability to keep information in mind.
*  But then we also have this separate, what he called a central executive, which is identified
*  a lot with the prefrontal cortex. It's this ability to control the flow of information that's
*  being kept active based on what it is you're doing. Now, a lot of my early work was basically saying
*  that this working memory, which some memory researchers would call short-term memory,
*  is not at all independent from long-term memory. That is that a lot of executive function requires
*  learning, and you have to have like synaptic change for that to happen. But there's also
*  transient forms of memory. So one of the things I've been getting into lately is the idea that
*  we form internal models of events. The obvious one that I always use is birthday parties, right? So
*  you go to a child's birthday party. Once the cake comes out and you just see a candle, you can predict
*  the whole frame, you know, set of events that happens later. And up till that point where the
*  child blows out the candle, you have an internal model in your head of what's going on. And so if
*  you follow people's eyes, it's not actually on what's happening. It's going where the action's about
*  to happen, which is just fascinating, right? So you have this internal model, and that's a kind of
*  a working memory product. It's something that you're keeping online that's allowing you to
*  interpret this world around you. Now to build that model though, you need to pull out stuff from
*  your general knowledge of the world, which is what we call semantic memory. And then you'd
*  want to be able to pull out memories for specific events that happened in the past, which we call
*  episodic memory. So in a way, they're all connected, even though it's different. The things
*  that we're focusing on and the way we organize information in the present, which is working
*  memory, will play a big role in determining how we remember that information later, which people
*  typically call long-term memory. So if you have something like a birthday party and you've been
*  to many before, you're going to load that from disk into working memory, this model, and then
*  you're mostly operating on the model. And if it's a new task, you don't have a model. So you're more
*  in the data collection. Yes. One of the fascinating things that we've been studying, and this is,
*  we're not at all the first to do this. Jeff Sachs was a big pioneer in this. And I've been
*  working with many other people, Ken Norman, Leila Devachian, Columbia has done some interesting
*  stuff with this, is this idea that we form these internal models at particular points of high
*  prediction error, or points of, I believe also points of uncertainty, points of surprise or
*  motivationally significant periods. And those points are when it's maximally optimal to encode
*  an episodic memory. So I used to think, oh, well, we're just encoding episodic memories constantly.
*  Boom, boom, boom, boom, boom. But think about how much redundancy there is and all that, right?
*  It's just a lot of information that you don't need. But if you capture an episodic memory at
*  the point of maximum uncertainty for the singular experience, right? It's only going to happen once.
*  But if you capture it at the point of maximum uncertainty or maximum surprise,
*  you have the most useful point in your experience that you've grabbed. And what we see is that the
*  hippocampus and these other networks that are involved in generating these internal models of
*  events, they show a heightened period of connectivity or correlated activity during
*  those breaks between different events, which we call event boundaries. These are the points
*  where you're like surprised or you cross from one room to another and so forth. And that communication
*  is associated with a bump of activity in the hippocampus and better memory. And so if
*  people have a very good internal model throughout that event, you don't need to do much memory
*  processing. You're in a predictive mode, right? And so then at these event boundaries, you encode
*  and then you retrieve and you're like, okay, wait a minute, what's going on here?
*  Branganath's now talking about orcas, what's going on? And maybe you have to go back and
*  remember reading my book to pull out the episodic memory to make sense of whatever it is I'm babbling
*  about, right? And so there's this beautiful dynamics that you can see in the brain of
*  these different networks that are coming together and then deaffiliating at different points in time
*  that are allowing you to go into these modes. And so to speak to your original question,
*  to some extent, when we're talking about semantic memory and episodic memory and working memory,
*  you can think about it as these processes that are unfolding as these networks kind of come
*  together and pull apart. Can memory be trained and improved? This beautiful connected system
*  that you've described? What aspect of it is a mechanism that can be improved through training?
*  I think improvement, it depends on what your definition of optimal is. So what I say in the
*  book is, is that you don't want to remember more, you want to remember better, which means focusing
*  on the things that are important. And that's what our brains are designed to do. So if you go back
*  to the earliest quantitative studies of memory by Ebbinghaus, what you see is that he was trying so
*  hard to memorize this arbitrary nonsense, and within a day he lost about 60% of that information.
*  And he was basically using a very, very generous way of measuring it. So as far as we know,
*  nobody has managed to violate those basics of having people forget most of their experiences.
*  So if your expectation is that you should remember everything and that's what your optimal is,
*  you're already off because this is not what human brains are designed to do.
*  On the other hand, what we see over and over again is that the brain does, basically, one of the cool
*  things about the design of the brain is it's always less is more, less is more. I've seen estimates
*  that the human brain uses something like 12 to 20 watts in a day. That's just nuts, the low power
*  consumption. So it's all about reusing information and making the most of what we already have.
*  And so that's why basically, again, what you see biologically is neuromodulators, for instance,
*  these chemicals in the brain like norepinephrine, dopamine, serotonin, these are chemicals that are
*  released during moments that tend to be biologically significant, surprise, fear,
*  stress, etc. And so these chemicals promote lasting plasticity, right? Essentially,
*  some mechanisms by which the brain can prioritize the information that you carry with you into the
*  future. Attention is a big factor as well, our ability to focus our attention on what's important.
*  And so there's different schools of thought on training attention, for instance. So one of my
*  colleagues, Amishi Jha, she wrote a book called Peak Mind and talks about mindfulness as a method
*  for improving attention and focus. So she works a lot with military like Navy SEALs and stuff to do
*  this kind of work with mindfulness meditation. Adam Ghazali, another one of my friends and
*  colleagues, has worked on kind of training through video games actually as a way of training attention.
*  And so it's not clear to me, one of the challenges though in training is you tend to overfit
*  to the thing that you're trying to optimize, right? So you tend to, if I'm looking at a video game,
*  I can definitely get better at paying attention in the context of the video game, but you transfer
*  it to the outside world. That's very controversial. The implication there is that attention is a
*  fundamental component of remembering something, allocating attention to it. And then attention
*  might be something that you could train. How you allocate attention and how you hold attention.
*  I can say that in fact, we do in certain ways, right? So if you are expert in something,
*  you are training attention. So we did this one study of expertise in the brain. And so people
*  used to think, let's say if you're a bird expert or something, right? People will go like, if you
*  get really into this world of birds, you start to see the differences in your visual cortex is tuned
*  up and it's all about plasticity of the visual cortex. And vision researchers love to say
*  everything's visual. But it's like, we did this study of attention and working or working memory
*  and expertise. And one of the things that surprised us were the biggest effects as people became
*  experts in identifying these different kinds of just crazy objects that we made up. As they
*  developed this expertise of being able to identify what made them different from each other and what
*  made them unique, we were actually seeing massive increases in activity in the prefrontal cortex.
*  And this fits with some of the studies of chess experts and so forth that it's not so much that
*  you learn the patterns passively, you learn what to look for. You learn what's important, what's not.
*  Right? And you can see this in any kind of expert professional athlete. They're looking three steps
*  ahead of where they're supposed to be. So that's a kind of a training of attention. And those are
*  also what you'd call expert memory skills. So if you take the memory athletes, I know something
*  we're both interested in. And so these are people who train in these competitions and they'll
*  memorize like a deck of cards in like a really short amount of time. There's a great memory
*  athlete. Her name I think is pronounced Yenya Wintersol. So I think she's got like a giant
*  Instagram following. And so she had this YouTube video that went viral where she had memorized an
*  entire Ikea catalog. Right? And so how do people do this? By all accounts from people who become
*  memory athletes, they weren't born with some extraordinary memory, but they practice strategies
*  over and over and over again. The strategy that they use for memorizing a particular thing,
*  it can become automatic and you can just deploy it in an instant. Right? So again, it's not
*  necessarily going to one strategy for learning the order of a deck of cards might not help you for
*  something else that you need, like remembering your way around Austin, Texas. But it's going to
*  be these, whatever you're interested in, you can optimize for that. And that's just a natural
*  byproduct of expertise. There's certain hacks. There's something called the memory palace that
*  I've played with. I don't know if you're familiar with that whole technique and it works. It's
*  interesting. So another thing I recommend for people a lot is I use Anki a lot every day. It's
*  a app that does spaced repetition. So I think medical students and students use this a lot
*  to remember a lot of different things. Oh yeah. Okay. We can come back to this, but yeah, sure.
*  It's the whole concept of spaced repetition. You just, when the thing is fresh, you kind of have
*  to remind yourself of it a lot. And then over time you can wait a week, a month, a year before you
*  have to recall the thing again. And that way you essentially have something like note cards that
*  you can have tens of thousands of and can only spend 30 minutes a day and actually be refreshing
*  all of that information, all that knowledge. It's really great. And then for a memory palace
*  is a technique that allows you to remember things like the IKEA catalog or by placing them visually
*  in a place that you're really familiar with. Like I'm really familiar with this place so I can
*  put numbers or facts or whatever you want to remember. You can walk along that little
*  palace and it reminds you it's cool. Like there's stuff like that that I think athletes,
*  memory athletes could use, but I think also regular people can use. One of the things I have to
*  solve for myself is how to remember names. I'm horrible at it. I think it's because when people
*  introduce themselves, I have the social anxiety of the interaction where I'm like,
*  I know I should be remembering that, but I'm freaking out internally about social interaction
*  in general. And so therefore I forget immediately. So I'm looking for good tricks for that.
*  So I feel like we've got a lot in common because when people introduce themselves to me,
*  it's almost like I have this blank blackout for a moment and then I'm just looking at them like,
*  what happened? I look away or something, what's wrong with me? So I mean, I'm totally with you
*  on this. The reason why it's hard is that there's no reason we should be able to remember names
*  because when you say remembering a name, you're not really remembering a name. Maybe in my case,
*  you are, but most of the time you're associating a name with a face and an identity. And that's a
*  completely arbitrary thing. I mean, maybe in the olden days, somebody named Miller, it's like,
*  they're actually making flour or something like that. But for the most part, it's like these names
*  are just utterly arbitrary. So you have no thing to latch onto. And so it's not really a thing that
*  our brain does very well to learn meaningless arbitrary stuff. So what you need to do is build
*  connections somehow, visualize a connection. And sometimes it's obvious or sometimes it's not.
*  I'm trying to think of a good one for you now, but the first thing I think of is Lex Luthor.
*  That's great. Because this isn't Lex Luthor wear a suit, I think.
*  I know he has a shaved head though, or he's bald, which you're not. You've got a great head. I'd
*  trade hair with you any day. But something like that. But if I can come up with something,
*  I could say, okay, so Lex Luthor is this criminal mastermind. And then I just imagine you-
*  We talked about stabbing or whatever earlier. Yeah, exactly.
*  So I'm just going to connect it and that's it. Yeah, yeah. But I'm serious though,
*  that these kinds of weird associations, now I'm building a richer network. I mean,
*  one of the things that I find is if I've, like, you can have somebody's name that's just totally
*  generic, like John Smith or something. Not that no offense to people that name. But if I see a
*  generic name like that, but I've read John Smith's papers academically and then I meet John Smith at
*  a conference, I can immediately associate that name with that face because I have this pre-existing
*  network to lock everything into. And so you can build that network. And that's what the method
*  of loci or the memory palace technique is all about, is you have a pre-existing structure in
*  your head of like your childhood home or this mental palace that you've created for yourself.
*  And so now you can put arbitrary pieces of information in different locations in that
*  mental structure of yours. And then you could walk through the different path and find all the pieces
*  of information you're looking for. So the method of loci is a great method for just learning
*  arbitrary things because it allows you to link them together and get that cue that you need to pop in
*  and find everything. Right? We should maybe linger on this memory palace thing just to make
*  obvious. Because when people were describing to me a while ago, what this is, it seems insane.
*  I just, you literally think of a place like a childhood home or a home that you're really
*  visually familiar with. And you literally place in that three-dimensional space,
*  facts or people or whatever you want to remember. And you just walk in your mind along that place
*  visually. And you can remember, remind yourself of the different things. One of the limitations is
*  there is a sequence to it. So it's, I think your brain is somehow unique. You can't just like go
*  upstairs right away or something. You have to like walk along the room. So it's really great
*  for remembering sequences, but it's also not great for remembering like individual facts out
*  of context. So the full context of the tour, I think is important. But it's fascinating how
*  the mind is able to do that. When you ground these pieces of knowledge into something that you
*  remember well already, especially visually. Fascinating. And you can just do that for any
*  kind of sequence. I'm sure she used something like this for the, for Ikea catalog.
*  So yeah, absolutely. Absolutely. And I think the principle here is, again, I was telling you this
*  idea that memories can compete with each other, right? Well, I like to use this example and maybe
*  someday I'll regret this, but I've used it a lot recently is like, imagine if this were my desk,
*  it could be cluttered with a zillion different things, right? So imagine it's just cluttered
*  with a whole bunch of yellow Post-it notes and one of them, I put my bank password on it, right?
*  Well, it's going to take me forever to find it. I might, you know, it's just going to be buried
*  under all these other Post-it notes. But if it's like hot pink, it's going to stand out and I find
*  it really easily. Right. So that's one way in which if things are distinctive, if you've processed
*  information in a very distinctive way, then you can have a memory that's going to last.
*  And that's very good for instance, for name face associations. If I get something distinctive about
*  you, you know, that it's like, that you've got very short hair and maybe I can make the association
*  with Lex Luthor that way or something like that, right? You know, but I get something very specific.
*  That's a great cue. But the other part of it is what if I just organized my notes so that I have
*  my finances in one pile and I have my like reminders, my to-do list in one pile and so forth.
*  So I organize them. Well, then I know exactly if I'm going for my banking, you know,
*  my bank password, I could go to the finance pile. Right. So the method of loci works or
*  memory palaces work because they give you a way of organizing. There's a school of thought that says
*  that episodic memory evolved from this like kind of knowledge of space and, you know, basically
*  this primitive abilities to figure out where you are. And so people explain the method of loci that
*  way. And, you know, whether or not the evolutionary argument is true, the method of loci is not at all
*  special. So if you don't, you're not a good visualizer. Stories are a good one. So a lot
*  of memory athletes will use stories and they'll go like, if you're memorizing a deck of cards,
*  they have a little code for the different like, like the king and the jack and the 10 and so forth.
*  And they'll make up a story about things that they're doing and that'll work. Songs are a great
*  one. Right. I mean, it's like, I can still remember there's this obscure episode of the TV show Cheers.
*  They say a song about Albania that he uses to memorize all these facts about Albania.
*  I could still sing that song to you. It's just, I saw it on a TV show, you know.
*  So what you mentioned, space repetition. So what, do you like this process? Maybe can you explain it?
*  Oh, yeah. If I am trying to memorize something, let's say if I have an hour to memorize as many
*  Spanish words as I can, if I just try to do like half an hour and then later in the day, I do half
*  an hour, I won't retain that information as long as if I do half an hour today and half an hour,
*  one week from now. And so doing that extra spacing should help me retain the information better.
*  Now there's an interesting boundary condition, which is it depends on when you need that
*  information. So many of us, you know, for me, like I can't remember so much from college and
*  high school because I crammed because I just did everything at the last minute. And sometimes I
*  would literally study like, you know, in the hallway right before the test. And that was great
*  because what would happen is, is I just had that information right there. And so actually not
*  spacing can really help you if you need it very quickly. Right. But the problem is, is that you
*  tend to forget it later on. But on the other hand, if you space things out, you get a benefit for
*  later on retention. And so there's many different explanations. We have a computational model of
*  this. It's currently under revision. But in our computer model, what we say is, is that an easy,
*  maybe a good way of thinking about this is this conversation that you and I are having,
*  it's associated with a particular context, a particular place in time. And so all of these
*  little cues that are in the background, these little guitar sculptures that you have, and
*  that big light umbrella thing, right? All these things are part of my memory for what we're talking
*  about the content. So now later on you're sitting around and you're at home drinking a beer and you
*  think, God, what a strange interview that was. Right. So now you're trying to remember it,
*  but the context is different. So your current situation doesn't match up with the memory that
*  you pulled up. There's error. There's a mismatch between what you've pulled up and your current
*  context. And so in our model, what you start to do is you start to erase or alter the parts of the
*  memory that are associated with a specific place in time, and you heighten the information about
*  the content. And so if you remember this information in different times, in different places,
*  it's more accessible at different times in different places because it's not overfitted
*  in an AI kind of way of thinking about things. It's not overfitted to one particular contact.
*  But that's also why the memories that we call upon the most also feel kind of like they're just
*  things that we read about almost. You don't vividly reimagine them, right? It's like they're just these
*  things that just come to us like facts, right? Yeah. And it's a little bit different than semantic
*  memory, but it's like basically these events that we have recalled over and over and over again,
*  we keep updating that memory so it's less and less tied to the original experience.
*  Then we have those other ones, which it's like you just get a reminder of that very specific context.
*  You smell something, you hear a song, you see a place that you haven't been to in a while,
*  and boom, it just comes back to you. And that's the exact opposite of what you get with spacing,
*  right? That's so fascinating. So with space repetition, one of its powers is that you lose
*  attachment to a particular context, but then it loses the intensity of the flavor of the memory.
*  That's interesting. That's so interesting. Yeah. But at the same time, it becomes stronger in the
*  sense that the content becomes stronger. Yeah. So it's used for learning languages,
*  for learning facts, for learning for that generic semantic information type of memory.
*  Yeah. And I think this falls into a category we've done other modeling,
*  one of these is published study in PLOS computational biology, where we showed that
*  another way, which is, I think, related to the spacing effect is what's called the testing
*  effect. So the idea is, is that if you're trying to learn words, let's say in Spanish or something
*  like that, and this doesn't have to be words, it could be anything, you test yourself on the words,
*  and that act of testing yourself helps you retain it better over time than if you just studied it.
*  And so from traditional learning theories, some learning theories anyway, this seems weird,
*  why would you do better giving yourself this extra error from testing yourself rather than just
*  giving yourself perfect input that's a replica of what it is that you're trying to learn?
*  And I think the reason is that you get better retention from that error, that mismatch that
*  we talked about. So what's happening in our model, it's actually conceptually kind of similar to
*  what happens with backprop in AI, or neural networks. And so the idea is that you expose,
*  here's the bad connections and here's the good connections. And so we can keep the parts of
*  this cell assembly that are good for the memory and lose the ones that are not so good. But if
*  you don't stress test the memory, you haven't exposed it to the error fully. And so that's why
*  I think this is a thing that I come back to over and over again, is that you will retain
*  information better if you're constantly pushing yourself to your limit. If you are feeling like
*  you're coasting, then you're actually not learning. So you should always be stress testing
*  the memory system. Yeah, and feel good about it. Even though everyone tells me, oh, my memory is
*  terrible. In the moment, they're overconfident about what they'll retain later on. So it's
*  fascinating. And so what happens is when you test yourself, you're like, oh, my God, I thought I knew
*  that, but I don't. And so it can be demoralizing until you get around that and you realize, hey,
*  this is the way that I learned. This is how I learned best. It's like if you're trying to star
*  in a movie or something like that, you don't just sit around reading the script. You actually
*  act it out and you're going to botch those lines from time to time. Right? You know,
*  there's an interesting moment. You probably experienced this. I remember a good friend of
*  mine, Joe Rogan, I was on his podcast and we were randomly talking about soccer football.
*  Somebody had grew up watching Diego Armando Maradona, one of the greatest soccer players
*  of all time. And we were talking about him and his career and so on. And Joe asked me if he's still
*  around. Now, and I said, yeah. I don't know why I thought, yeah, because that was a perfect example
*  of memories. He passed away. I tweeted about it, how heartbroken I was, all this kind of stuff.
*  A year before, I know this, but in my mind, I went back to the thing I've done many times in my head,
*  visualizing some of the epic runs he had on goal and so on. So for me, he's alive.
*  And part of the conversation when you're talking to Joe, there's stress and the focus is allocated,
*  the attention is allocated in a particular way. But when I walked away, I was like,
*  in which world was Diego Maradona still alive? Because I was sure in my head that he was still
*  alive. It's a moment that sticks with me. I've had a few like that in my life where just kind of
*  obvious things just disappear from mind. And it's cool. It shows actually the power of the mind in
*  a positive sense to erase memories you want erased maybe. But I don't know. I don't know
*  if there's a good explanation for that. One of the cool things that I found is that
*  some people really just revolutionize a field by creating a problem that didn't exist before.
*  It's kind of like why I love science is like engineering is like solving other people's
*  problems and science is about creating problems. I'm just much more like I want to break things and
*  create problems. Not necessarily move fast. But one of my former mentors, Marsha Johnson,
*  who in my opinion is one of the greatest memory researchers of all time, she comes up young woman
*  in the field and it's mostly guy field. And she gets into this idea of how do we tell the
*  difference between things that we've imagined and things that we actually remember? How do we tell,
*  I get some mental experience, where did that mental experience come from? And it turns out this is a
*  huge problem because essentially our mental experience of remembering something that happened,
*  our mental experience of thinking about something, how do you tell the difference? They're both
*  largely constructions in our head. And so it is very important. And the way that you do it
*  is, I mean, it's not perfect, but the way that we often do it and succeed is by again using our
*  prefrontal cortex and really focusing on the sensory information or the place and time and
*  the things that put us back into when this information happened. And if it's something
*  you thought about, you're not going to have all of that vivid detail as you do for something that
*  actually happened. But it doesn't work all the time, but that's a big thing that you have to do.
*  But it takes time. It's slow and it's again, effortful, but that's what you need to remember
*  accurately. But what's cool, and I think this is what you alluded to about how that was an
*  interesting experience, is imagination is exactly the opposite. Imagination is basically saying,
*  I'm just going to take all this information from memory, recombine it in different ways,
*  and throw it out there. And so for instance, Dan Schachter and Donna Addis did cool work on this.
*  Demis Hassabis did work on this with Eleanor McGuire in UCL. And this goes back actually to
*  this guy Frederick Bartlett, who was this revolutionary memory researcher. Bartlett,
*  he actually rejected the whole idea of quantifying memory. He said, there's no statistics in my book.
*  He came from this anthropology perspective. And short version of the stories, he just asked people
*  to recall things. He would give people stories and poems, ask people to recall them. And what he found
*  was people's memories didn't reflect all of the details of what they were exposed to. And they
*  did reflect a lot more. They were filtered through this lens of prior knowledge, the cultures that
*  they came from, the beliefs that they had, the things they knew. And so what he concluded was
*  that he called remembering an imaginative construction, meaning that we don't replay the
*  past. We imagine how the past could have been by taking bits and pieces that come up in our heads.
*  And likewise, he wrote this beautiful paper on imagination saying, when we imagine something
*  and create something, we're creating it from these specific experiences that we've had and
*  combining it with our general knowledge. But instead of trying to focus it on being accurate
*  and getting at one thing, you're just ruthlessly recombining things without any necessary goal in
*  mind. Or at least that's one kind of creation. So imagination is fundamentally coupled with memory
*  in both directions. I think so. I mean, it's not clear that it is in everyone, but one of the things
*  that's been studied is some patients who have amnesia, for instance, they have brain damage,
*  say to the hippocampus. And if you ask them to imagine things that are not in front of them,
*  imagine what could happen after I leave this room, right? They find it very difficult to
*  give you a scenario of what could happen. Or if they do, it would be more stereotyped, like,
*  yes, this would happen. But it's not like they can come up with anything that's very vivid
*  and creative in that sense. And it's partly because when you have amnesia, you're stuck in the present
*  because to get a very good model of the future, it really helps to have episodic memories to draw
*  upon, right? And so that's the basic idea. And in fact, one of the most impressive things,
*  when people started to scan people's brains and ask people to remember past events,
*  what they found was there was this big network of the brain called the default mode network.
*  It gets a lot of press because it's like thought to be important. It's engaged during mind wandering.
*  And if I ask you to pay attention to something, it only comes on when you stop paying attention.
*  So people, oh, it's just this kind of daydreaming network. And I thought,
*  this is just ridiculous research. Who cares? But then what people found was when people
*  recall episodic memories, this network gets active. And so we started to look into it.
*  And this network of areas is really closely functionally interacting with the hippocampus.
*  And so in fact, some would say the hippocampus is part of this default network. And if you look at
*  brain images of people or brain maps of activation, so to speak, of people imagining
*  possible scenarios of things that could happen in the future, even things that couldn't really be
*  very plausible, they look very similar. I mean, you know, to the naked eye, they look almost the
*  same as maps of brain activation when people remember the past. According to our theory,
*  and we've got some data to support this, we've broken up this network in various sub pieces,
*  is that basically it's kind of taking apart all of our experiences and creating these little
*  Lego blocks out of them. And then you can put them back together if you have the right instructions to
*  recreate these experiences that you've had, but you could also reassemble them into new pieces to
*  create a model of an event that hasn't happened yet. And that's what we think happens. And when
*  our common ground that we're establishing in language requires using those building blocks to
*  put together a model of what's going on. Well, there's a good percentage of time I personally
*  live in the imagined world. I think of, I do thought experiments a lot. I, you know, take the
*  absurdity of human life as it stands and play it forward in all kinds of different directions.
*  Sometimes it's rigorous thoughts, thought experiments, sometimes it's fun ones. So
*  I imagine that that has an effect on how I remember things. And I suppose I have to be
*  a little bit careful to make sure stuff happened versus stuff that I just imagined happened.
*  And this also, I mean, some of my best friends are characters inside books that never even existed.
*  And I'm, you know, there's some degree to which they actually exist in my mind.
*  Like these characters exist, authors exist, Dostoevsky exists, but also Brothers Karamazov.
*  I love that book. It's one of the few books I've read. One of the few literature books that I've
*  read, I should say. I read a lot in school that I don't remember, but Brothers Karamazov.
*  But they exist. They exist. And I have almost kind of like conversations with them. It's
*  interesting. It's interesting to allow your brain to kind of play with ideas of the past,
*  of the imagined and see it all as one. Yeah, there was actually this famous
*  nomenest. He's kind of like back then the equivalent of a memory athlete, except he would
*  go to shows and do this. Those described by this really famous neuropsychologist from Russia named
*  Luria. And so this guy was named Solomon Cherashevsky. And he had this condition called
*  synesthesia that basically created these weird associations between different senses that
*  normally wouldn't go together. So that gave him this incredibly vivid imagination that he would
*  use to basically imagine all sorts of things that he would need to memorize. And he would just imagine
*  like just create these incredibly detailed things in his head that allowed him to memorize all sorts
*  of stuff. But it also really haunted him by some reports that basically it was like he was at some
*  point, and again, who knows if the drinking was part of this, but at some point had trouble
*  differentiating his imagination from reality. And this is interesting because it's like,
*  I mean, that's what psychosis is in some ways is you, first of all, you're just learning
*  connections from prediction errors that you probably shouldn't learn. And the other part of
*  it is that your internal signals are being confused with actual things in the outside world.
*  Well, that's why a lot of this stuff is both feature and bug. It's a double-edged sword.
*  Yeah. I mean, it might be why there's such an interesting relationship between genius and psychosis.
*  Yeah. Maybe they're just two sides of the same coin.
*  Humans are fascinating, aren't they? I think so. Sometimes scary, but mostly fascinating.
*  Can we just talk about memory sport a little longer? There's something called the USA Memory
*  Championship. What are these athletes like? What does it mean to be elite level at this? Have you
*  interacted with any of them or reading about them? What have you learned about these folks?
*  There's a guy named Henry Rodger who's studying these guys. And there's actually a book by Joshua
*  Foer called Moonwalking with Einstein where he talks about, he actually, as part of this book,
*  just decided to become a memory athlete. They often have these life events that make them go,
*  hey, why don't I do this? So there was a guy named Scott Hagwood who I write about
*  who thought that he was getting chemo for cancer. And so he decided, because there's a well-known
*  thing called chemo brain where people become like they just lose a lot of their sharpness.
*  And so he wanted to fight that by learning these memory skills. So he bought a book. And this is
*  the story you hear in a lot of memory athletes is they buy a book by other memory athletes
*  or other memory experts, so to speak. And they just learn those skills and practice them over
*  and over again. They start by winning bets and so forth. And then they go into these competitions.
*  And the competitions are typically things like memorizing long strings of numbers or memorizing
*  orders of cards and so forth. So there tend to be pretty arbitrary things, not like things that
*  would be able, you'd be able to bring a lot of prior knowledge, but they build the skills that
*  you need to memorize arbitrary things. Yeah, that's fascinating. I've gotten a chance to work with
*  something called end back tasks. So there's all these kinds of tasks, memory recall tasks that
*  are used to kind of load up the quote unquote working memory and to see the psychologist used
*  it to test all kinds of stuff, like to see how well you're good at multitasking. We use it in
*  particular for the task of driving. Like if you fill up your brain with intensive working memory
*  tasks, how good are you at also not crashing, that kind of stuff. So it's fascinating. But
*  again, those tasks are arbitrary and they're usually about recalling a sequence of numbers
*  in some kind of semi-complex way. Do you have any favorite tasks of this nature in your own studies?
*  I've really been most excited about going in the opposite direction and using things that are more
*  and more naturalistic. And the reason is that we've really moved in that direction because
*  what we found is that memory works very, very differently when you study it, when you study
*  memory in the way that people typically remember. And so it goes into a much more predictive mode
*  and you have these event boundaries, for instance. But a lot of what happens is this kind of
*  fascinating mix that we've been talking about, a mix of interpretations and imagination with
*  perception. And so the new direction we're going in is understanding navigation and our
*  memory first places. And the reason is that there's a lot of work that's done in rats,
*  which is very good work. They have a rat and they put it in a box and the rat goes chase the cheese
*  in a box. You'll find cells in the hippocampus that fire when a rat is in different places in
*  the box. And so the conventional wisdom is that the hippocampus forms this map of the box. And I
*  think that probably may happen when you have absolutely no knowledge of the world. But I think
*  one of the cool things about human memory is we can bring to bear our past experiences to
*  economically learn new ones. And so for instance, if you learn a map of an Ikea, let's say if I go
*  to the Ikea in Austin, I'm sure there's one here, I probably could go to this Ikea and find my way to
*  the, you know, where the wine glasses are without having to even think about it because it's got a
*  very similar layout. Even though Ikea is a nightmare to get around, once I learn my local
*  Ikea, I can use that map everywhere. Why form a brand new one for a new place? And so that kind of
*  ability to reuse information really comes into play when we look at things that are, you know,
*  more naturalistic tasks. And another thing that we're really interested in is this idea of like,
*  what if instead of basically mapping out every coordinate in a space, you form a pretty
*  economical graph that connects basically the major landmarks together and being able to use that as,
*  you know, emphasizing the things that are most important, the places that you go for food and
*  the places that are landmarks that help you get around. And then filling in the blanks for the
*  rest because I really believe that cognitive maps or mental maps of the world, just like our memories
*  for events are not photographic. I think there's this combination of actual verifiable details and
*  then a lot of inference that you make. So what have you learned about this kind of spatial mapping
*  of places? How do people represent locations? There's a lot of variability, I think that,
*  and there's a lot of disagreement about how people represent locations. In a world of GPS
*  and physical maps, people can learn it from like basically what they call a survey perspective,
*  being able to see everything. And so that's one way in which humans can do it. That's a little
*  bit different. There's one way which we can memorize routes. Like I know how to get from here to,
*  let's say if I knew, walk here from my hotel, I could just rigidly follow that route back, right?
*  And there's another more integrative way, which would be what's called a cognitive map, which
*  would be kind of a sense of how everything relates to each other. And so there's lots of people who
*  believe that these maps that we have in our head are isomorphic with the world. They're like these
*  literal coordinates that follow Euclidean space. And as you know, Euclidean mathematics is very
*  constrained, right? And I think that we are actually much more generative in our maps of
*  space so that we do have these bits and pieces. And we've got a small task as it's right now,
*  not yet, like we need to do some work on it for further analysis. But one of the things we're
*  looking at is these signals called ripples in the hippocampus, which are these bursts of activity
*  that you see that are synchronized with areas in the neocortex, in the default network actually.
*  And so what we find is that those ripples seem to increase at navigationally important points
*  when you're making a decision or when you reach a goal. So it speaks to the emotion thing, right?
*  Because if you have limited choices, if I'm walking down a street, I could really just get a mental
*  map of the neighborhood with a more minimal kind of thing by just saying, here's the intersections
*  and here's the directions I take to get in between them. And what we found in general in our MRI
*  studies is basically the more people can reduce the problem, whether it's space or any kind of
*  decision-making problem, the less the hippocampus encodes. It really is very economical towards
*  the points of most highest information content and value. So can you describe the encoding in
*  the hippocampus and the ripples you were talking about? What's the signal in which we see the ripples?
*  Yeah. So this is really interesting. There are these oscillations, right? So there's these waves
*  that you basically see. And these waves are points of very high excitability and low excitability.
*  And at least during, they happen actually during slow wave sleep too. So the deepest stages of sleep
*  and you're just zonked out, right? You see these very slow waves where it's like very excitable and
*  then very unexcited when it goes up and down. And on top of them, you'll see these little sharp wave
*  ripples. And when there's a ripple in the hippocampus, you tend to see a sequence of cells that resemble
*  a sequence of cells that fire when an animal is actually doing something in the world. So it almost
*  is like a little people call it replay. I don't like that term, but it's basically a little bit of
*  a compressed play of the sequence of activity in the brain that was taking place earlier.
*  And during those moments, there's a little window of communication between the hippocampus and these
*  areas in the neocortex. And so that I think helps you form new memories, but it also helps you,
*  I think, stabilize them, but also really connect different things together in memory and allows you
*  to build bridges between different events that you've had. And so this is one of our least our
*  theories of sleep and its real role in helping you see the connections between different events
*  that you've experienced. Oh, so during sleep is when the connections are formed.
*  The connections between different events. Yeah. Right. So it's like, you see me now, you see me
*  next week, you see me a month later, you start to build a little internal model of how I behave and
*  you know what to expect of me. And we think sleep, one of the things that allows you to do is figure
*  out those connections and connect the dots and find the signal in the noise. So you mentioned
*  fMRI. What is it and how is it used in studying memory? This is actually the reason why I got
*  into this whole field of sciences. When I was in grad school, fMRI was just really taking off as
*  a technique for studying brain activity. And what's beautiful about it is you can study the whole
*  human brain and there's lots of limits to it, but you can basically do it in person without sticking
*  anything into their brains and very non-invasive. I mean, for me, being an MRI scanner is like being
*  in the womb. I just fall asleep. If I'm not being asked to do anything, I get very sleepy,
*  but you can have people watch movies while they're being scanned or you can have them do tests of
*  memory, like giving them words and so forth to memorize. But what MRI is itself is just this
*  technique where you put people in a very high magnetic field. Typical ones we would use would
*  be three Tesla to give you an idea. So a three Tesla magnet, you put somebody in and what happens
*  is you get this very weak but measurable magnetization in the brain. And then you apply
*  a radio frequency pulse, which is basically a different electromagnetic field. And so you're
*  basically using water, the water molecules in the brain as a tracer, so to speak. And part of it in
*  fMRI is the fact that these magnetic fields that you mess with by manipulating these radio
*  frequency pulses and the static field and you have things called gradients which change the strength
*  of the magnetic field in different parts of the head. So they're all, we tweak them in different
*  ways, but the basic idea that we use in fMRI is that blood is flowing to the brain. And when you
*  have blood that doesn't have oxygen on it, it's a little bit more magnetizable than blood that does,
*  because you have hemoglobin that carries the oxygen, the iron basically in the blood that makes it red.
*  And so that hemoglobin when it's deoxygenated actually has different magnetic field properties
*  than when it has oxygen. And it turns out when you have an increase in local activity in some part of
*  the brain, the blood flows there and as a result you get a lower concentration of hemoglobin that
*  is not oxygenated. And then that gives you more signal. So I gave you, I think I sent you a GIF,
*  as you like to say. Yeah, we had off record intense argument, well, if it's pronounced GIF or GIF,
*  but that's, we shall set that aside as friends. We could have called it a stern rebuke perhaps.
*  Rebuke, yeah. I drew a hard line. It is true the creator of GIFs that is pronounced GIF,
*  but that's the only person that pronounces GIF. Anyway, yes, you sent a GIF of...
*  This would be basically a whole, a movie of fMRI data. And so when you look at it,
*  it's not very impressive. It looks like these like very pixelated maps of the brain, but it's mostly
*  kind of like white, but these tiny changes in the intensity of those signals that you probably
*  wouldn't be able to visually perceive, like about 1% can be statistically very, very large effects
*  for us. And that allows us to see, hey, there's an increase in activity in some part of the brain
*  when I'm doing some task, like trying to remember something. And I can use those changes to even
*  predict is a person going to remember this later or not. And the coolest thing that people have done
*  is to decode what people are remembering from the patterns of activity from, because maybe when I'm
*  remembering this thing, like I'm remembering the house where I grew up, I might have one pixel
*  that's bright in the hippocampus and one that's dark. And if I'm remembering something like more
*  like the car that I used to drive when I was 16, I might see the opposite pattern where a different
*  pixel is bright. And so all that little stuff that we used to think of noise, we can now think of
*  almost like a QR code for memory, so to speak, where different memories have a different little
*  pattern of bright pixels and dark pixels. And so this really revolutionized my research. So
*  there's fancy research out there where people really, I mean, not even that, I mean, by your
*  standards would be Stone Age, but applying machine learning techniques to do decoding and so forth.
*  And now there's a lot of forward encoding models and you can go to town with this stuff, right?
*  And I'm much more old school designing experiments where you basically say, okay,
*  here's a whole web of memories that overlap in some way, shape or form. Do memories that
*  occurred in the same place have a similar QR code and do memories that occurred in different
*  places of different QR code? And you can just use things like correlation coefficients or
*  cosine distance to measure that stuff, right? Super simple, right? And so what happens is you
*  can start to get a whole state space of how our brain area is indexing all these different
*  memories. And it's super fascinating because what we could see is this little like separation
*  between how certain brain areas are processing memory for who was there and other brain areas
*  are processing information about where it occurred or the situation that's kind of unfolding.
*  And some are giving you information about what are my goals that are involved and so forth.
*  And so, and the hippocampus is just putting it all together into these unique things that just
*  are about when and where it happened. So there is a separation between spatial information,
*  and concepts. Like literally there's distinct, as you said, QR codes for these.
*  So to speak. Let me try a different analogy too that might be more accessible for people,
*  which would be like, you've got a folder on your computer, right? And you open it up,
*  there's a bunch of files there. I can sort those files by alphabetical order. And now things that
*  both start with the letter A are lumped together. And things that start with Z versus A are far
*  apart, right? And so that is one way of organizing the folder, but I could do it by date. And if I
*  do it by date, things that were created close together in time are close and things that are
*  far apart in time are far. So every, like you can think of how a brain area or a network of areas
*  contributes to memory by looking at what the sorting scheme is. And these QR codes that we're
*  talking about that you get from fMRI allow you to do that. And you can do the same thing if you're
*  recording from massive populations of neurons in an animal. And you can do it for recording
*  local potentials in the brain, you know, so little waves of activity in, let's say, a human who has
*  epilepsy and these stick electrodes in their brain try to find the seizures. So that's some of the
*  work that we're doing now. But all these techniques basically allow you to say, hey, what's the sorting
*  scheme? And so we've found that some networks of the brain sort information in memory, according
*  to who was there. So I might have like, we've actually shown one of my favorite studies of all
*  time that was done by a former postdoc, Zach Ray, and Zach did the study where we had a bunch of
*  movies with different people in my labs, they're two different people, and he filmed them at two
*  different cafes and two different supermarkets. And what you could show is in one particular
*  network, you could find the same kind of pattern of activity, more or less a very, very similar
*  pattern of activity. Every time I saw Alex in one of these movies, no matter where he was, right.
*  And I could see another one that was like a common pattern that happened every time I saw this
*  particular supermarket nugget, you know, and so and it didn't matter whether you're watching a movie
*  or whether you're recalling the movie is the same kind of pattern that comes up, right?
*  That's so fascinating.
*  It is fascinating. So now you have those building blocks for assembling a model of what's happening
*  in the present, imagining what could happen, and remembering things very economically from
*  putting together all these pieces so that all the hippocampus has to do is get the right kind of
*  blueprint for how to put together all these building blocks.
*  These are all like, beautiful hints at a super interesting system that makes me wonder on the
*  other side of it how to build it. But it's like, it's fascinating. Like the way it does the encoding
*  is really, really fascinating. Or I guess the symptoms, the results of that encoding are
*  fascinating to study from this. Just as a small tangent, you mentioned sort of the measuring local
*  potentials with electrodes versus fMRI. Oh yeah. What are some interesting like limitations,
*  possibilities of fMRI? Maybe the way you explained it is like brilliant with blood and detecting the
*  activations or the excitation because blood flows to that area. What's like the latency of that?
*  What's the blood dynamics in the brain? How quickly can the task change and all that kind of stuff?
*  Yeah, I mean it's very slow. To the brain, 50 milliseconds is like, you know,
*  like it's an eternity. Maybe not 50, you know, maybe like, you know, let's say half a second,
*  500 milliseconds. Just so much back and forth stuff happens in the brain in that time, right?
*  So in fMRI, you can measure these magnetic field responses about six seconds after that burst of
*  activity would take place. All these things, it's like, is it a feature or is it a bug, right?
*  So one of the interesting things that's been discovered about fMRI is it's not so tightly
*  related to the spiking of the neurons. So we tend to think of the computation, so to speak,
*  as being driven by spikes, meaning like there's just a burst of, it's either on or it's off,
*  and the neuron's like going up or down. But sometimes what you can have is these states
*  where the neuron becomes a little bit more excitable or less excitable.
*  And so fMRI is very sensitive to those changes in excitability. Actually, one of the fascinating
*  things about fMRI is where does that, how is it we go from neural activity to, you know, essentially
*  blood flow to oxygen, you know, all this stuff. It's such a long chain of, you know, going from
*  neural activity to magnetic fields. And one of the theories that's out there is most of the cells
*  in the brain are not neurons. They're actually these support cells called glial cells. And one
*  big one is astrocytes, and they play this big role in regulating, you know, kind of being a middle
*  man, so to speak, with the neurons. So if you, for instance, like one neuron's talking to another,
*  you release a neurotransmitter, like let's say glutamate, and that gets another neuron, starts
*  getting active after you release it in the gap between the two neurons called synapse.
*  So what's interesting is if you leave that, you know, imagine you just flooded with this like
*  liquid in there, right? If you leave it in there too long, you just excite the other neuron too
*  much, and you can start to basically get seizure activity. You don't want this. So you got to suck
*  it up. And so actually what happens is these astrocytes, one of their functions is to suck up
*  the glutamate from the synapse, and that is a massively, and then break it down and then
*  feed it back into the neurons so that you can reuse it. But that cycling is actually very
*  energy intensive. And what's interesting is, at least according to one theory, they need to
*  work so quickly that they're working on metabolizing the glucose that comes in without using oxygen,
*  kind of like anaerobic metabolism. So they're not using oxygen as fast as they are using glucose.
*  So what we're really seeing in some ways may be in fMRI, not the neurons themselves being active,
*  but rather the astrocytes, which are meeting the metabolic demands of the process of keeping the
*  whole system going. It does seem to be that fMRI is a good way to study activation. So
*  with these astrocytes, even though there's a latency, it's pretty reliably coupled to
*  the activations. Oh, well, this gets me to the other part. So now let's say, for instance,
*  if I'm just kind of like, I'm talking to you, but I'm kind of paying attention to your cowboy hat,
*  right? So I'm looking off to the room. I'm thinking about the right, even if I'm not looking at it.
*  What you'd see is that there'd be this little elevation in activity in areas in the visual
*  cortex, which process vision around that point in space. So if then something happened, like
*  suddenly the light flashed in that part of right in front of your cowboy hat,
*  I would have a bigger response to it. But what you see in fMRI is even if I don't see that
*  flash of light, there's a lot of activity that I can measure because you're kind of keeping it
*  excitable. And that in and of itself, even though I'm not seeing anything there that's
*  particularly interesting, there's still this increase in activity. And so it's more sensitive
*  with fMRI. So is that a feature or is it a bug? You know, some people who study spikes
*  in neurons would say, well, that's terrible. We don't want that, you know. Likewise, it's slow,
*  and that's terrible for measuring things that are very fast. But one of the things that we've found
*  in our work was when we give people movies and when we give people stories to listen to,
*  a lot of the action is in the very, very slow stuff. It's in because if you're thinking about
*  like a story, let's say you're listening to a podcast or listening to Lex Friedman podcast,
*  right? You're putting this stuff together and building this internal model over several seconds,
*  which is basically we filter that out when we look at electrical activity in the brain,
*  because we're interested in this millisecond scale. It's almost massive amounts of information,
*  right? So the way I see it is every technique gives you a little limited window into what's
*  going on. fMRI is huge problems. You know, people lie down in the scanner. There's parts of the brain
*  where you'll show you in some of these images where you'll see kind of gaping holes because
*  there's, you can't keep the magnetic field stable in those spots. You'll see parts where it's like
*  there's a vein and so it just produces big increases and decreases in signal or respiration
*  that causes these changes. There's lots of artifacts and stuff like that. You know,
*  every technique has its limits. If I'm lying down in an MRI scanner, I'm lying down. I'm not
*  interacting with you in the same way that I would in the real world, but at the same time,
*  I'm getting data that I might not be able to get otherwise. And so different techniques give you
*  different kinds of advantages. What kind of big scientific discoveries, maybe the flavor of
*  discoveries have been done throughout the history of the science of memory, the studying of memory,
*  what kind of things have been like understood? Oh, there's so many. It's really so hard to
*  summarize it. I mean, I think it's funny because it's like, when you're in the field, you can get
*  kind of blase about this stuff. But then once I started to write the book, I was like, oh my God,
*  this is really interesting. How did we do all this stuff? I would say that some of the, I mean,
*  from the first studies, just showing how much we forget is very important. Showing how much schemas,
*  which is our organized knowledge about the world, increase our ability to remember information,
*  just massively increase it. A studies of expertise, showing how experts like chess experts can memorize
*  so much in such a short amount of time because of the schemas they have for chess. But then also
*  showing that those lead to all sorts of distortions in memory. The discovery that the act of remembering
*  can change the memory, can strengthen it, but it can also distort it if you get misinformation at
*  the time. And it can also strengthen or weaken other memories that you didn't even recall.
*  So just this whole idea of memory as an ecosystem, I think, was a big discovery.
*  I could go, this idea of breaking up our continuous experience into these discrete events,
*  I think was a major discovery.
*  So the discreteness of our encoding of events?
*  Maybe, yeah. I mean, and again, there's controversial ideas about this, right? But
*  it's like, yeah, this idea that, and this gets back to just this common experience of you walk
*  into the kitchen and you're like, why am I here? And you just end up grabbing some food from the
*  fridge. And then you go back and you're like, oh, wait a minute, I left my watch in the kitchen.
*  That's what I was looking for. And so what happens is, is that you have a little internal model of
*  where you are, what you're thinking about. And when you cross from one room to another, those
*  models get updated. And so now when you're in the kitchen, you have to go back and mentally time
*  travel back to this earlier point to remember what it was that you went there for. And so these event
*  boundaries, turns out like in our research, and again, I don't want to make it sound like
*  we've figured out everything, but in our research, one of the things that we found is, is that
*  basically as people get older, the activity in the hippocampus at these event boundaries
*  tends to go down. But independent of age, if I give you outside of the scanner, you're done with
*  the scanner, I just scan you while you're watching a movie, you just watch it. You come out, I give
*  you a test of memory for stories. What happens is you find this incredible correlation between
*  the activity in the hippocampus at these singular points in time, these event boundaries, and your
*  ability to just remember a story outside of the scanner later on. So it's marking this ability to
*  encode memories, just these little snippets of neural activity. So I think that's a big one.
*  There's all sorts of work in animal models that I can get into. Sleep, I think there's so much
*  interesting stuff that's being discovered in sleep right now. Being able to just record from
*  large populations of cells and then be able to relate that. And I think the coolest thing gets
*  back to this QR code thing, because what we can do now is I can take fMRI data while you're watching
*  a movie. Or let's do better than that. Let me get fMRI data while you use a joystick to move around
*  in virtual reality. So you're in the metaverse, whatever, right? But it's kind of a crappy metaverse
*  because there's always so much metaverse that you can do in an MRI scanner. So you do this crappy
*  metaversing. So now I can take a rap, record from his hippocampus and prefrontal cortex and all
*  these areas with these really new electrodes, get massive amounts of data, and have it move around
*  on a track ball in virtual reality in the same metaverse that I did and record that rats activity.
*  I can get a person with epilepsy who we have electrodes in their brain anyway to try to figure
*  out where the seizures are coming from. And it was a healthy part of the brain record from that
*  person, right? And I can get a computational model. And one of the brand new members in my lab,
*  Tyler Brown, is just doing some great stuff. He relates computer vision models and looks at the
*  weaknesses of computer vision models and relates it to what the brain does well. And so you can
*  actually take a ground truth code for the metaverse basically. And you can feed in the visual
*  information, let's say the sensory information or whatever that's coming in to a computational
*  model that's designed to take real world inputs, right? And you could basically tie them all together
*  by virtue of the state spaces that you're measuring in neural activity in these different formats,
*  these different species, and in the computational model, which is just, I just find that mind
*  blowing. You could do different kinds of analyses on language and basically come up with just like,
*  basically it's the guts of LLMs, right? You could do analyses on language and you could do analyses
*  on sentiment analyses of emotions and so forth. Put all this stuff together. I mean, it's almost
*  too much, but if you do it right and you do it in a theory driven way, as opposed to just throwing
*  all the data at the wall and see what sticks, I mean, that to me is just exceptionally powerful.
*  So you can take fMRI data in across species and across different types of humans or conditions
*  of humans and what find construct models that help you find the commonalities or like the core
*  thing that makes somebody navigate through the metaverse, for example. Yeah. Yeah. I mean,
*  more or less. I mean, there's a lot of details, but yes, I think, and not just fMRI, but you can
*  relate it to, like I said, recordings from large populations of neurons that could be taken in a
*  human or even in a non-human animal that is where you think it's an anatomical homolog.
*  So that's just mind blowing to me. What's the similarities in humans and mice?
*  That's what a smashing pumpkins were all just wrath in a cage. Is that smashing pumpkins?
*  Despite all of your rage. Is that smashing pumpkins? I think.
*  Despite all of your rage at GIFs, you're still just wrath in a cage.
*  Oh yeah. All right. Good callback. Anyway. Good callback. See, these memory retrieval
*  exercises of doing are actually helping you build a lasting memory of this conversation.
*  And it's strengthening the visual thing I have of you with James Brown on stage.
*  It's just becoming stronger and stronger by the second.
*  It's a lot.
*  But animal studies work here as well.
*  Yeah. Yeah. So, okay. So let's go to the, so I think Reese, I've got great colleagues who I talk
*  to who study memory in mice, and there's some, one of the valuable things in those models is you can
*  study neural circuits in an enormously targeted way because you could do these genetic studies,
*  for instance, where you can manipulate like particular groups of neurons. And it's just
*  getting more and more targeted to the point where you can actually turn on a particular kind of
*  memory just by activating a particular set of neurons that was active during an experience.
*  So there's a lot of conservation of some of these neural circuits across evolution in mammals,
*  for instance. And then some people would even say that there's genetic mechanisms for learning
*  that are conserved even going back far, far before. But let's go back to the mice and humans
*  question, right? There's a lot of differences. So for one thing, the sensory information is very
*  different. Mice and rats explore the world largely through smelling, olfaction, but they also have
*  vision that's kind of designed to kind of catch death from above. So it's like a very big view
*  of the world. And we move our eyes around in a way that focuses on particular spots in space where
*  you get very high resolution from a very limited set of spots in space. So that makes us very
*  different in that way. We also have all these other structures as social animals that allow us to
*  respond differently. There's language. There's like, so you name it, there's obviously gobs
*  of differences. Humans aren't just giant rats. There's much more complexity to us. Timescales
*  are very important. So primate brains and human brains are especially good at integrating and
*  holding on to information across longer and longer periods of time, right? And also, finally,
*  it's like our history of training data, so to speak, is very, very different than, I mean,
*  a human's world is very different than a wild mouse's world. And a lab mouse's world is
*  extraordinarily impoverished relative to an adult human. But still, what can you understand
*  by studying mice? I mean, just basic almost behavioral stuff about memory? Well, yes,
*  but that's very important, right? So you can understand, for instance, how do neurons talk
*  to each other? That's a really big, big question. Neural computation, you'd think it's the most
*  simple question, right? Not at all. I mean, it's a big, big question. And understanding how
*  two parts of the brain interact, meaning that it's not just one area speaking. It's not like
*  Twitter where one area of the brain is shouting and then another area of the brain is just stuck
*  listening to this crap. It's like they're actually interacting on a millisecond scale,
*  right? How does that happen? And how do you regulate those interactions, these dynamic
*  interactions? We're still figuring that out, but that's going to be coming largely from
*  model systems that are easier to understand. You can do manipulations like drug manipulations to
*  manipulate circuits and use viruses and so forth and lasers to turn on circuits that you just can't
*  do in humans. So I think there's a lot that can be learned from mice. There's a lot that can be
*  learned from non-human primates. And then there's a lot that you need to learn from humans. And I
*  think, unfortunately, some of the people in the National Institutes of Health think you can learn
*  everything from the mouse. It's like, why study memory in humans when I could study learning in
*  a mouse? And then just like, oh my God, I'm going to get my funding from somewhere else.
*  So let me ask you some random fascinating questions. How does deja vu work?
*  So deja vu is actually one of these things I think that some of the surveys suggest that like 75%
*  of people report having a deja vu experience one time or another. I don't know where that came from,
*  but I've pulled people in my class and most of them say they've experienced deja vu.
*  It's this kind of sense that I've experienced this moment sometime before. I've been here before.
*  And actually, there's all sorts of variants of this. The French have all sorts of names for
*  various versions of the chamois vu, parley vu, I don't know, whatever. It's like all these different
*  vus. But deja vu is this sense that it can be like almost disturbing, intense sense of familiarity.
*  So there is a researcher named Wilder Penfield. Actually, this goes back even earlier to some of
*  the earliest, like, Hewlings-Jackson was this neurologist who did a lot of the early
*  characterizations of epilepsy. And one of the things he notices in epilepsy patients,
*  some group of them right before they would get a seizure, they would have this intense sense of
*  deja vu. So it's this artificial sense of familiarity. It's a sense of having a memory
*  that's not there. And so what was happening was there's electrical activity in certain parts of
*  these brains. And so this guy Penfield later on, when he was trying to look for how do we map out
*  the brain to figure out which parts we want to remove and which parts don't we, he would stimulate
*  parts of the temporal lobes of the brain and find you could elicit the sense of deja vu. Sometimes
*  you'd actually get a memory that a person would re-experience just from electrically stimulating
*  some parts. Sometimes they just have this intense feeling of being somewhere before. And so one
*  theory which I really like is that in higher order areas of the brain that are integrating from many,
*  many different sources of input, what happens is that they're tuning themselves up every time you
*  process a similar input. And so that allows you to just get this kind of a fluent sense that I'm
*  very familiar, you're very familiar with this place. And so just being here, you're not going
*  to be moving your eyes all over the place because you kind of have an idea of where everything is.
*  And that fluency gives you a sense of like I'm here. Now I wake up in my hotel room and I have
*  this very unfamiliar sense of where I am, right? But there's a great set of studies done by Ann
*  Cleary at Colorado State where she created these virtual reality environments. And we'll go back
*  to the metaverse. Imagine you go through a virtual museum, right? And then she would put people in
*  virtual reality and have them go through a virtual arcade. But the map of the two places was
*  exactly the same. She just put different skins on them. So one looks different than the other,
*  but they've got same landmarks and the same places, same objects and everything, but
*  carpeting colors, theme, everything's different. People will often not have any conscious idea
*  that the two are the same, but they could report this very intense sense of deja vu.
*  So it's like a partial match that's eliciting this kind of a sense of familiarity. And that's
*  why in patients who have epilepsy that affects memory, you get this artificial sense of familiarity
*  that happens. And so we think that, and again, this is just one theory amongst many, but we think
*  that we get a little bit of that feeling. It's not enough to necessarily give you deja vu,
*  even for very mundane things, right? So it's like if I tell you the word rutabaga,
*  your brain's going to work a little bit harder to catch it than if I give you a word like apple,
*  right? And that's because you hear apple a lot. So your brain's very tuned up to process it
*  efficiently, but rutabaga takes a little bit longer and more intense. And you can actually see
*  a difference in brain activity in areas in the temporal lobe when you hear a word,
*  just based on how frequent it is in the English language. So we think it's tied to this basic,
*  it's basically a byproduct of our mechanism of just learning, doing this error driven learning
*  as we go through life to become better and better and better to process things more and more
*  efficiently. So I guess deja vu is just thinking extra elevated, the stuff coming together,
*  firing for this artificial memory as if it's the real memory. I mean, why does it feel so intense?
*  Well, it doesn't happen all the time, but I think what may be happening is
*  it's a partial match to something that we have. And it's not enough to trigger that sense of
*  that ability to pull together all the pieces, but it's a close enough match to give you that
*  intense sense of familiarity without the recollection of exactly what happened when.
*  But it's also like a spatial temporal familiarity. So like it's also in time,
*  because it's a weird blending of time that happens. And we'll probably talk about time
*  because I think that's a really interesting idea how time relates to memory. But you also kind of
*  artificial memory brings to mind this idea of false memories that comes in all kinds of
*  contexts. But how do false memories form? Well, I like to say there's no such thing as true or
*  false memories, right? It's like Johnny Rotten from the Sex Pistols, he had a saying that's like,
*  I don't believe in false memories any more than I believe in false songs, right?
*  And so the basic idea is that we have these memories that reflect bits and pieces of what
*  happen as well as our inferences and theories, right? So I'm a scientist and I collect data,
*  but I use theories to make sense of that data. And so a memory is kind of a mix of all these things.
*  So where memories can go off the deep end and become what we would call conventionally as false
*  memories are sometimes little distortions where we filled in the blanks, the gaps in our memory
*  based on things that we know, but don't actually correspond to what happened, right? So if I were
*  to tell you that I'm like, you know, a story about this person who's like worried that they have
*  cancer or something like that, and then, you know, they see a doctor and the doctor says,
*  well, things are very much like you would have expected or like, you know, what you were afraid
*  of or something. When people remember that, they'll often remember, well, the doctor told the patient
*  that he had cancer, even if that wasn't in the story, because they're infusing meaning into that
*  story, right? So that's a minor distortion. But what happens is, is that sometimes things can really
*  get out of hand where people have trouble telling the difference in things that they've imagined
*  versus things that happen. But also, as I told you, the act of remembering can change the memory.
*  And so what happens then is you can actually be exposed to some misinformation. And so Elizabeth
*  Loftus was a real pioneer in this work, and there's lots of other work that's been done since.
*  But basically, it's like if you remember some event, and then I tell you something about the
*  event, later on, when you remember the event, you might remember some original information from the
*  event, as well as some information about what I told you. And sometimes, if you're not able to
*  tell the difference, that information that I told you gets mixed into the story that you had
*  originally. So now I give you some more misinformation, or you're exposed to some more information somewhere
*  else. And eventually, your memory becomes totally detached from what happened. And so sometimes you
*  can have cases where people, this is very rare, but you can do it in lab too, or like a significant,
*  not everybody, but a chunk of people will fall for this, where you can give people misinformation
*  about an event that never took place. And as they keep trying to remember that event more and more,
*  what happens is they start to imagine, they start to pull up things from other experiences they've
*  had. And eventually, they can stitch together a vivid memory of something that never happened,
*  because they're not remembering an event that happened, they're remembering the act of trying
*  to remember what happened, and basically putting it together into the wrong story.
*  It's fascinating because this could probably happen at the, a collective level. Like this is
*  probably what successful propaganda machines aim to do, is creating false memory across
*  thousands, if not millions of minds. Yeah, absolutely. I mean, this is exactly what they do.
*  And so all these kind of foibles of human memory get magnified when you start to have social
*  interactions. There's a whole literature on something called social contagion,
*  which is basically when misinformation spreads like a virus. Like you remember the same thing
*  that I did, but I give you a little bit of wrong information, then that becomes part of your story
*  of what happened. Because once you and I share a memory, like I tell you about something I've
*  experienced and you tell me about your experience of the same event, it's no longer your memory or
*  my memory, it's our memory. And so now the misinformation spreads and the more you trust
*  someone or the more powerful that person is, the more of a voice they have in shaping that narrative.
*  And there's all sorts of interesting ways in which misinformation can happen. There's a
*  great example of when John McCain and George Bush Jr. were in a primary, and there are these polls
*  where they would do these, I guess they were like not robo calls, but real calls where they would
*  poll voters. But they actually inserted some misinformation about McCain's beliefs on taxation,
*  I think, and maybe it was something about illegitimate children, I don't really remember.
*  But they included misinformation in the question that they asked, like, how do you feel about
*  the fact that he wants to do this or something? And so people would end up becoming convinced he
*  had these policy things or these personal things that were not true, just based on the
*  polls that were being used. So it was a case where, interestingly enough, the people who were using
*  misinformation were actually ahead of the curve relative to the scientists who were trying to
*  study these effects in memory. Yeah, it's really interesting. So it's not just about truth and
*  falsehoods like us as intelligent reasoning machines, but it's the formation of memories
*  where they become visceral. You can rewrite history. If you just look throughout the 20th
*  century, some of the dictatorships with Nazi Germany, with the Soviet Union,
*  effective propaganda machines can rewrite our conceptions of history, how we remember our own
*  culture, our upbringing, all this kind of stuff. And you could do quite a lot of damage in this way.
*  And then there's probably some kind of social contagion happening there. Like certain ideas
*  that may be initiated by the propaganda machine can spread faster than others. You can see that
*  in modern day certain conspiracy theories, there's just something about them that they are like
*  really effective at spreading. There's something sexy about them to people, to wear
*  something about the human mind, eats it up and then uses that to construct memories as almost
*  as if they almost were there to witness whatever the content of the conspiracy theory is. It's
*  fascinating because once you feel like you remember a thing, I feel like there's a certainty, it
*  emboldens you to say stuff. It's not just you believe an idea is true or not. It's at the
*  core of your being that you feel like you were there to watch the thing happen.
*  Yeah, I mean there's so much in what you're saying. I mean one of the things is that
*  people's sense of collective identity is very much tied to shared memories. If we have a shared
*  narrative of the past, or even better, if we have a shared past, we will feel more socially connected
*  with each other and I will feel part of this group. They're part of my tribe if I remember the same
*  things in the same way. You brought up this weaponization of history and it really speaks
*  to I think one of the parts of memory which is that if you have a belief you will find,
*  and you have a goal in mind, you will find stuff in memory that aligns with it and you won't see
*  the parts in memory that don't. So a lot of the stories we put together are based on our perspectives.
*  Right? And so let's just zoom out for the moment from misinformation, take something even
*  more fascinating but not as scary. I was reading Thanh Viet Nguyen, but he wrote a book about the
*  collective memory of the Vietnam War. He's a Vietnamese immigrant who was flown out after
*  the war was over. And so he went back to his family to get their stories about the war.
*  And they called it the American War, not the Vietnam War. Right? And that just kind of blew
*  my mind having grown up in the US and I've always heard about it as a Vietnam War. But of course
*  they call it the American War because that's what happened. America came in. Right? And that's based
*  on their perspective, which is a very valid perspective. And so that just gives you this
*  idea of the way we put together these narratives based on our perspectives. And I think the
*  opportunities that we can have in memory is if we bring groups together from different perspectives
*  and we allow them to talk to each other and we allow ourselves to listen. I mean, right now you'll
*  hear a lot of just jammering, people going blah, blah, blah about free speech, but they just want
*  to listen to themselves. Right? It's like, let's face it, the old days before people were supposedly
*  woke, they were trying to ban two live crew or, you know, just think about letty Bruce got
*  canceled for cursing. Jesus Christ. It's like, this is nothing new. People don't like to hear
*  things that disagree with them. But if you're in it, I mean, you can see two situations in groups
*  with memory. One situation is you have like people who are very dominant, who just take over
*  the conversation and they basically what happens is the group remembers less from the experience
*  and they remember more of what the dominant narrator says. Right? Now, if you have a diverse
*  group of people, and I don't mean diverse in necessarily the human resources sense of the
*  word. I mean, diverse in any way you want to take it. Right. But diverse in every way, hopefully.
*  And you give everyone a chance to speak and everyone's being appreciated for their unique
*  contribution. You get more accurate memories and you get more information from it. Right.
*  Even two people who come from very similar backgrounds, if you can appreciate the unique
*  contributions that each one has, you can do a better job of generating information from memory.
*  And that's a way to inoculate ourselves, I believe, from misinformation in the modern world.
*  But like everything else, it requires a certain tolerance for discomfort. And I think when we
*  don't have much time and I think when we're stressed out and when we are just tired,
*  it's very hard to tolerate discomfort. And I mean, social media has a lot of opportunity for this,
*  because it enables this distributed one-on-one interaction that you're talking about where
*  everybody has a voice, but still our natural inclination, you see this on social media,
*  there's a natural clustering of people and opinions and you just kind of form these kind of bubbles.
*  I think that's, to me personally, I think that's a technology problem that could be solved. If
*  there's a little bit of interaction, kind, respectful, compassionate interaction with
*  people that have a very different memory, that respectful interaction will start to
*  intermix the memories and ways of thinking to where you're slowly moving towards truth.
*  But that's a technology problem because naturally, left our own devices, we want to cluster up in a
*  tribe. Yeah, and that's the human problem. I think a lot of the problems that come up with technology
*  aren't the technology itself as much as the fact that people adapt to the technology in
*  maladaptive ways. I mean, one of my fears about AI is not what AI will do, but what people will do.
*  I mean, take text messaging, right? It's like it's a pain in the ass to text people, at least for me.
*  And so what happens is the communication becomes very Spartan and devoid of meaning, right? And
*  it's just very telegraphic. And that's people adapting to the medium, right? I mean, look at
*  you, you've got this keyboard, right? That's like got these dome-shaped things and you've adapted
*  to that to communicate, right? That's not the technology adapting to you, that's you adapting
*  to the technology. And I think one of the things I learned when Google started to introduce
*  autocomplete in emails, I started to use it. And about a third of the time I was like,
*  this isn't what I want to say. A third of the time I'd be like, this is exactly what I wanted to say.
*  And a third of the time I was saying, well, this is good enough, I'll just go with it, right?
*  And so what happens is it's not that the technology necessarily is doing anything so bad as much as
*  it's just going to constrain my language because I'm just doing what's being suggested to me.
*  And so this is why I say, you know, kind of like my mantra for some of what I've learned about
*  everything in memory is to diversify your training data basically, because otherwise you're going to,
*  so like humans have this capability to be so much more creative than anything generative AI will put
*  together, at least right now, who knows where this goes. But it can also go the opposite direction
*  where people could become much, much less creative if they just become more and more like resistant
*  to discomfort, you know, and resistant to exposing themselves to novelty, to cognitive dissonance,
*  and so forth. I think there is a dance between natural human adaptation of technology and the
*  people that design the engineering of that technology. So I think there's a lot of
*  opportunity to create like this keyboard, things that on that are positive for human behavior.
*  So we adapt and all this kind of stuff. But when you look at the long arc of history across years
*  and decades, has humanity been flourishing? Are humans creating more awesome stuff? Are
*  humans happier? All that kind of stuff. And so there I think technology on that has been, and I
*  think, maybe hope will always be on that positive thing.
*  **Jay Larkin** Do you think people are happier now than they were 50 years ago or 100 years ago?
*  **Jay Larkin** Yes. Yes.
*  **Jay Larkin** I don't know about that.
*  I think humans in general like to reminisce about the past, like the times are better,
*  and complain about the weather today or complain about whatever today, because we,
*  there's this kind of complainy engine that's just, there's so much pleasure in saying,
*  you know, life sucks for some reason. **Jay Larkin**
*  That's why I love punk rock. **Jay Larkin**
*  Exactly. I mean, there's something in humans that loves complaining,
*  even about trivial things, but complaining about change, complaining about everything.
*  But ultimately, I think on net, on every measure, things are getting better.
*  Life is getting better. **Jay Larkin**
*  Oh, life is getting better, but I don't know necessarily that tracks people's happiness,
*  right? I mean, I would argue that maybe, who knows? I don't know this, but I wouldn't be surprised if
*  people in hunter-gatherer societies are happier. I mean, I wouldn't be surprised if they're happier
*  than people who have access to modern medicine and email and cell phones. **Jay Larkin**
*  Well, I don't think there's a question whether you take hunter-gatherer folks and put them into
*  modern day and give them enough time to adapt, they'll be much happier. The question is, in terms
*  of every single problem they've had is now solved. There's now food, there's guaranteed survival
*  shelter and all this kind of stuff. So what you're asking is a deeper sort of biological question.
*  Do we want to be, oh, we're in a Herzog movie, a happy people, life in the taiga. Do we want to be
*  busy 100% of our time hunting, gathering, surviving, worried about the next day? Maybe
*  that constant struggle ultimately creates a more fulfilling life? I don't know, but I do know this
*  modern society allows us to, when we're sick, to find medicine, to find cures, when we're hungry,
*  to get food much more than we did even 100 years ago. And there's many more activities that you
*  could perform or create of all this kind of stuff that enables the flourishing of humans at the
*  individual level. Whether that leads to happiness, I mean, that's a very deep philosophical question.
*  Maybe struggle, deep struggles necessary for happiness. Or maybe cultural connection. Maybe
*  it's about functioning in social groups that are meaningful and having time. But I do think there's
*  an interesting memory related thing, which is that if you look at things like reinforcement learning,
*  for instance, you're not learning necessarily every time you get a reward. If it's the same reward,
*  you're not learning that much. You mainly learn if deviates from your expectation of what you're
*  supposed to get. So it's like you get a paycheck every month from MIT or whatever. And you probably
*  don't even get excited about it when you get the paycheck. But if they cut your salary, you're going
*  to be pissed. And if they increase your salary, oh, good, I got a bonus. And that adaptation and
*  that ability that basically you learn to expect these things, I think, is a major source of,
*  I guess, it's a major way in which we're kind of more, in my opinion, wired to strive and not be
*  happy to be in a state of wanting. And if, you know, some people talk about dopamine, for instance,
*  being this pleasure chemical. And it's like, there's a lot of compelling research to suggest
*  it's not about pleasure at all. It's about the discomfort that energizes you to get things,
*  to seek a reward, right? And so you could give an animal that's been deprived of dopamine
*  a reward and, oh, yeah, enjoy it. It's pretty good. But they're not going to do anything to get it.
*  You know, and just one of the weird things in our research is we got into curiosity from a postdoc
*  in my lab, Matthias Gruber. And one of the things that we found is when we gave people a question,
*  like a trivia question that they wanted the answer to, that question, the more curious people were
*  about the answer, the more activity in these dopamine-related circuits in the brain we would
*  see. And again, that was not driven by the answer per se, but by the question. So it was not about
*  getting the information. It was about the drive to seek the information. But it depends on how you
*  take that. If you get this uncomfortable gap between what you know and what you want to know,
*  you could either use that to motivate you and energize you, or you could use it to say,
*  I don't want to hear about this. This disagrees with my beliefs. I'm going to go back to my echo
*  chamber. You know? Yeah. I like what you said that maybe we're designed to be in a kind of
*  constant state of wanting, which by the way is a pretty good either band name or rock song name,
*  state of wanting. That's like a hardcore band name. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's pretty good.
*  I also like the hedonic treadmill. Hedonic treadmill is pretty good. Yeah. Yeah. We could
*  use that for like our techno project, I think. You mean the one we're starting? Yeah, exactly.
*  Okay, great. We're going on tour soon. This is our announcement. We could build a false memory of a
*  show, in fact, if you want. Let's just put it all together. So we don't even have to do all the work
*  to play the show. We just create a memory of it and might as well happen because the remembering
*  self is in charge anyway. So let me ask you about, we talked about false memories, but
*  you know, in the legal system, false confessions, I remember reading 1984 where, sorry for the dark
*  turn of our conversation, but through torture, you can make people say anything and essentially
*  remember anything. I wonder to which degree there's like truth to that. If you look at
*  the torture that happened in the Soviet Union for confessions, all that kind of stuff,
*  how much can you really get people to really, yeah, to force false memories, I guess?
*  Yeah. I mean, I think there's a lot of history of this actually in the criminal justice system.
*  You might've heard the term the third degree. If you actually look it up, historically,
*  it was a very intense set of beatings and, you know, starvation and physical demands that they
*  would place on people to get them to talk. And, you know, there was certainly a lot of work in the
*  that's been done by the CIA in terms of enhanced interrogation techniques. And from what I understand,
*  the research actually shows that they just produce what people want to hear, not necessarily the
*  information that is being looked for. And the reason is, is that, I mean, there's different
*  reasons. I mean, one is people just get tired of being tortured and just say whatever,
*  but another part of it is, is that you create a very interesting set of conditions where there's
*  an authority figure telling you something that you did this, we know you did this, we have witnesses
*  saying you did this. So now you start to question yourself. Then they put you under stress. Maybe
*  they're not feeding you. Maybe they're kind of like making you be cold or, you know, exposing you to
*  music that you can't stand or something, whatever it is, right? It's like they're creating this
*  physical stress. And so stress starts to act on, you know, starts to down regulate the prefrontal
*  cortex. You're not necessarily as good at monitoring the accuracy of stuff. Then they start to get nice
*  to you and they say, imagine, you know, okay, I know you don't remember this, but maybe we can walk
*  you through how it could have happened. And they feed you the information. And so you're in this
*  weakened mental state and you're being encouraged to imagine things by people who give you a
*  plausible scenario. And at some point, certain people can be very coaxed into creating a memory
*  for something that never happened. And, and there's actually some pretty convincing cases out there
*  where you don't know exactly the truth. There's a sheriff, for instance, who came to believe that
*  he had a false memory. I mean, that he had a memory of doing sexual abuse based on,
*  you know, essentially, I think it was, you know, I'm not going to tell the story because I don't
*  remember it well enough to necessarily accurately give it to you, but people could look this stuff
*  up. There are definitely stories out there like this, where people confess to crimes that they
*  just didn't do and objective evidence came out later on. But there's a basic recipe for it,
*  which is you feed people the information that you want them to remember. You stress them out.
*  You have an authority figure kind of like pushing this information on them, or you motivate them to
*  produce the information you're looking for. And that pretty much over time gives you what you want.
*  It's really tragic that centralized power can, can use these kinds of tools to destroy lives.
*  Sad. Since there's a theme about music throughout this conversation, one of the best topics
*  for songs is heartbreak, love in general, but heartbreak. Why and how do we remember and forget
*  heartbreak? Asking for a friend. Oh, God, that's so hard to asking for a friend. I love that.
*  It's such a hard one. Well, so I mean, part of this is we tend to go back to particular
*  times that are the more emotionally intense periods. And so that's a part of it. And again,
*  memory is designed to kind of capture these things that are biologically significant.
*  And attachment is a big part of biological significance for humans, right? Human
*  relationships are super important. And sometimes that heartbreak comes with
*  massive changes in your beliefs about somebody, say if they cheated on you or something like that,
*  or regrets and you kind of ruminate about things that you've done wrong.
*  There's really so many reasons though, but you know, I mean, I've had this, I,
*  my first pet I had as, you know, was, we got her for a wedding present as a cat and
*  got it after like, but it died of FIP when it was four years old. And, you know, I just would see
*  her everywhere around the house. You know, we got another cat that we got a dog, dog eventually died
*  of cancer and the cat just died recently. And, you know, so we got a new dog because I kept seeing
*  the dog around and I was just so heartbroken about this. But I still remember the pets that died. It
*  just comes back to you. I mean, it's part of this. I think there's also something about attachment
*  that's just so crucial that drives again, these things that we want to remember. And that gives
*  us that longing sometime. Sometimes it's also not just about the heartbreak, but about the positive
*  aspects of it, right? Cause the loss comes from not only the fact that the relationship is over,
*  but you had all of these good things before that you can now see in a new light, right? And so
*  part of one of the things that I found from my clinical background that really, I think, gave me
*  a different perspective on memory is so much of the therapy process was guided towards reframing
*  and getting people to look at the past in a different way, not by imposing, changing people's
*  memories or not by imposing an interpretation, but just offering a different perspective.
*  And maybe one that's kind of more optimized towards learning and, you know, an appreciation
*  maybe or gratitude, whatever it is, right? That gives you a way of taking, I think you said it in
*  the beginning, right? Where you can have this kind of like dark experiences and you can use it as
*  training data to, you know, grow in new ways, but it's hard.
*  I often go back to this moment, this show, Louis with Louis C.K., where he's all heartbroken about
*  a breakup with the woman he loves and an older gentleman tells him that that's actually the best
*  part, that heartbreak, because you get to intensely experience how valuable this love was.
*  He says the worst part is forgetting it, is actually when you get over the heartbreak,
*  that's the worst part. So I sometimes think about that because, you know, having the love
*  and losing it, like the losing it is when you sometimes feel it the deepest,
*  which is an interesting way to celebrate the past and relive it. It sucks that you don't have a
*  thing, but when you don't have a thing, it's a good moment to viscerally experience the memories
*  of something that you now appreciate even more. So you don't believe that an owner of a lonely
*  heart is much better than an owner of a broken heart. You think an owner of a broken heart is
*  better than the owner of a lonely heart. Yes, for sure. I think so. I think so. But I'm gonna have
*  to day by day. I don't know. I'm gonna have to listen to some more Bruce Springsteen to figure
*  that one out. Well, you know, it's funny because it's like after I turned 50, I think of death all
*  the time. Like I just think that, you know, I'm in like, I have fewer, probably a fewer years ahead
*  of me than I have behind me, right? So you think about one thing, which is what are the memories
*  that I want to carry with me for the next period of time? And also about like just the fact that
*  everything around me could be, you know, I know more people who are, you know, dying for various
*  reasons. And so I'm not lots. I'm not that old, right? But you know, it's something I think about
*  a lot. And I'm reminded of like how I talked to somebody who's like, you know, who's a Buddhist.
*  I was like, you know, the whole idea of Buddhism is renouncing attachments. Some way the idea of
*  Buddhism is like staying out of the world of memory and staying in the moment, right? And they talked
*  about, you know, it's like, how do you, how do you renounce attachments to the people that you love,
*  right? And they're just saying, well, I appreciate that I have this moment with them and knowing
*  that they will die makes me appreciate this moment that much more. I mean, you said something similar,
*  right? In your daily routine that you think about things this way, right?
*  Yeah. Meditate on mortality every day. But I don't know. I, at the same time, that really makes you
*  appreciate the moment and live in the moment. And I also appreciate the full deep roller coaster of
*  suffering involved in life, the little and the big too. So I don't know. I'm the Buddhist kind of
*  removing yourself from the world or the stoic removing yourself from the world, the world of
*  emotion. I'm torn about that one. I'm not sure. Well, you know, this is where Hinduism and
*  Buddhism, or at least some strains of Hinduism and Buddhism differ. In Hinduism,
*  like if you read the Bhagavad Gita, the philosophy is not one of renouncing the world because the
*  idea is that not doing something is no different than doing something, right? So what they argue,
*  and again, you could interpret in different ways, positive and negative. But the argument is that
*  you don't want to renounce action, but you want to renounce the fruits of the action.
*  You don't do it because of the outcome. You do it because of the process,
*  because the process is part of the balance of the world that you're trying to preserve, right?
*  And of course, you could take that different ways, but I really think about that from time to time
*  in terms of like, you know, letting go of this idea of does this book sell or trying to, you know,
*  like impress you and get you to laugh at my jokes or whatever, and just be more like I'm sharing
*  this information with you and, you know, getting to know you or whatever it is. But it's hard,
*  right? It's like, because we're so driven by the reinforcer, the outcome.
*  You're just part of the process of telling the joke. And if I laugh or not,
*  that's up to the universe to decide. Yep. It's my dharma.
*  How does studying memory affect your understanding of the nature of time? So like,
*  we've been talking about us living in the present and making decisions about the future.
*  Standing on the foundation of these memories and narratives about the memories that we've
*  constructed. So it feels like it does weird things to time. Yeah. And the reason is,
*  is that in some sense, I think, especially the farther we go back, I mean, there's all sorts of
*  interesting things that happen. So your sense of like, if I ask you how different does one hour ago
*  feel from two hours ago, you'd probably say pretty different. But if I ask you, okay,
*  go back one year ago versus one year and one hour ago, it's the same difference in time. It won't
*  feel very different, right? So there's this kind of compression that happens as you look back farther
*  in time. So that it's kind of like why when you're older, the difference between somebody who's like
*  50 and 45 doesn't seem as big as the difference between like 10 and five or something, right?
*  When you're 10 years old, everything seems like it's a long period of time. Here's the point is
*  that, you know, so one of the interesting things that I found when I was working on the book,
*  actually, was during the pandemic, I just decided to ask people in my class when we're doing the
*  remote instruction. So one of the things I did was I would pull people. And so I just asked people,
*  do you feel like the days are moving by slower or faster or about the same?
*  Almost everyone in the class said that the days were moving by slower.
*  So then I would say, okay, so do you feel like the weeks are passing by slower, faster, or the same?
*  And the majority of them said that the weeks were passing by faster. So according to the laws of
*  physics, I don't think that makes any sense, right? But according to memory, it did because
*  what happened was people were doing the same thing over and over in the same context. And without
*  that change in context, their feeling was that they were in one long monotonous event. And so,
*  but then at the end of the week, you look back at that week and you say, well, what happened?
*  No memories of what happened. So it must, the week just went by without even my noticing it. But that
*  week went by during the same amount of time as an eventful week where you might've been going out,
*  hanging out with friends on vacation or whatever, right? It's just that nothing happened because
*  you're doing the same thing over and over. So I feel like memory really shapes our sense of time,
*  but it does so in part because context is so important for memory.
*  Well, that compression you mentioned, it's an interesting process. Because what I think about
*  when I was like 12 or 15, I just fundamentally feel like the same person. It's interesting what
*  that compression does. It makes me feel like it's all, we're all connected, not just amongst humans
*  and spatially, but in terms, back in time, there's a kind of eternal nature, like the timelessness,
*  I guess, to life. That could be also a genetic thing just for me. I don't know if everyone agrees
*  to this view of time, but to me, it all feels the same. Like you don't feel the passage of time or?
*  No, I feel the passage of time in the same way that your students did from day to day.
*  There's certain markers that let you know that time has passed, you celebrate birthdays and so on.
*  But the core of who I am and who others I know are events, it like that compression of my
*  understanding of the world removes time. Because time is not useful for the compression. So the
*  details of that time, at least for me, is not useful to understanding the core of the thing.
*  Maybe what it is is that you really like to see connections between things. This is really what
*  motivates me in science actually too. But it's like when you start recalling the past and seeing
*  the connections between the past and present, now you have this kind of web of interconnected
*  memories. And so I can imagine in that sense, there is this kind of the present is with you.
*  But what's interesting about what you said too that struck me is that your 16-year-old self was
*  probably very complex. And by the way, I'm the same way, but it's like it really is the source
*  of a lot of darkness for me. But you can look back at, let's say you hear a song that you
*  used to play before you would go do a sports thing or something like that. And you might not think of
*  yourself as an athlete, but once you get back to that, you mentally time travel to that particular
*  thing, you open up this little compartment of yourself that wasn't there before, right? That
*  didn't seem accessible for them. Dan Schachter's lab did this really cool study where they would
*  ask people to either remember doing something altruistic or imagine doing something altruistic.
*  And that act made them more likely to want to do things for other people. So that act of mental
*  time travel can change who you are in the present. And we tend to think of this goes back to that
*  illusion of stability. And we tend to think of memory in this very deterministic way that I am
*  who I am because I have this past, but we have a very multifaceted past and can access different
*  parts of it and change in the moment based on whatever part we want to reach for.
*  How does nostalgia connect into this? Like this desire and pleasure associated with
*  going back? Yeah. So my friend, Felipe de Brigard,
*  wrote this and it just like blew my mind where the word nostalgia was coined by a Swiss physician
*  who was actually studying traumatized soldiers. And so he described nostalgia as a disease.
*  And the idea was it was bringing these people extraordinary unhappiness because they're
*  remembering how things used to be. And I think it's very complex. So as people get older, for
*  instance, nostalgia can be an enormous source of happiness, right? And being nostalgic can improve
*  people's moods in the moment, but it just depends on what they do with it. Because what you can
*  sometimes see is nostalgia has the opposite effect of thinking those were the good old days and those
*  days are over, right? It's like America used to be so great and now it sucks. Or, you know, my life
*  used to be so great when I was a kid and now it's not, right? And you're selectively remembering
*  the things that we don't realize how selective our remembering self is. And so, you know, I live
*  through the 70s, it sucked. Partly it sucked more for me, but I would say that even otherwise,
*  it's like there's all sorts of problems going on. Gas lines, people were like, you know, worried
*  about like Russia, nuclear war, blah, blah, blah. So, I mean, it's just this idea that people have
*  about the past can be very useful if it brings you happiness in the present. But if it narrows
*  your worldview in the present, you're not aware of those biases that you have. You will end up,
*  you can end up, it can be toxic, right? Either at a personal level or at a collective level.
*  Let me ask you both a practical question and an out there question. So, let's start with the more
*  practical one. What are your thoughts about BCIs, brain computer interfaces, and the work that's
*  going on with Neuralink? We talked about electrodes and different ways of measuring the brain,
*  and here Neuralink is working on basically two-way communication with the brain. And the more out
*  there question would be like, where does this go? But more practically in the near term,
*  what do you think about Neuralink? Yeah, I mean, I can't say specifics about the company because
*  I haven't studied it that much. But I mean, I think there's two parts of it. So one is they're
*  developing some really interesting technology, I think, with these like surgical robots and things
*  like that. BCI, though, has like a whole lot of innovation going on. I'm not necessarily seeing
*  any scientific evidence from Neuralink, and maybe that's just because I'm not looking for it. But
*  I'm not seeing the evidence that they're anywhere near where the scientific community is. And
*  there's lots of startups that are doing incredibly innovative stuff. One of my colleagues, Sergey
*  Savitsky, is just like a genius in this area, and they're working on it. I think speech prosthetics
*  that are incorporating decoding techniques with AI and movement prosthetics, the rate of
*  progress is just enormous. So part of the technology is having good enough data and
*  understanding which data to use and what to do with it. And then the other part of it then is
*  the algorithms for decoding it and so forth. And I think part of that has really resulted in some
*  real breakthroughs in neuroscience as a result. So there's lots of new technologies like
*  Neuropixels, for instance, that allow you to harvest activity from many, many neurons from
*  a single electrode. I know Neuralink has some technologies that are also along these lines,
*  but again, because they do their own stuff, the scientific community doesn't see it.
*  But I think BCI is much, much bigger than Neuralink, and there's just so much innovation
*  happening. I think the interesting question which we may be getting into is I was talking to Sergey
*  a while ago about a lot of language is not just what we hear and what we speak, but also our
*  intentions and our internal models. And so are you really going to be able to restore language
*  without dealing with that part of it? And he brought up a really interesting question, which is
*  the ethics of reading out people's intentions and understanding of the world as opposed to the more
*  concrete parts of hearing and producing movements. Just so we're clear, because you said a few
*  interesting things. When we talk about language and BCIs, what we mean is getting signal from
*  the brain and generating the language, say you're not able to actually speak,
*  as a kind of linguistic prosthetic, it's able to speak for you exactly what you want it to say.
*  And then the deeper question is, well, saying something isn't just the letters, the words
*  you're saying, it's also the intention behind it, the feeling behind all that kind of stuff.
*  And is it ethical to reveal that full shebang, the context of what's going on in our brain?
*  That's really interesting. I mean, our thoughts. Is it ethical for anyone to have access to our
*  thoughts? Because right now the resolution is so low that we're okay with it, even doing studies
*  and all this kind of stuff. But if neuroscience has a few breakthroughs to where you can start
*  to map out the QR codes for different thoughts, for different kinds of thoughts, maybe political
*  thoughts, McCarthyism, what if I'm getting a lot of them communist thoughts, or however we want to
*  categorize or label it? That's interesting. That's really interesting. I think ultimately,
*  always the more transparency there is about the human mind, the better it is. But there could be
*  always intermediate battles with how much control does a centralized entity have, like a government
*  and so on? What is the regulation? What are the rules? What's legal and illegal? If you talk about
*  the police whose job is to track down criminals and so on, and you look at all the history,
*  how the police could abuse its power to control the citizenry, all that kind of stuff.
*  So people are always paranoid and rightfully so. It's fascinating. It's really fascinating.
*  We talk about freedom of speech, freedom of thought, which is also a very important liberty
*  at the core of this country and probably humanity starts to get awfully tricky when you start to be
*  able to collect those thoughts. But what I wanted to actually ask you is do you think
*  for fun and for practical purposes, we would be able to modify memories?
*  So how difficult is it to, how far away we are from understanding the different parts of the brains,
*  everything we've been talking about, in order to figure out how can we adjust this memory?
*  At the crude level from unpleasant to pleasant, you talked about we can remember the mall and the
*  people, like location of the people. Can we keep the people and change the place? Like this kind
*  of stuff. How difficult is that? Well, I mean, in some sense, we know we can do it just behaviorally,
*  right? Behaviorally, yes. I can just like tell you, give, you know, under certain conditions anyway,
*  I can give you the misinformation and then you can change the people, places and so forth, right?
*  On the crude level, there's a lot of work that's being done on a phenomenon called
*  reconsolidation, which is the idea that essentially when I recall a memory, what happens is that the
*  connections between the neurons in that cell assembly that give you the memory are going to be
*  like more modifiable. And so some people have used techniques to try to like, for instance,
*  with fear memories, to reduce that physical visceral component of the memory when it's
*  being activated. Right now, I think I've, as an outsider looking at the data, I think it's like
*  mixed results. And part of it is, and this speaks to the more complex issue, is that you don't,
*  you need somebody to actually fully recall that traumatic memory in the first place.
*  And in order to actually modify it, then what is the memory? That is the key part of the problem.
*  So if we go back to reading people's thoughts, what is the thought? I mean, people can sometimes
*  look at this like behaviorists and go, well, the memory is like, I've given you A and you produce B.
*  But I think that's a very bankrupt concept about memory. I think it's much more complicated than
*  that. And, you know, one of the things that when we started studying naturalistic memory, like memory
*  from movies, that was so hard was we had to change the way we did the studies. Because if I show you
*  a movie and I show, and I watch the same movie and you recall everything that happened, and I recall
*  everything that happened, we might take a different amount of time to do it. We might use different
*  words. And yet to an outside observer, we might have recalled the same thing. Right? So it's not
*  about the words necessarily. And it's not about how long we spent or whatever. There's something
*  deeper that is there that's this idea. But it's like, how do you understand that thought? I
*  encounter a lot of concrete thinking that it's like, if I show a model, like, you know, the visual
*  information that a person sees when they drive, I can basically reverse engineer driving. Well,
*  that's not really how it works. I once saw a talk by somebody or I saw somebody talking in this
*  discussion between neuroscientists and AI people. And he was saying that the problem with self-driving
*  cars that they had in cities as opposed to highways was that the car was okay at, you know,
*  doing the things it's supposed to. But when there are pedestrians around, it couldn't predict the
*  intentions of people. And so that unpredictability of people was the problem that they were having in,
*  you know, the self-driving car design, because it didn't have a good enough internal model of
*  what the people were, you know, what they were doing, what they wanted. What do you think about
*  that? Well, I spent a huge amount of time watching pedestrians, thinking about pedestrians, thinking
*  about what it takes to solve the problem of measuring, detecting the intention of a pedestrian.
*  Really have a human being in this particular context of having to cross the street. And it's
*  fascinating. I think it's a window into how complex social systems are that involve humans.
*  Because, you know, I would just stand there and watch intersections for hours. And what you start
*  to figure out is every single intersection has its own personality. So like, there's a history to
*  that intersection, like jaywalking, certain intersections allow jaywalking a lot more.
*  Because what happens is, we're leaders and followers. So there's a regular, let's say,
*  and they get off the subway and they start crossing on red light. And they do this every
*  single day. And then there's people that don't show up to that intersection often. And they're
*  looking for cues of how we're supposed to behave here. And if a few people start to jaywalk and
*  cross on red light, they will also follow. And there's just a dynamic to that intersection.
*  There's a spirit to it. And if you look at Boston versus New York versus a rural town,
*  versus even Boston, San Francisco, or here in Austin, there's different personalities citywide,
*  but there's different personalities area-wide, region-wide. And there's different personalities,
*  different intersections. And it's just fascinating for a car to be able to determine that.
*  It's tricky. Now, what machine learning systems are able to do well is collect a huge amount of
*  data. So for us, it's tricky because we get to like, understand the world with very limited
*  information and make decisions grounded in this big foundation model that we've built of
*  understanding how humans work. AI could literally, in the context of driving,
*  this is where I've often been really torn in both directions. If you just collect a huge amount of
*  data, all of that information, and then compress it into a representation of how humans cross
*  streets, it's probably all there. In the same way that you have a Noam Chomsky who says, no, no, no,
*  AI can't talk, can't write convincing language without understanding language. And more and more
*  you see large language models without quote unquote understanding can generate very convincing
*  language. But I think what the process of compression from a huge amount of data compressing
*  into a representation is doing is in fact understanding deeply in order to be able to
*  generate one letter at a time, one word at a time, you have to understand
*  the cruelty of Nazi Germany and the beauty of sending humans to space. And like, you have to
*  understand all of that in order to generate like, I'm going to the kitchen to get an apple and do
*  that radically correctly. You have to have a world model that includes all of human behavior.
*  You're thinking LLM is building that world model.
*  It has to in order to be good at generating one word at a time, a convincing sentence.
*  And in the same way, I think AI that drives a car, if it has enough data, will be able to form
*  a world model that will be able to predict correctly what the pedestrian does.
*  But when we as humans are watching pedestrians, we slowly realize, damn, this is really complicated.
*  In fact, when you start to self reflect on driving, you realize driving is really complicated.
*  There's like subtle cues we take about like, just this is a million things I could say, but
*  like one of them determining who around you is an asshole, aggressive drivers,
*  potentially dangerous. I was just thinking about this. Yeah. Or like, you can read it a mile. Once
*  you get become a great driver, you can see it a mile away. This guy is going to pull an asshole
*  move in front of you. Exactly. He's like way back there, but you know it's going to happen.
*  And I don't know what, because we're ignoring all the other cars. But for some reason, the asshole
*  like a red, like, like a glowing obvious symbol is just like right there, even in the periphery
*  vision. Because we're again, we're usually when we're driving, just looking forward, but we're like
*  using the periphery vision to figure stuff out. And it's like a little puzzle that we're
*  usually only allocating a small amount of our attention to, at least a cognitive attention to.
*  And it's fascinating, but I think AI just has a fundamentally different suite of sensors in
*  terms of the bandwidth of data that's coming in that allows you to form the representation
*  and perform inference on the representation you've using the representation you form.
*  For the case of driving, I think it could be quite effective. But one of the things that's
*  currently missing, even though open AI just recently announced adding memory. And I did
*  want to ask you like, how important it is, how difficult is it to add some of the memory
*  mechanisms that you've seen in humans to AI systems? I would say superficially not that hard,
*  but then in a deeper level, very hard, because we don't understand episodic memory. Right. So
*  one of the ideas I talked about in the book is one of the oldest kind of dilemmas in computational
*  neuroscience is what Steve Grossberg called the stability plasticity dilemma. Right. When do you
*  say something is new and overwrite your pre-existing knowledge versus going with
*  what you had before and making incremental changes? And so, you know, part of the problem with
*  going through like massive, you know, I mean, part of the problem of things like if you're trying to
*  design an LLM or something like that is especially for English, there's so many exceptions to the
*  rules. Right. And so if you want to rapidly learn the exceptions, you're going to lose the rules.
*  And if you want to keep the rules, you have a harder time learning the exception.
*  And so David Marr is one of the early pioneers in computational neuroscience. And then
*  Jay McClelland and my colleague, Randy O'Reilly, some other people like Neil Cohen, all these
*  people started to come up with the idea that maybe that's part of what we need in what the
*  human brain is doing is we have this kind of a actually a fairly dumb system, which just says
*  this happened once at this point in time, which we call episodic memory, so to speak. And then we
*  have this knowledge that we've accumulated from our experiences as semantic memory. So now when we
*  want to we encounter a situation that's surprising and violates all our previous expectations,
*  what happens is, is that now we can form an episodic memory here. And the next time we're
*  in a similar situation, boom, we could supplement our knowledge with this information from episodic
*  memory and reason about what the right thing to do is. Right. So it gives us this enormous amount
*  of flexibility to stop on a dime and change without having to erase everything we've already learned.
*  And that solution is incredibly powerful because it gives you the ability to learn from so much
*  less information, really. Right. And it gives you that flexibility. So one of the things I think
*  that makes humans great is having both episodic and semantic memory. Now, can you build something
*  like that? I mean, computational neuroscience people would say, well, yeah, you just record
*  a moment and you just get it and you're done. Right. But when do you record that moment?
*  How much do you record? What's the information you prioritize and what's the information you don't?
*  These are the hard questions. When do you use episodic memory? When do you just throw it away?
*  And these are the hard questions we're still trying to figure out in people.
*  And then you start to think about all these mechanisms that we have in the brain for figuring
*  out some of these things. And it's not just one, but many of them that are interacting with each
*  other. And then you just take not only the episodic and the semantic, but then you start
*  to take the motivational survival things. Right. It's just like the fight or flight responses that
*  we associate with particular things or the kind of like reward motivation that we associate with
*  certain things so forth. And those things are absent from AI. I frankly don't know if we want
*  it. I don't necessarily want a self-motivated LLM. Right. And then there's the problem of how do you
*  even build the motivations that should guide a proper reinforcement learning kind of thing,
*  for instance. So a friend of mine, Sam Gershman, I might be missing the quote exactly, but he
*  basically said, if I wanted to train a typical AI model to make me as much money as possible,
*  first thing I might do is sell my house. So it's not even just about having one goal or one objective,
*  but just having all these competing goals and objectives. Right. And then things start to get
*  really complicated. Well, it's all interconnected. I mean, just even the thing you've mentioned is
*  the moment. You know, if we record a moment, it's difficult to express concretely what a moment is,
*  like how deeply connected it is to the entirety of it. Maybe to record a moment, you have to
*  make a universe from scratch. You have to include everything. You have to include all the emotions
*  involved, all the context, all the things that built around it, all the social connections, all the
*  visual experiences, all the sensory experience, all of that, all the history that came before
*  that moment is built on. And we somehow take all of that and we compress it and keep the useful
*  parts and then integrate it into the whole thing, into our whole narrative. And then each individual
*  has their own little version of that narrative. And then we collide in a social way and we adjust
*  it and we evolve. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, well, even if we want to go super simple, right? Like Tyler
*  Bonin, who's a postdoc who's collaborating with me, he actually studied a lot of computer vision
*  at Stanford. And so one of the things he was interested in is some people who have brain
*  damage in areas of the brain that were thought to be important for memory. But they also seem
*  to have some perception problems with particular kinds of object perception. And this is super
*  controversial. Some people found this effect, some didn't. And he went back to computer vision
*  and he said, let's take the best state of the art computer vision models and let's give them the
*  same kinds of perception tests that we were giving to these people. And then he would find the images
*  where the computer vision models would just struggle and you would find that they just didn't
*  do well. Even if you add more parameters, you add more layers on and on and on, it doesn't help,
*  right? The architecture didn't matter. It was just there, the problem. And then he found those were
*  the exact ones where these humans with particular damage to this area called the periorhinal cortex
*  that was where they were struggling. So somehow this brain area was being, was important for being
*  able to do these things that were adversarial to these computer vision models. So then he found
*  that the, that it only happened if people had enough time, they could make those discriminations,
*  but without enough time, if they just get a glance, they're just like the computer vision models.
*  So then what he started to say was, well, maybe let's look at people's eyes, right?
*  So computer vision model sees every pixel all at once, right? It's not, you know, and we don't,
*  we never see every pixel all at once. Even if I'm looking at a screen with pixels, I'm not seeing
*  every pixel at once. I'm grabbing little points on the screen by moving my eyes around and getting a
*  very high resolution picture of what I'm focusing on and kind of a lower resolution information
*  about everything else. But I'm choo- I'm not necessarily choosing, but I'm directing that
*  exploration and allowing people to move their eyes and integrate that information gave them something
*  that the computer vision models weren't able to do. So somehow integrating information across time
*  and getting less information at each step gave you more out of the process. I mean,
*  the process of allocating attention across time seems to be a really important process.
*  Even the breakthroughs that you get with machine learning mostly has to do attention is all you
*  need as about attention, transform is about attention. So attention is a really interesting
*  one. Yeah. Well then like, yeah, but how you allocate that attention, again, is a really
*  important part of what you're doing. So attention again is like, is at the core of
*  like what it means to be intelligent, what it means to process the world, integrate all the
*  important things, discard all the unimportant things. Attention is at the core of it, is probably at the
*  core of memory too. There's so much sensory information, there's so much going on, so much
*  and just keep those parts and to keep those parts and then whenever there's an error to adjust the
*  model such that you can allocate attention even better to new things that would result maybe
*  maximize the chance of confirming the model or disconfirming the model that you have and
*  adjusting it since then. Yeah, attention is a weird one. I was always fascinated. I mean,
*  I got a chance to study peripheral vision for a bit and indirectly study attention through that
*  and it's just fascinating how humans, how good humans are looking around and gathering information.
*  Yeah. At the same time, people are terrible at detecting changes that can happen in the
*  environment if they're not attending in the right way, if their predictive model is too strong.
*  So you have these weird things where like the machines can do better than the people.
*  It's not that it's like, you know, so this is the thing is people go, oh, the machines can do this
*  stuff that's just like humans. It's like, well, the machines make different kinds of mistakes than the
*  people do and I will never be convinced unless I that, you know, we've replicated human. I don't
*  even like the term intelligence because it is a stupid concept, but it's like, I don't think we've
*  replicated human intelligence unless I know that the simulator is making exactly the same kinds of
*  mistakes that people do because people make characteristic mistakes. They have characteristic
*  biases. They have characteristic like, you know, heuristics that we use and those I have yet to see
*  evidence that chat GPT will do that. Since we're talking about attention,
*  is there an interesting connection to you between ADHD and memory?
*  Well, it's interesting for me because when I was a child, I was actually told my school,
*  I don't know if it came from a school psychologist. They did do some testing on me. I know for like
*  a hue and stuff like that. They, or if it just came from teachers who hated me, but they told
*  my parents that I had ADHD. And so this was of course in the seventies. So basically they said
*  you know, he has poor motor control and he's got ADHD. And so, and you know, there was social
*  issues. So like, I could have been put a year ahead in school, but then they said, oh, but he
*  doesn't have the social, it doesn't have the social capabilities. So I still ended up being like, you
*  know, an outcast even in my own grade. But then like, so then my parents said, okay, well, they
*  got me on a diet free of artificial colors and flavors because that was the thing that people
*  talked about back then. So, so I am interested in this topic because I've come to appreciate now
*  that I have many of the characteristics, if not, you know, full blown, it's like, I'm definitely
*  timeline-ness, rejection, sense of, you name it. They talk about it. It's like impulsive behavior.
*  I can tell you about all sorts of fights I've gotten into in the past, just you name it. But
*  yeah, so ADHD is fascinating though, because right now we're seeing like more and more diagnosis of
*  it. And I don't know what to say about that. I don't know how much of that is based on kind of
*  inappropriate expectations, especially for children and how much of that is based on true kind of like
*  maladaptive kinds of tendencies. But what we do know is this, is that ADHD is associated with
*  differences in prefrontal function so that attention can be both more, you're more
*  distractible. You have harder time focusing your attention on what's relevant. And so you shift too
*  easily, but then once you get on something that you're interested in, you can get stuck.
*  And so, you know, the attention is this beautiful balance of being able to focus when you need to
*  focus and shift when you need to shift. And so it's that flexibility plus stability again.
*  And that balance seems to be disrupted in ADHD. And so as a result, memory tends to be poor in
*  ADHD. But it's not necessarily because there's a traditional memory problem, but it's more because
*  of this attentional issue, right? And so, and people with ADHD often will have great memory
*  for the things that they're interested in, and just no memory for the things that they're not
*  interested in. Is there advice from your own life on how to learn and succeed from that?
*  From just how the characteristics of your own brain with ADHD and so on? How do you learn?
*  How do you remember information? How do you flourish in this sort of education context?
*  I'm still trying to figure out the flourishing per se, but education, I mean, being in science
*  is enormously enabling of ADHD. It's like you're constantly looking for new things. You're
*  constantly seeking that dopamine hit. And that's great, you know? And they tolerate your being
*  late for things. Nobody's going to die if you screw up. It's not like being a doctor or something
*  where you have to be much more responsible and focused. You can just freely follow your curiosity,
*  which is just great. But what I'd say is that I'm learning now about so many things, about how to
*  structure my activities more and basically say, okay, if I'm going to be, email is the big one
*  that kills me right now. I'm just constantly shifting between email and my activities.
*  And what happens is that I don't actually get the email. I just look at my email and I get stressed
*  because I'm like, oh, I have to think about this. Let me get back to it. And I go back to something
*  else. And so I've just got fragmentary memories of everything. So what I'm trying to do is set aside
*  a timer. Like this is my email time. This is my writing time. This is my goofing off time. And so
*  blocking these things off, you give yourself the goofing off time. Sometimes I do that. And sometimes
*  I have to be flexible and go like, okay, I'm definitely not focusing. I'm going to give myself
*  the downtime. And it's an investment. It's not like wasting time. It's an investment
*  in my attention later on. And I'm very much with
*  Cal Newport on this. He wrote deep work and a lot of other amazing books. He talks about tasks
*  switching as the thing that really destroys productivity. So switching, it doesn't even
*  matter from what to what, but checking social media, checking email, maybe switching to a
*  phone call and then doing work and switching, even switching between if you're reading a paper,
*  switching from paper to paper to paper, because curiosity and whatever the dopamine hit from the
*  attention switch, limiting that because otherwise your brain is just not capable to really load it
*  in and really do that deep deliberation. I think that's required to remember things and to really
*  think through things. Yeah. I mean, you probably see this, I imagine in AI conferences, but
*  definitely in neuroscience conferences, it's now the norm that people have their laptops out during
*  talks and conceivably they're writing notes. But in fact, what often happens if you look at people,
*  we can speak from a little bit of personal experience, is you're checking email and you're
*  or I'm working on my own talk, but often it's like you're doing things that are not paying
*  attention. I have this illusion, well, I'm paying attention and then I'm going back.
*  And then what happens is I don't remember anything from that day, it just kind of vanished,
*  because what happens is I'm creating all these artificial event boundaries. I'm losing all this
*  executive function every time I switch, I'm getting a few seconds slower and I'm catching
*  up mentally to what's happening. And so instead of being in a model where you're
*  meaningfully integrating everything and predicting and generating this kind of like rich model,
*  I'm just catching up. And so yeah, there's great research by Melina Unkafer and Anthony Wagner on
*  multitasking and people can look up that talks about just how bad it is for memory and it's
*  becoming worse and worse for problem. So you're a musician, take me through, how did you get into
*  music? Like what made you first fall in love with music, with creating music?
*  Yeah, so I started playing music just when I was like doing trumpet in school for a school band
*  and I would just read music and play and you know, it was pretty decent at it, not great,
*  but I was decent. How'd you go from trumpet to guitar, especially the kind of music you're into?
*  Yeah, so basically in high school, yeah, so I kind of was a late bloomer in music, but just
*  kind of MTV grew up with me. I grew up with MTV and so then you started seeing all this stuff and
*  then I got into metal was kind of like my early genre and I always reacted to just things that
*  were loud and had a beat like, I mean ADHD, right? Like you know, everything from Sergeant Pepper's
*  by the Beatles to like Led Zeppelin II, my dad had both, my parents had both those albums,
*  so I'd listen to them a lot and then like The Police, Ghost in the Machine and but then I got
*  into metal, Def Leppard and you know, ACDC, Metallica, went way down the rabbit hole of
*  speed metal and that time was kind of like, oh like why don't I play guitar? I can do this and
*  I had friends who were doing that and I just never got it. Like I took lessons and stuff like
*  that, but it was different because when I was doing trumpet, I was reading sheet music and this was
*  like I was learning by looking, there's a thing called tablature, you know this where it's like
*  you see like a drawing of the fretboard with numbers and that's where you're supposed to put
*  your, it's kind of like paint by numbers, right? And so I learned it in a completely different way,
*  but I was still terrible at it and I didn't get it. It's actually taken me a long time to understand
*  exactly what the issue was, but it wasn't until I really got into punk and I saw bands like,
*  I saw Sonic Youth, I remember especially and it just blew my mind because they violated the rules
*  of what I thought music was supposed to be. I was like, this doesn't sound right, these are not
*  power chords and this isn't just have like a shouty verse and then a chorus part, it's not going,
*  this is just like weird and then it occurred to me you don't have to write music the way it's,
*  people tell you it's supposed to sound. I just opened up everything for me and I was playing
*  in a band and I was struggling with writing music because I would try to write like you know, whatever
*  was popular at the time and or whatever sounded like other bands that I was listening to
*  and somehow I kind of morphed into just like just grabbing a guitar and just doing stuff
*  and I realized a part of my problem with doing music before was I didn't enjoy trying to play
*  stuff that other people play it. I just enjoyed music just dripping out of me and just you know,
*  spilling out and just doing stuff and so then I started to say, what if I don't play a chord?
*  What if I just play like notes that shouldn't go together and just mess around with stuff? Then I
*  said, well what if I don't do four beats, go na na na na, one two three four, one two three four,
*  one two three four, whatever I go, one two three four five, one two three four five and started
*  messing around time signatures. Then I was playing in this band with a great musician who was really
*  Brent Ritzel who was in this band with me and he taught me about arranging songs and it was like,
*  what if we take this part and instead of make it go like back and forth, we make it like a circle
*  or what if we make it like a straight line or a zigzag, just make it like non-linear in these
*  interesting ways and then next thing you know, it's like the whole world sort of opens up as like the
*  and then what I started to realize especially, so you could appreciate this as a musician I think,
*  so time signatures, right? So we are so brainwashed to think in four four, right? Every rock song you
*  can think of almost is in four four. I know you're a Floyd fan, so think of Money by Pink Floyd,
*  right? Yeah. You feel like it's in four four because it resolves itself but it resolves on the
*  last note of the, basically it resolves on the first note of the next measure. So it's got seven
*  beats instead of eight where the riff is actually happening. Interesting. But you're thinking in four
*  because that's how we're used to thinking. So the music flows a little bit faster than it's supposed
*  to and you're getting a little bit of prediction error every time this is happening and once I got
*  used to that, I was like I hate writing in four four because it was like everything just feels
*  better if I do it in seven four, if I alternate between four and three and doing all this stuff
*  and then it's like you just, jazz music is like that, you know they just do so much interesting
*  stuff with us. So playing with those time signatures allows you to really break it all open
*  and just, I guess there's something about that where it allows you to actually have fun.
*  Yeah, yeah and it's like, so I'm actually like a very, the genre, one of the genres we used to
*  play in was math rock is what they called it. It's just like, there's so many weird time signatures.
*  What is math? Oh interesting. Yeah so. That's the math part of rock is what, the mathematical
*  disturbances of it or what? Yeah I guess it would be like so instead of, you might go like, instead
*  of playing four beats in every measure, you go, you know and just do these things and then you
*  might arrange it in weird ways so that there might be three measures of verse and then one, you know
*  and then five measures of chorus and then two measures, so you could just mess around with
*  everything right. What does that feel like to listen to? There's something about symmetry or
*  or like patterns that feel good and like relaxing for us or whatever. It feels like home and
*  disturbing that can be quite disturbing. Yeah. So is that the feeling you would have if you were
*  keep messing, if you're math rock? I mean, yeah, yeah. That's stressing me out just listening.
*  Well yeah, yeah. Learning about it. So I mean it depends, so a lot of my style of songwriting
*  is very much like in terms of like repetitive themes but messing around with structure
*  because I'm not a great guitarist technically. It's so I don't play complicated stuff and there's
*  things you can hear stuff where it's just like so complicated, you know. But often what I find is,
*  is like having a melody or and then adding some dissonance to it just enough and then adding some
*  complexity that gets you going just enough. But I have a high tolerance for that kind of dissonance
*  and prediction. I think I have a theory, a pet theory that it's like basically you can explain
*  most of human behavior as some people are lumpers and some people are splitters, you know. And so
*  it's like some people are very kind of excited when they get this dissonance and they want to
*  like go with it. Some people are just like, no, I want to lump every, you know, I don't know, maybe
*  that's even a different thing. But it's like basically it's like I think some people get
*  scared of that discomfort and I really thrive on it, you know. I love it. What's the name of
*  your band now? The cover band I play in is a band called Pavlov's Dogs. So it's a band, unsurprisingly,
*  of mostly memory researchers, neuroscientists. I love this. I love this so much. Yeah, actually one
*  of your MIT colleagues, Earl Miller, plays bass. He plays bass. Do you play rhythm or lead? You
*  could compete if you want. Maybe we could audition you. For audition? Oh yeah. I'm coming for you,
*  Earl. Earl's going to kill me. He's like very precise. I'll play triangle or something.
*  Or is it, we're the cowbell. Yeah, I'll be the cowbell guy. What kind of songs do you guys do?
*  So it's mostly late 70s punk and 80s new wave and post-punk. Blondie, Ramones, Clash. I sing
*  Age of Consent by New Order and Love Will Terrorist. You said you have a female singer now?
*  Yeah, yeah, yeah. Carrie Hoffman and also Paula Crocks. And so they do, yeah, so Carrie does
*  Blondie amazingly well. And we do Gigantic by the Pixies. Paula does that one. Which song do you
*  love to play the most? What kind of song is super fun for you? Of someone else's? Yeah, Cover, yeah.
*  Cover, okay. And it's one we do with Pavlov's Dogs. I really enjoy playing I Want to Be Your Dog by
*  Iggy and the Stooges. Yeah, it's a good song. Which is perfect because we're Pavlov's Dogs.
*  And Pavlov, of course, was basically created learning theory. But also, Iggy and the Stooges,
*  that song, so I play and sing on it, but it's just like it devolves into total noise and I
*  fall on the floor and generate feedback. I think in the last version, it might have been that or
*  a Velvet Underground cover in our last show. I have a guitar made of aluminum that I got made.
*  And I thought this thing's indestructible, so I kind of like was just, you know,
*  moving it around, had it upside down and all this stuff to generate feedback. And I think I broke
*  one of the tuning pegs. Oh, wow. Yeah, so I managed to break an all metal guitar. Go figure.
*  A bit of a big ridiculous question, but let me ask you, we've been talking about neuroscience in
*  general. What do you, you've been studying the human mind for a long time. What do you love
*  most about the human mind? Like when you look at it, we look at the fMRI, just the scans and
*  the behavioral stuff, the electrodes, you know, the psychology aspect, reading the
*  literature on the biology side, neurobiology, all of it. When you look at it, what is most beautiful
*  to you? I think the most beautiful, but incredibly hard to put your finger on
*  is this idea of the internal model that it's like, there's everything you see and there's
*  everything you hear and touch and taste, you know, every breath you take, whatever,
*  but it's all connected by this like dark energy that's holding that whole universe of your mind
*  together, right? And without that, it's just a bunch of stuff. And somehow we put that together
*  and it forms our, so much of our experience and being able to figure out where that comes from and
*  how things are connected to me is just amazing. But just this idea of like the world in front of
*  us, we're only sampling this little bit and trying to take so much meaning from it. And we do a really
*  good job, not perfect, I mean, you know, but that ability to me is just amazing.
*  Yeah, it's an incredible mystery, all of it. It's funny you said dark energy because the same in
*  astrophysics, you look out there, look at dark matter and dark energy, which is this loose term
*  assigned to a thing we don't understand, which helps make the equations work in terms of gravity
*  and the expansion of the universe in the same way. It seems like there's that kind of thing in the
*  human mind that we're like striving to understand. Yeah, yeah, you know, it's funny that you mentioned
*  that. So one of the reasons I wrote the book amongst many is that I really felt like people
*  needed to hear from scientists and like COVID was just a great example of this because like
*  people weren't hearing from scientists. One of the things I think that people didn't get
*  was the uncertainty of science and how much we don't know. And I think every scientist lives
*  in this world of uncertainty. And when I was writing the book, I just became aware of all of
*  these things we don't know. And so I think of physics a lot. I think of this idea of like,
*  overwhelming majority of the stuff that's in our universe cannot be directly measured. I used to
*  think, haha, I hate physics. So this is physicists get the Nobel Prize for doing whatever stupid
*  thing. It's like there's 10 physicists out there. I'm just kidding. Just dishing out words. Yeah,
*  no, no, no, I'm kidding. It's just the physicists who do neuroscience could be rather opinionated.
*  So sometimes I like to dish on it. It's all love. It's all love. That's right. I, this is ADHD
*  talking. So, but at some point I had this aha moment where I was like, to be aware of that much
*  that we don't know and have a bead on it and be able to go towards it. That's one of the biggest
*  scientific successes that I could think of. You are aware that you don't know about this gigantic
*  section, overwhelming majority of the universe, right? And I think the more, what keeps me going
*  to some extent is realizing the, changing the scope of the problem and figuring out, oh my God,
*  there's all these things we don't know. And I thought I knew this because science is all
*  about assumptions, right? So have you ever read the structure of scientific revolutions by Thomas
*  Kuhn? Yes. That's like my only philosophy really that I've read, but it's so brilliant in the way
*  that they frame this idea of like, he frames this idea of assumptions being core to the scientific
*  process. And the paradigm shift comes from changing those assumptions and this idea of like finding out
*  this kind of whole zone of what you don't know to me is the exciting part. Well, you are a great
*  scientist and you wrote an incredible book. So thank you for doing that. And thank you for
*  talking today. You've decreased the amount of uncertainty I have just a tiny little bit today
*  and reveal the beauty of memory. This is fascinating conversation. Thank you for talking today.
*  Oh, thank you. It's been blast.
*  Thanks for listening to this conversation with Sharon Roggenoth. To support this podcast,
*  please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from
*  Haruki Murakami. Most things are forgotten over time. Even the war itself,
*  the life and death struggle people went through is now like something from the distant past.
*  We're so caught up in our everyday lives that events of the past are no longer in orbit around
*  our minds. There are just too many things we have to think about every day, too many new things we
*  have to learn. But still, no matter how much time passes, no matter what takes place in the interim,
*  there are some things we can never assign to oblivion, memories we can never rub away.
*  They remain with us forever, like a touchstone. Thank you for listening. I hope to see you next
*  time.
