---
Date Generated: October 24, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 3752s
Video Keywords: ['Bernie Sanders', 'alex friedman', 'lex ai', 'lex debate', 'lex freedman', 'lex fridman', 'lex friedman', 'lex interview', 'lex lecture', 'lex mit', 'lex podcast', 'lex transcript']
Video Views: 282517
Video Rating: None
Video Description: Bernie Sanders is a US Senator from Vermont and a two-time presidential candidate.
Thank you for listening ❤ Check out our sponsors: https://lexfridman.com/sponsors/ep450-sb
See below for timestamps, transcript, and to give feedback, submit questions, contact Lex, etc.

*Transcript:*
https://lexfridman.com/bernie-sanders-transcript

*CONTACT LEX:*
*Feedback* - give feedback to Lex: https://lexfridman.com/survey
*AMA* - submit questions, videos or call-in: https://lexfridman.com/ama
*Hiring* - join our team: https://lexfridman.com/hiring
*Other* - other ways to get in touch: https://lexfridman.com/contact

*EPISODE LINKS:*
Bernie's Website: https://berniesanders.com
Bernie's X: https://x.com/BernieSanders
Bernie's Instagram: https://instagram.com/berniesanders
Bernie's YouTube: https://youtube.com/@BernieSanders
Bernie's Facebook: https://facebook.com/berniesanders

Bernie's Books:
It's OK to Be Angry About Capitalism: https://amzn.to/4fiIqS3
Where We Go from Here: https://amzn.to/4eUSJMj
Bernie Sanders Guide to Political Revolution: https://amzn.to/3YkVAa4
Our Revolution: https://amzn.to/40cIbnf
Outsider in the White House: https://amzn.to/3BSfD8u

*SPONSORS:*
To support this podcast, check out our sponsors & get discounts:
*Eight Sleep:* Temp-controlled smart mattress.
Go to https://lexfridman.com/s/eight_sleep-ep450-sb
*Saily:* An eSIM for international travel.
Go to https://lexfridman.com/s/saily-ep450-sb
*Ground News:* Unbiased news source.
Go to https://lexfridman.com/s/ground_news-ep450-sb
*AG1:* All-in-one daily nutrition drinks.
Go to https://lexfridman.com/s/ag1-ep450-sb
*LMNT:* Zero-sugar electrolyte drink mix.
Go to https://lexfridman.com/s/lmnt-ep450-sb

*OUTLINE:*
0:00 - Introduction
1:40 - MLK Jr
4:33 - Corruption in politics
15:50 - Healthcare in US
24:23 - 2016 election
30:21 - Barack Obama
36:16 - Capitalism
44:25 - Response to attacks
49:22 - AOC and progressive politics
57:13 - Mortality
59:20 - Hope for the future

*PODCAST LINKS:*
- Podcast Website: https://lexfridman.com/podcast
- Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/2lwqZIr
- Spotify: https://spoti.fi/2nEwCF8
- RSS: https://lexfridman.com/feed/podcast/
- Podcast Playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLrAXtmErZgOdP_8GztsuKi9nrraNbKKp4
- Clips Channel: https://www.youtube.com/lexclips

*SOCIAL LINKS:*
- X: https://x.com/lexfridman
- Instagram: https://instagram.com/lexfridman
- TikTok: https://tiktok.com/@lexfridman
- LinkedIn: https://linkedin.com/in/lexfridman
- Facebook: https://facebook.com/lexfridman
- Patreon: https://patreon.com/lexfridman
- Telegram: https://t.me/lexfridman
- Reddit: https://reddit.com/r/lexfridman
---

# Bernie Sanders Interview  Lex Fridman Podcast #450
**Lex Fridman:** [October 23, 2024](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MzkgWDCucNY)
*  The ideas that I am talking about are ideas that are widely supported.
*  Everything that I talk about, raising them in wage, health care for all,
*  a tax system which demands the billionaires pay their fair share, those are all popular ideas.
*  But people didn't know. You got to run for president and have 20,000 people come out to
*  your rallies and win 23 states. There's hmm, well, maybe those ideas are not so crazy after all.
*  And we've got to entertain them. The establishment doesn't like that.
*  They really don't. They want to tell you, and this is their main, this is how they succeed.
*  What they say, Lex, is the world is the way it is. It always will be this way. We got the wealth,
*  we got the power. And don't think of anything else. This is the way it is. You have no power.
*  Give up. They don't say it quite that way, but that's really what the intent is.
*  And what we showed is, guess what? Running an outsider campaign, we took on the democratic
*  establishment, we came close to winning it, and we did win 23 states. And the ideas that
*  we're talking about are the ideas that working class people, young people believe in.
*  The following is a conversation with Bernie Sanders, senator from Vermont and two-time
*  presidential candidate, both times as the underdog who, against the long odds, captivated the support
*  and excitement of millions of people, both on the left and the right.
*  This is the Lex Friedman podcast. To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description.
*  And now, dear friends, here's Bernie Sanders. Growing up, did you ever think you'd be a politician?
*  Nope. Not a million years. Yeah, I know that you hate talking about yourself,
*  which is rare for a politician, I would say. What's your philosophy behind that? You like
*  talking about the issues. Yeah, I do. I mean, everybody talks about themselves. It's not about
*  me. Nice guy, not a nice guy. What politics should be about is the issues facing the people of our
*  country, the people of the world, and how we're going to address it. That's what it should be.
*  That said, there's interesting aspects to your life story. For example, in 1963, you were very
*  active in the Civil Rights Movement, got arrested even for protesting segregation in Chicago,
*  and you attended the famous march on Washington where MLK gave his I Have a Dream speech. What
*  was that like? It was extraordinary. I took a bus ride down with fellow students from the University
*  of Chicago. There was a zillion people there. I'm not sure if it was the first time I'd ever been
*  in Washington in my life, but it was a very impressive moment. What he was talking about,
*  what people very often forget about that, it was not only racial justice, it was jobs. Jobs and
*  justice, that was the name of that rally. It's something I've never forgotten.
*  What influence did he have on you? What did you learn about the way he enacted change in the world?
*  King was a very impressive guy. More impressive, I think, than people think that he was.
*  What he did is he created his movement from the bottom on up. He developed
*  real organization, grassroots organization, which put pressure on communities and officials
*  to end segregation, to open up voting patterns. I think what has to also be remembered about King,
*  which is really quite extraordinary, is he won the Nobel Peace Prize and everyone was,
*  oh, you're great, you're wonderful. But then, to the end of his life, he took on Lyndon Johnson
*  on the war in Vietnam. As soon as he did that, suddenly the editorial pages throughout America,
*  established from papers, no longer thought he was so great. In fact, the message sent out,
*  you're black, deal with civil rights. Don't worry about foreign policy, we'll take care of that.
*  But he said, if I talk about peace and nonviolence, I can't sit back and allow
*  what's going on in Vietnam to continue without speaking out. Incredible courage to do that.
*  And by the way, when he was assassinated at a fighting for the rights of AFSCME workers,
*  garbage, guys who delivered the garbage, who were treated terribly, low wages, bad working conditions,
*  they went out to support their right to form a union. That's when he got killed.
*  So, on the war front, one of the things that people don't often talk about your work in
*  politics, you gave what I think is a truly brave speech on the Iraq War in 2002, I believe.
*  You voted no on the Iraq Resolution, you voted no on the Patriot Act, and you basically predicted
*  very accurately what would happen if we go into Iraq. What was your thinking at the time
*  those speeches behind voting no on the Patriot Act on the Iraq Resolution?
*  It maybe ironically came out of maybe the war in Vietnam and the ease and lies that people told.
*  We went into Vietnam under a lie. We lost close to 60,000 Americans, millions of people
*  in Vietnam, Cambodia died as a result of that. So, you think twice about it. And then the war in
*  Iraq, you had people like Dick Cheney and others telling us, oh, they have nuclear weapons and
*  all that stuff. It's the only way we can resolve the issue. I didn't believe it. I didn't agree
*  with it. And then you're right. It turns out historically I was right.
*  What's the way to fight this thing that Martin Luther King tried to fight,
*  which is the military industrial complex? It's huge. I mean, it gets to the broader
*  issue of where we are as a nation. And what I almost uniquely in Congress talk about is the
*  fact that we are moving lex to an oligarchic form of society. And not a lot of people are familiar
*  with that term. But what it means, we talk about oligarchy in Russia. Putin is surrounded by the
*  oligarchs. Well, guess what? What do you think is happening in the United States?
*  So, what you have right now is an economy with more concentration of ownership than we've ever
*  had. All right. That means whether it's agriculture, transportation, healthcare, whatever it may be,
*  fewer and fewer massively large corporations control what's produced and the prices we pay.
*  And then you look at our political system and we don't talk about it. What is the reality of the
*  political system today? And that is that billionaires are spending huge amounts of money
*  to buy this election. In Trump's campaign, he got three multi-billionaires spending over $200
*  million. Three people. Democrats have their billionaires not quite as concentrated. But at
*  the end of the day, billionaires play an enormous role in terms of electing politicians and in
*  Washington in determining what legislation gets seen and not seen. But it's not just single
*  billionaires. It's companies with lobbyists. You got it. Let me give you one example. Lobbyists.
*  We pay in the United States by far the highest prices in the world for prescription drugs.
*  This is an issue I've been working hard on with some success. Take a wild and crazy guess. How
*  many lobbyists are there from the drug companies in Washington, DC? Well, over a thousand. Over a
*  thousand. There are a hundred members of the Senate, 435 members of the House, 535 members
*  of Congress. There are 1,800 well-paid lobbyists representing the drug companies, including former
*  leaders of the Republican and Democratic Party. That is one of the reasons why we pay the highest
*  prices in the world for prescription drugs. Military industrial complex. You got a revolving
*  door. People go from the military into the general dynamics, into Lockheed Martin and the other large
*  companies. What we see there is an institution in the Pentagon. We spend a trillion dollars a year
*  on the Pentagon. It is the only federal agency that is not able to submit to an independent audit.
*  So if you think there's not massive fraud and waste and cost overruns in the Pentagon,
*  you would be sorely mistaken. Do you think most politicians are corrupt in accepting the money,
*  or is the system corrupt, or is it a bit of both? If the corrupt means that, hey, here's $10,000,
*  vote this way. Doesn't work like that. Very, very rare occasionally. Very, very rare. That's
*  corruption. What happens is that if you are in a campaign, and right now the amount of money
*  that people have to raise, you're running for Senate in Ohio, you're talking about $50, $60 million.
*  Where the hell are you going to get that money? It's not going to be $10 donations.
*  You're going to be surrounding yourself with people who have the money. You're going to go
*  $5,000, Platinus, et cetera. So you surround yourself with those people who say, oh,
*  these are my problems. This is what I need. I need a tax break for billionaires, blah, blah, blah.
*  So you live in that world. They are your financial support. They are, in a sense,
*  your political base. So you're very cognizant of what you do in terms of not upsetting them.
*  It's not corruption in the sense of people taking envelopes with huge amounts of money to vote a
*  certain way. That very, very rarely, if ever happens. It is the power of big money to make
*  politicians dependent on those folks. That's why when I ran for president, what I'm probably
*  maybe most proud of is the fact that we received millions and millions of campaign contributions,
*  averaging $27 a piece, I think, in 2016. Have companies, lobbyists ever tried to buy you,
*  tried to influence you? We don't welcome them into our office. I do deal with these guys,
*  but it's usually on a confrontational tone. No, so they don't come into my office very often,
*  telling me they have problems. So how do we fix the system? How do we get money out of politics?
*  Like many other issues, we don't have to reinvent the wheel here. It exists in other countries.
*  If you go to, every country has their own election system, but nobody has a system where
*  billionaires can spend unlimited sums of money through super PACs to elect the candidates of
*  their choice. So first thing you got to do. One of the things, Lex, I found that the more important
*  the issue, the less discussion there is. The less important the issue, the more discussion there is.
*  A number of years ago, the United States Supreme Court in one of its more pathetic decisions passed
*  the Citizens United decision. What Citizens United decision said is, you're a multi-billionaire,
*  you want the freedom. You're a free person in a free country. You want the freedom to buy the
*  government. And how terrible it would be to deny you the freedom to spend hundreds of millions of
*  dollars on a campaign to elect the candidates. And they said, that's your freedom. And that's
*  what Citizens United is about. We've got to end that. In my view, we move to public funding of
*  elections. That means you want to run for governing, you want to run for Senate, show that you have
*  some support, get $5 contributions from X number of people to show you you're not a flake. You have
*  some support and government will pay a certain amount more and there will be a limit on the amount
*  of money that can be spent. So it'll be a real, you can run against me and I'm not going to outspend
*  you 10 to 1. That's what we should be moving toward in my view. How do we make that happen when
*  there's so much money in the system and the politicians owe to the people who paid for their
*  election? Does it have to come from the very top, essentially sort of a really strong, popular,
*  populist president? Well, you're right. You raise exactly the question. If I am getting a huge amount
*  of money from billionaires, do you think I'm going to go out and announce, I think billionaires should
*  not be involved in buying elections. I doubt that very much. So what you're going to need, and you
*  tell me if I'm missing something, but I pay attention, you don't hear either of the major
*  candidates talking about that issue, do you? I think what happens is when an individual politician
*  speaks out about it, they get punished. But I think this is a popular idea. So if a lot of them speak
*  out, that's why if it came from the top, if a president was using a very large platform
*  to basically speak out, it provides a safety blanket for the other politicians to get it all
*  out of the system. But there has to be a kind of a mass movement. Yes, it does. I mean, in every place
*  I always speak about the issue. And it always, people understand it. You're a Republican,
*  you're a Democrat, you're progressive, you're conservative. Who really believes that we are
*  democracy when billionaires can spend tens and tens of millions of dollars to buy elections?
*  So it is a very popular issue. It's important. You're right. We need political leaders to be
*  speaking out on that. But we need a grassroots movement to say, when somebody is at a town
*  meeting, you're running for the Senate, you're running for the House. What's your view on citizens
*  united? Are you prepared to vote to overturn that decision and move to public funding of elections?
*  Extraordinarily important. So many of your policy proposals are quite radical. No, they're not.
*  I beg to differ. Okay, great. Well, they're popular. So what I mean is relative to what
*  the way other politicians speak, it's usually a little bit more moderate. So from everything
*  you've learned from politics, is it better to go sort of radical, maybe we can come up with a
*  different word versus a more moderate, safe, ambiguous kind of policy. Okay, let's let's
*  talk about it. Fair enough. We talked about one issue, very important money in politics.
*  Getting money out of big money out of politics. Do you think that's a radical idea?
*  Well, I mean, yeah, it's a popular idea. It's an idea that makes sense. But in order to implement
*  it and actually make it happen requires, I mean, to flip the system upside down, right? In that
*  sense, it's radical. In that sense, it's radical. But if you go to walk down the street here and
*  you say, do you think billionaires should be able to spend as much money as they want to buy
*  politicians? I would say nine out of 10 people say that's crazy. That's not what Americans supposed
*  to be about. So that sense is certainly not radical. Let's talk about health care. Go out on the
*  street, do it, or do a poll. I've done the polling. Is health care a human right? Should every
*  American be able to go to a doctor when they need regardless of their income? You know what people
*  say? I would say about 85, 90% of the people say, of course. The idea that health care is a human
*  right available to all exists Lex in every major country on earth except the United States. So
*  you're here with me in Burlington, Vermont, right? If you got a car, go 50 miles north to Canada.
*  Walk into Canada and ask people, when you go to the hospital, how much does it cost you? Which
*  kind of bill? And they'll say, what are you talking about? It doesn't cost us anything. It doesn't
*  cost us a nickel. That's the case in virtually every country in Europe. So the idea that health
*  care should be available to all, that there should be no out-of-pocket expense because it's a human
*  right, is widespread around the world and very much agreed to in this country. Bottom line is
*  that because of our corrupt political system, we have a health care system designed not to provide
*  health care to all people to make huge profits for the drug companies and the insurance companies.
*  And that is what's happening. And we got to change that system. So I'm a strong advocate
*  and I've led the effort on Medicare for All. Okay. Let's talk about Medicare for All.
*  If you could snap your fingers today and implement the best possible health care system for the
*  United States of America, what would that look like? Well, we have a pretty good system, not great,
*  but a pretty good system in Medicare. So it's there for the elderly. And Lyndon Johnson passed
*  that in the 1960s. So huge step forward. It is being chopped away by the private insurance
*  companies through Medicare Advantage. But if you strengthen Medicare and you do away with the kind
*  of deductibles the seniors now have to pay and you do away with other stuff and you say basically
*  right now you're a senior in America, go to any doctor you want. When you're in the hospital,
*  Medicare will pay the entire bill. If you expand Medicare to cover dental, hearing and vision,
*  which it doesn't now cover, you do all of those things. And then the next thing to do is say,
*  okay, to be eligible for Medicare now you have to be 65. First year, we're going to lower it to 55.
*  Then we'll lower it to 45. Then we'll lower it to 35. Then we'll have everybody in the system.
*  So I think in a four or five year period, you can strengthen Medicare and have everybody in
*  the system. And when you do that, and this is not just me talking, a number of studies have pointed
*  this out. When you take the profit motive out of it from the insurance companies and the drug
*  companies, you can end up providing quality care to all people at no more than we're spending right
*  now. Because right now we are spending twice as much per person in healthcare as the people of
*  any other nation. Incredibly wasteful system. So the way to pay for the system is to increase taxes,
*  but you're saying if you cut that cost and increase the taxes, you're saying it's going to...
*  Here's the story. And I've gotten my share of 30 second ads attacking me on this.
*  Bernie Sanders wants to raise your taxes on healthcare. It's true, in a progressive way.
*  But right now, do you have health insurance? Yes. Okay. Somebody's paying for your health
*  insurance. It depends. If you are working, most people get their health insurance through their
*  jobs. Okay? So if you're working for a large company, your employer is paying your health
*  insurance. And by the way, that comes out of your wages. Healthcare costs in America are very high
*  and your employer will tell you, honestly, look, I can't give you more than a 3% wage increase
*  because I got a 10% increase in your healthcare costs. You want that? Or if you're a union
*  negotiating, you know what they'll say? Hey, you want decent wages? We're going to have to
*  cut back on your healthcare. That's what every union has to deal with every negotiating session.
*  So we're paying for it through employers out of pocket. We pay through it to Medicare, Medicaid,
*  Veterans Administration, et cetera. What I am proposing is really not radical. It's what
*  exists in Canada and other countries. It is publicly funded, like the police departments
*  and like libraries are, like public education. This is publicly funded in a progressive way.
*  So right now, rather than paying out of your own pocket, if you are a family, let's just say
*  you're self-employed right now and you are, you know, you want to have a couple of kids and a wife,
*  it could cost you $15,000, $20,000 a year in insurance costs. Well, that's all eliminated.
*  Will you have to pay more in taxes? Of course you will. Maybe it depends on your income level,
*  but it could be that you'd be paying $12,000 more in taxes, but not $20,000 more in premiums,
*  copayments and deductibles. You save money. So it's paying taxes rather than
*  paying money to the insurance company. You got a better deal through the tax system.
*  So the most painful thing in today's system is the surprise bills, the number one cause of bankruptcy
*  and the psychological pain that comes from that, just worrying, stressed, in debt. You got it.
*  And just basically afraid constantly of getting sick because you don't know if insurance is going
*  to cover it. And if you're not insured, you don't know how much it's going to cost. So you're not
*  going to go to the hospital even if there's something wrong with you, if there's pain and
*  all that. So you just live in a state of fear, psychological fear. That's the number one problem.
*  It's just not just financial, psychological. You got it. Look, and I think you said it very well.
*  I'm chairman of the committee that deals with this stuff. So I talked to a lot of doctors
*  and doctors in Vermont and all over this country tell me that they are astounded. People walk into
*  their offices much sicker than they should have been. And the doctor said, why didn't you come
*  in your six months ago when you first felt your symptoms? And they said, well, I have a high
*  deductible of a $10,000 deductible. I don't have any money to pay. I'm uninsured. Some of those
*  people don't make it. Other people, and this is what is totally crazy. They end up in the hospital
*  at huge expense to the system rather than getting the care they need when they needed it. So that
*  is how crazy, give you another example of it. We pay the highest prices in the world for
*  prescription drugs. One out of four Americans can't afford the drugs their doctors prescribe.
*  So you walk into the doctor's office and they say, okay, Lex, you got this, that, and the other
*  thing, here's your prescription. You can't afford to fill it. What happens? You get sicker. You end
*  up in the emergency room, which is an extremely expensive proposition. Or you end up in the
*  hospital rather than dealing with the problem when it occurs. And what is not talked about,
*  I mentioned earlier how we don't talk about some of the major issues. The estimate is that some
*  60,000 people in America die every single year unnecessarily because they can't get to a doctor
*  when they need because of financial reasons. And you want to hear it even crazier. One out of four
*  people who get cancer treatment in this country either go bankrupt or deplete their financial
*  resources or their family. So your point is right. If somebody diagnoses you with cancer,
*  you're scared to death, you're worried about how you're going to live, you're going to die,
*  what's going to happen. And then on top of that, you got to worry about whether your family goes
*  bankrupt. How insane and cruel is that? So to me, I think healthcare is what unites us all.
*  Everybody has family, they get sick, we'll get born, we all die, we all want care. And we all
*  have got to come together to create a system that works for all of us, not just the drug companies
*  or the insurance companies. There's just so many stories and not even the horrific stories,
*  there's countless horrific stories, but just basic stories of cost. Like my friend,
*  Dr. Peter Atiyah has this story where he happens to be wealthy so he can afford it, but he had to
*  take his son to the emergency room and the son was dehydrated and the bill was $6,000. They just
*  did a basic test and gave him an IV, a basic thing. And he has really good insurance and the
*  insurance covered $4,000 of it. So he had to, at the end, pay $2,000 for a basic emergency room
*  visit. And there's a lot of families for whom that one visit for such a simple thing would be
*  just financially devastating. And you know what? People know that. And you know what they say?
*  I don't feel well today. Something's wrong. I ain't going to go to that emergency room
*  because I don't want a $6,000 bill. And what happens? He had insurance that paid two-thirds
*  of it, right? So what happens if he didn't have money? He'd be had by bill collectors for the
*  rest of his life. So it is a disgusting system. It is an inhumane system. But the insurance
*  companies and the drug companies are very powerful and they make a lot of campaign contributions,
*  have a lot of lobbyists, and we are where we are. But I think the American people want
*  fundamental changes there. So that's another good example of a really popular idea
*  that is not implemented because of the money in politics. You got it. That's a wonder. And I'll
*  tell you that not only is it not implemented because of money, it's not even discussed.
*  All right. So I'm saying here, and no one disputes me, we are spending twice as much per person on
*  healthcare, right? And yet 85 million Americans are uninsured or underinsured and our life
*  expectancy is lower than virtually every other major country. Do you think that might be an
*  issue that we'd be discussing? Again, if a single politician discusses it, they get punished for it.
*  So there needs to be a mass movement and probably, I mean, from my perspective, it has to come from
*  the very top. It has to come from the president. And the president has to be a populist president
*  where they don't care about the parties with the rich people. They just speak out because they know
*  it's a popular message and they know it's the right thing. So speaking of that, you had a historic
*  campaign run for president in 2016. And in the eyes of many people, mine included, you were
*  screwed over by the DNC, especially the WikiLeaks emails showed. What's your just looking back
*  feelings about that? Are you angry? Are you upset?
*  Yeah, of course I'm angry and of course I'm upset. But when you take on, in this case,
*  the democratic establishment, who have controlled that party forever,
*  the moneyed interests of the democratic party, you're taking on corporate America,
*  when you're taking on the corporate media. And when you're calling for a political revolution
*  that creates a government that works for all and not just the few, the opposition is going to be
*  extraordinary. But what I am extremely proud of from that campaign in 2020 as well,
*  is that we took on the anointed candidate of the establishment. And we showed, despite the fact the
*  entire establishment, I had in the Senate, I had one supporter. There were 50 Democrats,
*  I had one supporter, I had no governor supporting me, I think, maybe a few people in the house.
*  But we took on the whole political establishment and we did, you know, got millions of votes and
*  the ideas that we brought forth were ideas that they had to eventually deal with in one way or
*  another. And if you look at the American rescue plan, which I'm proud to have helped write,
*  during the midst of COVID, a lot of the ideas that we fought for were implemented in that
*  bill and I want to make them obviously permanent. And you almost won and a lot of people thought
*  that you would win against Donald Trump. I think we would have. I think we would have.
*  You know, I think Trump is a very, you know, I think he's a little bit crazy between you and me,
*  but he is a smart politician and he's appealing to a lot of the anger that working class people
*  feel. And you know what? Working class people should feel angry, but they should make sure
*  that their anger is directed in the right direction and not against people who are even
*  worse off than they are, which is what demagogues like Trump always do. So, you know, I think we had,
*  as I went around the country then and now, we have a lot of support from working class people
*  who understand that there is something wrong. And this is an incredible fact that no one talks about.
*  All right. I'm going to ask you a question. Are you ready for this Lex? Let's go. Here we go.
*  Over the last 50 years, there's been a massive increase in worker productivity as a result of
*  technology, right? Everyone agrees with that. And it's, I don't know exactly what is,
*  but the worker today is producing a lot more than the worker 50 years ago doing something similar.
*  Is the worker today in real inflation accounted for dollars making more money than that worker
*  50 years ago? Well, there's a lot of close arguments there, but your point is well taken.
*  It's either the same or a little bit higher or a little bit lower, depending on the statistics.
*  It has not increased significantly and the wealth inequality has increased significantly.
*  That is the point. So you would think that if a worker is producing a lot more, that worker
*  would be better off, would be working lesser hours, et cetera. That hasn't been the case.
*  And what has happened in that 50 years is according to the Rand Corporation,
*  there has been a 50 trillion, trillion with a T, redistribution of wealth from the bottom 90%
*  to the top 1%. So you've got CEOs today making 300 times more than their workers.
*  You've got three people on top owning more wealth than the bottom half of American society.
*  So that's why people are angry and they're worried that their kids may have a lower standard of
*  living than they in the wealthiest country in the history of the world. So there's a lot of anger
*  out there. And I think we tap some of that anger in a constructive way, essentially saying, you
*  know what? We don't need so few to have so much in wealth and power. Let's distribute it more
*  fairly in America. I got to get back to 2016 because it's such a historic moment. So there's
*  a lot of fans of yours that wanted you to keep fighting because you forgave in the end the
*  establishment and joined them in support. And your fans wanted you to keep fighting for a takeover,
*  for a progressive takeover of the Democratic Party. If you just look back and had to do it
*  all over again, what would you do differently? Well, by the way, in terms of a takeover of the
*  Democratic Party, we did try. Do you know who Keith Ellison is? Keith is now the attorney general
*  of the state of Minnesota. He's doing a great job, really, one of the outstanding attorney
*  generals in the country. And Keith was then a member of Congress. And we ran Keith to become
*  the head of the DNC and the establishment from the president of the United States on down went
*  crazy. And they beat him by a few votes, not a whole lot. So it's look, you're faced and you know,
*  that's the exact same position that many of us are in right today. So people say, well, why did you
*  support Hillary Clinton? Yeah, what's the alternative? Donald Trump. I think Donald Trump is an extremely
*  dangerous person trying to undermine American democracy. So I can't support him. You know,
*  Hillary Clinton, obviously, his views are very, very different than mine. But that in that moment,
*  you know, that's where politics becomes really tricky. And it ain't easy. And, you know, sometimes
*  you have to do things that you're not really all that excited about. But I think it was right to
*  try to do what I could to prevent Trump from getting elected. And in 2020, I did the same with
*  Biden and we had more success with Biden than we had with Clinton. Well, there's this interesting
*  story about a long time coming meeting between you and Obama in 2018, I believe. So Ari Rabenhaft,
*  who was a former deputy campaign manager wrote a great book, I would say about you called The
*  Fighting Soul on the Road with Bernie Sanders. And he tells many great stories, but one of them is
*  your meeting with Obama. And he says that Obama told you, Bernie, I wish I could do a good Obama
*  impression. Bernie, you're an Old Testament prophet, a moral voice for our party giving
*  us guidance. Here's the thing though, prophets don't get to be king. Kings have to make choices,
*  prophets don't. Are you willing to make those choices? Basically, Obama's making the case that
*  you have to sort of moderate your approach in order to win. So was Obama right? Look, and again,
*  that's why politics is very, very fascinating. You know, sometimes you can run and lose and you
*  really win if your goal is not just individual power, but transforming society. One of my heroes,
*  you mentioned Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., who is one of my heroes. Another one of my heroes is
*  Eugene Victor Debs. Did that ring a bell? Yeah, yes. Okay. For many reasons, yes. All right.
*  Debs, many listeners may not know who Debs was. Debs was a union organizer in the early 1900s,
*  helped form the American Railway Union, ran for president, I think, five times,
*  ran the last time while he was in a jail cell because of his opposition to World War I and got
*  a million votes doing that. Debs lost badly in every race that he ran in. 1932, Franklin
*  Delano Roosevelt ran for president, and much of what Roosevelt ended up doing was at least some
*  of what Debs had talked about. Debs helped lay the groundwork for ideas. So sometimes you can
*  lose and win if you're into transforming society. What my view is, where I disagree with Obama,
*  is I think you have got to raise consciousness among ordinary people. And when people know
*  what's going on and are prepared in an organized way to fight for change, they can make incredible
*  changes. And we've seen that in recent years. Today we take for granted, we have a woman running
*  for president of the United States, I'm supporting. We have had other women running for president. We
*  have women governors and senators. Not so many years ago in the United States Senate, there were
*  98 men, two women. Even before that, 1920, it was when women got the right to vote. How did that
*  change? How did women's role in society change? It changed because women and their male allies stood
*  up in forts. Gay rights, old enough to remember that anybody I knew who was gay, you think they
*  would talk about it? Come out about it? No, they wouldn't. That's changed. We have seen, in terms
*  of civil rights, massive changes. Change happens when people at the grassroots level demand that.
*  We talked about healthcare a moment ago. We will get universal Medicare for all when millions of
*  people make it clear that's what they want. So I believe politics starts at the grassroots level,
*  and that's how you got to bring about change. So just to go back to Obama, though, in many ways,
*  he too is a singular historic figure in American politics who has brought about a lot of change.
*  He's a symbol I think that will be remembered for a long time. What do you admire most about Obama?
*  I know him. We're not best friends, but I know him well, and we chat every once in a while.
*  First of all, don't underestimate what it was in 2008 to be the first black president in the
*  history of this country. I think few would deny that he's an extraordinarily intelligent guy,
*  very, very articulate, one of the best speakers that there is in America, and that he and his
*  family, and again, it's a lot harder than it looks. He and his family, for eight years,
*  that's his wife Michelle and his kids, really held that office in a way that earned, I think,
*  the respect of the American people, even when people disagree with him politically.
*  So he deserves it. And again, don't ever underestimate. I think years ago,
*  there were people who said a black president in our lifetimes, never going to happen,
*  can't happen, too racist to the country. He did it, and that is a huge accomplishment.
*  And I think he has had some significant achievements in his presidential tenure. He and I
*  did disagree on a number of issues. I think he will tell you, I think his public stance is that,
*  yeah, if you had to start all over again, he would do Medicare for all, single payer.
*  But where we are right now, the best he could do is the Affordable Care Act. Well, we disagree on
*  that. And we disagree on other things. But I think he deserves an enormous amount of credit for what
*  he has accomplished. And he, like you, also gave a damn good speech opposing the Iraq War before
*  running for president. And that takes courage. Yes, it does.
*  But then it also shows that once again, to office, it's not so easy to oppose or to work against
*  the military industrial complex. It is very hard. People do not fully
*  appreciate how powerful the establishment is, whether it is the healthcare industry,
*  whether it's the military industrial complex, whether it's the fossil fuel industry.
*  These people have unlimited amounts of money. They are very smart lobbyists in Washington,
*  DC. And they are very, very greedy people. They want it all.
*  I have to ask you about capitalism, the pros and cons. So you wrote a book,
*  It's Okay to Be Angry about Capitalism. That is a thorough, rigorous criticism of,
*  I would say, hyper capitalism. Yes, that's right.
*  A certain kind of capitalism that you argue that we are existing in today in the United States. But
*  a lot of people would attribute to capitalism all the amazing technological innovations
*  over the past 70 plus years that have contributed to increase in quality of life, in GDP,
*  in decrease in poverty, decrease in infant mortality, increase in expected life,
*  life expectancy. So how do you see the tension, the pros of capitalism and the cons of capitalism?
*  Some of my European friends, they say, Bernie, in the United States, you are considered to be
*  very radical. If you were here in France or Denmark or someplace, you would be kind of
*  a mainstream left guy. Not all that radical. So this is what I think. I think the best that
*  we could do right now, where we are right now, is to create a society which does two things.
*  It encourages innovation. But at the same time, it makes sure that all people in a wealthy nation
*  have a decent standard of living. In some countries, if you look at Scandinavia,
*  and this shocks people because we don't talk about this at all. So in Scandinavia, it has been the
*  case, Denmark, Finland, Norway, for years that people have health care. That's not a big deal.
*  You end up in the hospital, so what? They don't pay a bill. You have, and this shocks people,
*  in America right now, we have people who get one week, two weeks off paid vacation. Sometimes
*  we get nothing. There are people out there who have no vacation at all. In Germany, you get
*  six weeks paid vacation and other holidays as well. People are shocked by that. In America,
*  we don't have paid family and medical leave. The only major country not to do it.
*  Other countries, your wife gets sick, you stay home with her, your kids get sick, not a big deal.
*  You get a certain amount of paid family and medical leave. Of course, the prescription drugs
*  are far more affordable. So what you want to do is create what's called a social safety net.
*  That means, I don't care what your income is, of course you're going to have health care is
*  the human right. Of course you're going to have housing that is affordable. Of course your kids
*  are going to have great quality education from child care to university without much cost. Every
*  country has a little bit different, but there are countries in the world right now, I think in Germany,
*  I think college is now tuition free, as I recall, for obvious reasons. They want to have the best
*  educated workforce they can. So in terms of government playing a role in a civilized
*  democratic society, providing all basic needs, health care, education, housing, retirement benefits.
*  Yes, that is what we've got to do. Now, does that mean then that the government is going to
*  run every mom and pop store in the corner? Of course not. You want innovation, you want to go
*  out and start a business, produce a product, good luck to you, make money. But on the other hand,
*  in terms of even making money, we want you to be able to do that, come up with good products,
*  good services. But do I think you should end up with a hundred billion dollars? I don't.
*  And you know what's funny, I did an interview with Bill Gates, who is I think the third wealthiest guy
*  in the country, struggling behind Musk and Bezos, I think. And he's only worth a hundred plus billion,
*  but he gets by. And I said to him, Bill, he was supposed to ask me questions. I asked him the
*  question, Bill, tell me something. You know, you're an innovator with Microsoft and all that stuff.
*  Did you know that you'd become a multi-billionaire? And was that motivated you? That one motivated
*  you? And he said, no. And I believe he was honest. He said, I love doing what I love programming.
*  I was a kid. He started doing it. He loved it. He was motivated by it. Do you think that there are
*  scientists out there who work in day and night trying to develop drugs to deal with Alzheimer's
*  or cancer? That they're motivated, oh boy, if I come up with this drug, I'm going to become a
*  billionaire? So I think, you know, we want to reward success. Fine. But you don't need a billion
*  dollars. We want people to get satisfaction from what they accomplish, the work they're doing,
*  whether it's cleaning the street or developing a new drug. So I think we have gone a little
*  bit too far. And you're right in talking about the book was an attack on, I call it hypercapitalism
*  or ubercapitalism. But right now, and this is not an American issue, this is a global issue.
*  You know, it's not an accident that Musk is over there in Saudi Arabia talking to the,
*  you know, trillionaire families in the mid-east. These guys that were Putin and his friends,
*  you got probably not more than, you know, five, 10,000 extraordinarily wealthy families who have
*  unbelievable economic power over 7 billion people on this planet. Well, Elon Musk is actually an
*  interesting case because he's investing all the money back into the businesses. So I think there
*  is a balance to be struck. And you just spoke to it, which is we can still celebrate even big
*  companies that are bringing wealth to the world that are building cool stuff that are improving
*  quality of life. But we can question of why is it that the working class does not have a living wage
*  in many cases, and sort of trying to find that balance? That's right. That is the story. Look,
*  I am no great fan of Elon Musk, especially in the role that he's playing right now in Trump's
*  campaign. But is he a brilliant guy? Of course he is. Does he work like a dog? Of course he does.
*  Does he come up with these incredible innovations in companies? Yes, he does. Does he sell your
*  credit for that? Yeah, he does. But, you know, even in terms of encouraging innovation, I would hope
*  that we are focusing on the important issues. I would love to see great innovators
*  figure out how we build the affordable housing that we need, come up with the great drugs that
*  we need to solve many of the terrible illnesses that plague people, climate change for God's
*  sakes. All right. Do we need innovation? You know, we're making some progress in this country.
*  Should we do more? What kind of technologies out there can really cut back on carbon emissions?
*  So, you know, I hope we focus on some of the most important issues that impact humanity.
*  But, you know, reward innovators, I don't have a problem with that, but I do have a problem
*  when three people end up owning more wealth at the bottom half of American society.
*  Maybe you can briefly speak to something you tweeted recently about Donald Trump going to
*  McDonald's and the minimum wage, I believe, of seven and a half dollars. Can you just speak to
*  that tweet? Look, nothing new. Trump didn't invent it. That's called a photo opportunity. I've done
*  one or two in my life too. So you go to a place, he puts on an apron, he got old Donald Trump,
*  just another McDonald's worker. But anyhow, he was so blind. He did his photo op. That's fine.
*  Kamala Harris was in North Carolina handing out food to people who were victims of the
*  hurricane. Fine. That's what politicians do. But some reporter asked them, they said, you know,
*  Mr. Trump, are you for raising the minimum wage? And that was a fair question because she got,
*  I don't know how many, but many, many thousands of McDonald's workers and millions of other
*  American workers right now are trying to get by on nine, 10, 11 bucks an hour. Federal minimum wage
*  is seven and a quarter. You have people working at McDonald's right now for sure who are working
*  with 12, 13 bucks an hour. So the reporter said, how, you know, what do you think about raising
*  the federal minimum wage? And he's, oh, these are great workers. I love McDonald's. So forth.
*  He didn't answer the question. Well, I think that in the richest country in the history of the world,
*  if you work 40 hours a week, you should not be living in poverty. And that means we should have
*  a federal minimum wage, not absurdly seven and a quarter an hour, but in my view, $17 an hour.
*  Will that solve all the economic problems for working class people? No, it won't. It'll help.
*  It'll help. Since running for president, you've often been attacked, especially from the right
*  about being worth, I believe, $2 million and owning three houses. So from my perspective,
*  the answer to that is most of your wealth has been earned from writing books and selling those
*  books. And you are one of the most famous politicians in the world. And so your wealth
*  and the context in comparison to other people of that fame level and other politicians is actually
*  quite modest. So what's your response usually to those attacks? Do I own three residences? Yeah,
*  I do. I live here in Burlington, Vermont. We live in a middle-class neighborhood, nice house.
*  Guess what? I'm a United States Senator and I own a home in Washington, D.C. as do most centers.
*  You live there year after year. When I first went to, actually, when I was in Congress for 16 years,
*  I rented all the time, but I got elected. Okay, got a six-year term. You know what? Let's buy a
*  house. So we bought a house. And guess what? Like many thousands of people in the state of Vermont,
*  I have a summer camp. It's a nice one on Lake Champlain. That's it. Now, how did I get the money?
*  You're right. I wrote two bestselling books, including this book on capitalism,
*  was New York Times bestseller for a while. And also another book was a youth book. And that's,
*  and I make, I don't know, 175,000 a year. And that's more or less how I became the
*  zillionaire that I am. I should also mention that sometimes the word mansion is used. I think your
*  residences are quite modest, at least from my perspective.
*  Yeah, normal houses in Vermont. They're not, you know, they're middle-class houses, very nice
*  house. So when you started in politics, I read you were worth $1,100.
*  That much? Yeah, that much. That's right. Has the increase in wealth changed your ability to relate
*  to the working class? Well, that's a good question. And obviously growing up in a working-class family
*  has been maybe the most singularly significant aspect of my politics. It's, you know, I grew up
*  without money in a family that lived in a rent-controlled apartment in Brooklyn, New York.
*  So that has impacted me. I'll tell you, I don't really give a damn about money. I drive a car
*  that's 11 years old, you know, it's an old car and money. Here's my jewelry. It's a solar watch
*  in my wedding ring. That's about it. I don't have a Rolex watch. Would not be interested in it.
*  But I'll tell you what has impacted me. My wife, who also grew up in a working-class family,
*  will tell you the same. We don't worry. You raise that issue. You know, if we have to go to the
*  doctor, if our kids have to go to the doctor, we go to the doctor. I don't stay up nights worrying.
*  I used to, there was a time I have to worry about how to pay my electric bill. I don't worry about
*  that anymore. So what has happened, that stress, that economic stress of not worrying about a
*  financial disaster, that's gone. And that is enormous. I, you know, maybe as much or more
*  than any other member of the Senate, work hard, not only for, but with working-class people.
*  I'm chairman of the committee that deals with labor issues. We have been involved
*  probably in dozens of strikes all over this country. I've been on picket lines.
*  So, you know, I do my best. It's a very easy trap to fall into. You can get separated from ordinary
*  people and their struggles. Not hard to do. I try as hard as I can not to do that.
*  So sometimes people say, can money buy happiness? I think I agree with you. That worry, sort of
*  being able to fill up your car and not worry about how much it's going to cost, or be able to get
*  food for dinner and not worry about how much it's going to cost. Or even, you know, I've been very,
*  I've been poor most of my life, but I've been very fortunate recently to have enough wealth to not
*  worry about healthcare, to have insurance and be able to afford an emergency room visit.
*  And that worry is just such a giant lift off your shoulders.
*  Lex, I think you said it very well. I remember even to, and I saw this change in myself.
*  When I used to go out and I'd do the grocery shopping, my wife does a lot of the cooking,
*  I do the grocery shopping. I used to look at the prices of everything. I do that less now.
*  You know, I said, what the hell, so what? It costs 50 cents more for this can of stuff, so what?
*  But that's a luxury you have when you don't have to worry about that. And I don't have to worry
*  about it. But your point is, again, to me, I don't like big fancy cars or big fancy homes.
*  Don't go on. My wife will tell you we've not been on a real vacation for God knows
*  how long because I work pretty hard. But the major thing about having money,
*  which is enormously important, is just what you said. I don't have to worry. If somebody in my
*  family gets sick, I don't have to worry about it. I don't have to worry about putting food on the
*  table or paying the mortgage. So that's what money has done. Okay. Let me ask you about
*  the future of the Democratic Party. So one of the biggest impacts you've had
*  is you've been the fuel, the catalyst for the increase of the progressive caucus,
*  the progressive movement within the Democratic Party. Do you think that is the future,
*  the progressives, even democratic socialist leaders will take over the party?
*  That is the most important question regarding, to my mind, American politics.
*  One of the successes that we've had, and I'm proud to have played a role in this,
*  is that if you go to the House of Representatives right now, you will see almost 100 members of the
*  progressive caucus led very well by a woman from Washington, Pramila Jayapal, does a great job.
*  There's people like Alexandra Ocasio-Cortez, Iniel Anwar and many others. Many of them are young,
*  often women, people of color, and many of them come from working class backgrounds.
*  So what we have been able to do in recent years, elect a number of strong progressives who
*  represent working families very, very effectively. The struggle in the Democratic Party is between
*  the corporate wing and the progressive wing. And the corporate wing takes a whole lot of money,
*  sees its salvation in getting a whole lot of money from wealthy individuals and large corporations,
*  and is not very vigorous in my view in representing the needs of working class people.
*  If they were, we would have health care for all. We would have a minimum wage that was a living
*  wage. We would not have a housing crisis. We would not have a tax system in which billionaires pay
*  an effective tax rate that is lower than a truck driver or nurse. So I think one of the reasons
*  that Trump has had political success is not so much his ideas. Most working class people don't
*  think we should give tax breaks to billionaires or worry about the size of Arnold Palmer's genitalia.
*  But they are angry. People are angry. And the Democrats have not responded effectively to
*  that anger. So the struggle that we are waging right now is the future of the Democratic Party.
*  Will it be a party of the working class and represent working class issues, whether you're
*  black or white or Latino or Asian or whatever you may be, or will it be a corporately dominated party?
*  That's the struggle we're in right now. Did you consider running in 2024? From my perspective,
*  I would have loved it if you ran. I think you would have had a great chance of
*  winning not just the primary, but the presidency. I gave it about five minutes thought to it.
*  And the reason was we have a slogan in the progressive movement, it's not about me,
*  it's about us. And to have taken on Biden, who in my view on domestic issues has been quite strong,
*  would have really split the Democratic Party and laid the groundwork for an easy Trump victory.
*  And that I did not want to see. So sometimes in life, and I know that a lot of younger people
*  don't agree with me, but you got to make choices which are painful.
*  So I strongly supported Biden because I liked his domestic record. He's done some good things
*  against a lot of opposition. And I'm supporting Kamala right now. But I'm doing my best to see
*  that a dangerous guy like Donald Trump does not become president.
*  And the hope for you is that there will be future candidates that are populous,
*  that are progressive.
*  Yes, absolutely.
*  Let me ask you about AOC. She's become one of the most influential voices for the progressive
*  cause in the United States. You two had a great conversation on your podcast. And in general,
*  you work together. So what's to you is most impressive about her?
*  I really like Alex Ernst here a whole lot. She is a young woman who comes from a working class
*  background. She helped the mother clean houses. She was a bartender in the Bronx, New York.
*  And I'm very proud that my campaign for president inspired her to run. And she ran on a
*  progressive working class program. And she took on one of the more powerful guys,
*  a guy named Joe Crowley, who was pretty high up in the Democratic Party.
*  And she knocked on doors. She had no money. She did a very strong grassroots effort.
*  And I appreciate that. So that's number one. I like what she stands for. She's incredibly
*  smart. And she has that certain charisma that maybe you're born with it, maybe you develop it.
*  A couple of years ago, she came up here to Vermont. This was the time she and her partner,
*  Riley, came up. And we were out in the street. And people saw her. And they said,
*  oh, Congresswoman. And she just smiled. And she had an approach to people, which was
*  beautiful. I mean, it wasn't phony. It was real. But to be a politician, you got to know how to,
*  you know, you could be a great intellectual, but you can't relate to people. She relates well to
*  people. And so I think both from a personality perspective, from an intellect perspective,
*  from an ideological perspective, she helped create the Green New Deal concept, the need to create
*  jobs as we transform our energy system away from fossil fuel, strong advocate for Medicare
*  for all workers rights. So I'm a big fan of Alexandria. What do you think is the most
*  powerful, enduring impact you've had on American politics? Looking back, you've been in it for
*  quite a bit. Well, you know, I don't know if I can give you a singular answer. You know, I was
*  mayor of this city and proud of what we accomplished here. Proud of my accomplishments as a U.S.
*  Senator, you know, when COVID was devastating this country and we had a massive economic downturn
*  as chairman of the Budget Committee, I helped write the American Rescue Plan, which put a lot
*  of money into people's pockets. We cut childhood poverty by 40% by providing a child tax credit.
*  We kept hospitals going. We kept colleges going, kept people from getting evicted,
*  helped get public health out, that people getting the vaccines. You know, I'm proud of that. But at
*  the end of the day, I think what I have shown is that the ideas, this gets back to the early
*  part of this conversation, the ideas that I am talking about are ideas that are widely supported.
*  You know, so when, you know, Donald Trump says, oh, Bernie Sanders is a far left. You know, it's
*  like I'm some kind of extremist coming up with ideas that nobody supports. Everything that I talk
*  about, raising them in ways, healthcare for all, a tax system which demands the billionaires pay
*  their fair share. Those are all popular ideas, but people didn't know. You got to run for president
*  and have 20,000 people come out to your rallies and win 23 states. They say, hmm, well, maybe those
*  ideas are not so crazy after all. And we've got to entertain them. The establishment doesn't like
*  that. They really don't. They want to tell you, and this is their main, this is how they succeed.
*  What they say, Lex, is the world is the way it is. It always will be this way. We got the wealth.
*  We got the power. And don't think of anything else. This is the way it is. You have no power.
*  Give up. They don't say it quite that way, but that's really what the intent is.
*  And what we showed is, guess what? You know, running an outsider campaign, we took on the
*  democratic establishment. We came close to winning it, and we did win 23 states. And the ideas that
*  we're talking about are the ideas that working class people, young people believe in.
*  Yeah, you showed that it's possible to win. And that's an idea that will resonate for decades.
*  And out of that came dozens of candidates now in the House of Representatives,
*  people on city council, people on state legislature who did win.
*  So we mentioned about the worry of getting sick, the worry of life that many people in the working
*  class are suffering from. But there's also the worry that we all experience of the finiteness
*  of life. Do you ponder your own mortality? Are you afraid of it?
*  Well, when you're 83, it does come across.
*  All right.
*  Yeah, of course I do. And-
*  Are you afraid of it?
*  No, I'm not afraid of death. What I am afraid of, I think, is infirmity. I have been,
*  knock on wood, this is wood, I think, reasonably healthy with an exception. I had a heart attack
*  five years ago. And what blew me away was that my body failed me for the very first time in my life.
*  That was stunning to me, that suddenly I was in a hospital bed.
*  I have a great deal of compassion for people as we speak who are in nursing homes,
*  having a hard time walking, maybe your mental agility is slipping a little bit. That's tough.
*  That's what worries me. We are all going to die and that's that. So I'm not afraid of that. But
*  that aspect of getting older, that does concern me.
*  That said, your mind is as sharp as any politician that I've ever heard. And also just off mic,
*  I should say, just the warmth that you radiate. And I deeply, deeply appreciate that.
*  Well, thank you.
*  As a human being. So you still got it after all that, after all those speeches,
*  after all those houses, after all of it, there's still the humility and just the sharpness,
*  the wit is all there. So Bernie, yeah, like I said, I wish you would have ran this year, but
*  I also wish that there's future candidates.
*  Yeah, and there will be, Lex. I absolutely do. And I think, you know, he asked about my legacy
*  the idea that they're all wonderful, really, really wonderful people who are now got involved
*  in the political process that are fighting for justice. That's a great legacy.
*  What gives you hope about the future of this country, about the future of the world?
*  You know, sometimes one can become very cynical. You look at the terrible wars that are going on
*  right now. You look at the divisiveness in this country, the ugliness, the poverty,
*  you look at climate change, you know, you get depressed from all of that. But I am lucky in
*  this sense. And that I've had the opportunity people often have, what inspires you? How do you
*  keep going? And I remember it actually was in California where it really crystallized.
*  And I was at a rally in the agricultural area of California. And we did a rally, it was sunset,
*  thousands of people were out. And you looked around the crowd, and there were young people,
*  black and white and Latino and Asian American, huge cross section, they're older people.
*  And they all wanted to make America a very much better country. And it really moved me. I mean,
*  I see that time and time out, I've just been on the campaign trail. And you see great people,
*  really beautiful people, who are not interested in becoming billionaires. They want to improve
*  life for other people in this country. So, you know, I am grateful that I, you know,
*  it sounds like a platitude, you know, it's what every politician says, blah, blah, blah, blah.
*  But when you go out around the country, you know, you go to Native American reservations,
*  and you go to factories, and you see so many wonderful people, you know, I have been able
*  to see things that many others have not been to every state in the country. And that inspires me.
*  I share their optimism, I share your optimism. Bernie, I've been a fan for a long time. It's a
*  great honor to speak to you today. Thank you so much. Well, thank you very much for what you're
*  doing. Let me just say a word about what you're doing. Okay, let's go. The compliments here.
*  You know, I think there is a growing dissatisfaction with corporate media. And not
*  because it's fake news that the reporters lie all the time. That's nonsense. They don't.
*  But I think people want to hear folks really talk about in a calm manner about some of the
*  very important issues which are not discussed in corporate media. And I think that's what you and
*  some others are doing. So I thank you very much. It's a very important service to the country.
*  And thank you from a mayor perspective of creating a wonderful town. And I look forward to looking
*  at the fall leaves walking around. I think quite great the leaves. Yeah,
*  I think great some other things. Okay, thank you so much, Bernie. Thank you, Lex.
*  Thanks for listening to this conversation with Bernie Sanders. To support this podcast,
*  please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from
*  Aristotle. The real difference between democracy and oligarchy is poverty and wealth. Wherever
*  men rule by reason of their wealth, whether they be few or many, that is an oligarchy.
*  And where the poor rule, that is democracy. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
