---
Date Generated: April 08, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 8538s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence', 'elon musk', 'joe rogan', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex friedman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex pod', 'lex podcast', 'omar suleiman']
Video Views: 706197
Video Rating: None
---

# Omar Suleiman: Palestine, Gaza, Oct 7, Israel, Resistance, Faith & Islam | Lex Fridman Podcast #411
**Lex Fridman:** [January 31, 2024](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oFSyNdQf5uk)
*  You always know when you live in Gaza that it's only a matter of time before the next bombs drop.
*  You know if you're in Gaza that you are waiting for your death. People dream about going out in
*  the world and pursuing education. People dream about going out in the world and pursuing economic
*  opportunity. In Gaza, your idea of opportunity is an opportunity to see the next year. That has been
*  the case. When we talk about this not existing in a vacuum, if people only hear about Gaza
*  on October 7th, that is a major part of the problem. That is again part of the problem of
*  our ignorance and our apathy. Why is it that the plight of the people of Gaza
*  is not brought up until an attack happens on Israel?
*  The following is a conversation with Imam Dr. Omar Suleiman, his second time on the podcast. He is
*  a Palestinian American, a Muslim scholar, a civil rights leader, president of the Yakin Institute
*  for Islamic Research and is one of the most influential Muslims in the world. Our previous
*  conversation was focused on Islam. This time, the focus was on Gaza and Palestine. This is the Lex
*  Friedman podcast. To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description.
*  And now, dear friends, here's Omar Suleiman. What did you think, feel, and pray for in the days that
*  followed October 7th? I think the first feeling was that there's going to be a lot of death and
*  destruction in Gaza as a result. We always kind of see this where one Israeli casualty leads to
*  hundreds of Palestinian casualties. It's a pretty familiar cycle in some ways where there are daily
*  transgressions against Palestinians in the West Bank and in Gaza, the checkpoints, the aggression
*  on Masjid al-Aqsa, the settlements expanding, the stories of Palestinian death. Then you have
*  rockets fired from Gaza and that's when the Western press catches up and starts to cover it.
*  Israel responds with hellfire missiles, white phosphorus bombs, and the casualties
*  are wildly disproportionate. I wasn't surprised. I prayed for the people that I knew were going
*  to bear the brunt of this outbreak, but the outbreak was predictable.
*  You wrote a statement on October 9th. I was hoping to read it if it's okay.
*  Yeah, go ahead.
*  Our Palestinian casualties are always your footnotes. The daily humiliation of occupation
*  ignored. The aggression by settlers and soldiers alike on holy sites and souls.
*  The annihilation of entire families that follows. The devastation of whatever scraps remain in the
*  open-air prison of Gaza. Unsustainable and inhumane. So if you're waking up to a sudden
*  interest in the region and want to know what's been happening, dig a bit deeper than two weeks
*  and try to read beyond the headlines of a media that has been dehumanizing us for decades.
*  Again, this was not surprising. This was very predictable. If you've been watching what's been
*  unfolding before October 7th, 2021, Human Rights Watch puts out the report, threshold reached.
*  Israel is an apartheid state. Amnesty International 2022, the crime of apartheid,
*  showing how all of the legal determinations of apartheid have been reached. The occupation
*  is only getting more aggressive. Sharina Barakla, a Palestinian-American journalist,
*  is shot dead in 2022 in front of the world. The United States says initially that if it is shown
*  that Israel was complicit or that Israel carried out the execution, then there will be consequences.
*  Of course, once it was shown that Israel was indeed responsible for the bullet that killed
*  Sharina Barakla, the United States did absolutely nothing. Sharine's funeral was attacked. The
*  power bearers were beaten. Her casket almost fell. And again, the world is watching. The aggression
*  against worshippers in Al-Aqsa is getting worse. You have the flag march, the Jerusalem flag march,
*  where extremist settlers are let loose and wild on Palestinians by the thousands,
*  chanting things like, Mohammed is dead. We're going to murder you Arabs, all with the protection of
*  the state with Israeli soldiers. And throughout this time, it's like something bad is going to
*  happen and then 2023 comes along. You had 13,000 settler units in 2023, a plan of 13,000
*  settler units, the most in the history of the occupation, the most racist and extremist
*  government, Israeli government that you have ever had. And people don't realize that in 2023 alone,
*  over 600 Palestinians had already been killed. It just doesn't make Western headlines. And so,
*  if you wonder why the American public sees this so much differently than the rest of the world,
*  it's because American media shows the American public something so much different than what the
*  rest of the world has shown. And so, this was a pressure cooker. This was going to explode. It is
*  extremely predictable. You've given people absolutely no hope. And so, I think that as
*  we're watching that, it's important for us to actually interrogate the ignorance that people
*  have of the Palestinian plight, the ignorance of the root causes of this violence, the ignorance
*  of the occupation. And also ask yourselves, why is it that Israel can violate every single
*  international law on the books, have all these determinations, and the United States keeps on
*  issuing these inconsequential statements while also at the same time funding these aggressions?
*  So, it's like stop the settler violence. The United States will issue statement after statement,
*  stop the settler violence, stop the incursions on Masjid al-Aqsa, stop violating the people in
*  Jerusalem, stop trying to wipe out the Palestinian people, stop openly saying that there is no two
*  state solution, that we will never allow a Palestinian state to be established. But at
*  the same time, here's your $3 billion check. And if the United Nations issues any sort of resolution
*  against Israel, or if any international body tries to hold Israel accountable,
*  the United States stands in the way of any accountability. It's important for us to ask why,
*  and so I always tell people, read beyond the headlines, even now, with the backdrop of a
*  genocide, over 30,000 people have been killed. If you open the front page of most American mainstream
*  sites, you will see stories about the hostages, the Israeli hostages. You will see stories about
*  October 7th, but October 8th is missing, October 9th is missing, October 10th is missing. A hundred
*  days of genocide are missing, and you'll barely have a story that shows up every once in a while
*  that is still very much so controlled by the Israeli propaganda machine. Because while Israel
*  kills Palestinian journalists, it also makes sure that American journalists are only able to tell a
*  certain story. They're only able to see Gaza from a certain perspective. They're only able to speak
*  about Gaza from a certain perspective. And this is well documented, that they have to review
*  their media tapes with Israel before they can publicize them. And so this is state propaganda
*  at this point. The mainstream media and the United States government are in lockstep telling a very
*  skewed story. And that is leading to a greater sense of frustration.
*  And I think the American public has been wronged as well by not knowing what's happening.
*  So you mentioned settlements. So to you, this is bigger than Gaza. It is the West Bank, it is the
*  Palestinian people broadly. Absolutely. You can't disconnect Gaza from Palestine. You can't disconnect
*  the West Bank from Palestine. You can't disconnect Jerusalem from Palestine. And you can't disconnect
*  the very human story from the political plight. You interviewed Mohammed Al-Qurd, met him. What
*  did the world do when it saw the images of the Qurd household being taken over by a guy from
*  Brooklyn or Long Island who just shows up and lays claim to their home? What did the world do
*  when American settlers suddenly decided they could walk into historic Palestinian homes and
*  throw people out of their homes? What did the world do? And so, yes, this is very much so connected
*  to the broader issue of Palestinian existence. If you realize here, we are erased in peace and
*  we are erased in war. In peace, it's the Abraham Accords, agreements between Israel and its Arab
*  neighbors, which is supposedly to solve the Palestinian problem. The Palestinians are absent
*  from their own fate, from discussions about their own fate. In war, it's the Israel-Hamas war.
*  It's Israel and Gaza. Where are the Palestinian people, the millions of Palestinian people
*  that have either been removed from their land or are being tormented on their land?
*  Where are they in this discussion? What are the Palestinians in the diaspora feeling?
*  I think deeply frustrated, a great sense of anger, sadness. Every single Palestinian right now
*  knows someone that's been killed. Every single Palestinian is a part of a story of displacement
*  or destruction. Every single Palestinian has a relative that's either missing a limb or a
*  loved one. Every single Palestinian in the world is traumatized by this. And in some ways, being
*  outside of Palestine, being away from it all hurts even more because you see your people being killed
*  and starved and brutalized and slaughtered, and you can't do anything about it. And the
*  people around you are justifying that slaughter. If you turn on a TV or if you open a mainstream
*  news site, these sites are justifying your slaughter. And people are being killed over there
*  because they look like me, because they're Palestinian like I'm Palestinian.
*  And so we're watching this in diaspora with agony. We can't go. We can't heal our loved ones. We
*  can't comfort the people that are there. I recently spoke to a doctor who's lost 75 relatives,
*  75 relatives in Gaza, and he's a medical doctor. And all he wants to do is get in there and just
*  use his medical expertise to help his people. And he can't. And so we're watching it from afar,
*  but our hearts are there. They are in the buildings that are being destroyed.
*  They're in the hospitals that are being bombed. They are there and they are with the people.
*  You're somebody who's always rushed into the midst of a crisis. So what does it feel like
*  on a personal level to not be able to do that here, to go to Gaza to help?
*  Yeah, it's really hard. I mean, when any group of people are killed,
*  my instinct, and I think a lot of people, is to go there to help,
*  whether it's a natural disaster or especially after an incident of terror, wherever it is,
*  it's rush there and do the best that you can to help people get through it. So it's been
*  extremely hard to watch this from afar and feel like I can't do anything about it. And so that's
*  why instead I think that most of us are driven to continue to be the voice of the voiceless.
*  I always say that if they've made them faceless, they can't make us voiceless.
*  They have reduced our casualties in Palestine to a number. The number is hundreds a day,
*  over 30,000 people. We're averaging 10,000 people a month. The fact that they've been turned into
*  faceless numbers with no stories, with no humanity, makes it that much more important
*  for us to tell their stories here and to remind the world that you've lost your humanity if you
*  can watch this unfold and not even have the decency to call for a ceasefire. I mean, that's
*  where we've reached. That's how low it is right now. Calling for a ceasefire has now become
*  radical. So we have to remind the world that if you're okay with the demolition of an entire
*  town or a city or whatever it is that you want to call Gaza, because it wasn't always the Gaza strip,
*  but if you're okay with this and you're okay with this casualty count every single day,
*  it's not just them who are being killed. It's your hearts that are dying. And I think that when I
*  look back to Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., and I mentioned this, he wrote about Vietnam. He said
*  that if America was to succumb to its spiritual death, the autopsy would read Vietnam. I would
*  say that it would read Gaza now. Speaking of the people, the faces, the voices, one of the
*  people you've talked about, you've posted about, you've written about is Wael Al-Aqduh,
*  him being hospitalized. He's a Palestinian journalist and the bureau chief of Al Jazeera
*  in Gaza City. What can you tell me about this man? If Wael Al-Aqduh wasn't Palestinian,
*  he'd be on the cover of Time Magazine right now. He would be the most celebrated journalist in the
*  world. Wael Al-Aqduh is from Gaza. He has been in Israeli prisons. He has been under Israeli
*  airstrikes. He has seen the worst of the occupation before he's seen the worst of the genocide.
*  While on TV, and this is insane when you think about it, we have over a hundred journalists now.
*  That's more than any conflict in history that have been killed. And there is sufficient evidence by
*  international watchdogs that this is intentional, that journalists have been killed intentionally.
*  But then their families, Wael was reporting on TV when an airstrike hits his wife, two kids,
*  and a grandchild. He goes to the scene and he said this, you never expect as a journalist to be the
*  subject of the story. Suddenly, the camera is on him, mourning over his dead wife and kids and
*  grandkid. He even says it in Arabic, he says, they're taking it out on our children.
*  They're taking it out on our children. I've heard this from multiple people that have had
*  relatives targeted that, I wish it was me instead. He gets back on camera the same day because he
*  feels a responsibility to continue to cover the lives of the people of Gaza. He understands that
*  his story, as devastating as it is, is not unique in regards to the people of Gaza,
*  that there are many people whose families have been killed in airstrikes.
*  All two million people have been traumatized in some way. And so he gets back on camera,
*  tells the story again, and then he is targeted himself. His arm struck, his cameraman, Samer
*  Abu Dhaka, dies in front of him. He bleeds out. Wael watches him bleed out for hours. And while
*  any aid workers try to reach them in the building that they were in, snipers would shoot all of
*  those that were rushing to Samer. So he watches his cameraman and one of his best friends bleed
*  out to death. Wael goes to the hospital, his arm is wrapped up, gets treatment. He's back on camera
*  the next day. A few weeks later, another child is killed again with his friend in a car. So this
*  was a targeted airstrike. His son is driving and his son and his best friend are hit in an airstrike.
*  Wael leads the funeral prayer, is back on camera again and speaks with such dignity,
*  with such compassion. One of the things that always gets to me as a Palestinian,
*  and as a Muslim too, is that we are portrayed to be these beasts and savages. Tell me a man that
*  would be put through what Wael was put through and still stand on that pulpit and in front of the
*  world with such dignity, with such grace. He continues to tell the story. Wael has become a
*  hero to many of us and he would be a hero in a world that wasn't anti-Palestinian. Unfortunately,
*  Wael has not only lost his family, he's not only lost much of his own existence,
*  but Wael is part of the greater story of erasure. So even though he's telling the story of the
*  people of Gaza and he is the story of the people of Gaza, most people will never learn about Wael.
*  You have posted videos and written about what is happening in Gaza
*  since October 7th. What has been happening there, the individual stories and the broader impact on
*  the two million people there? Gaza has been described as the world's largest open air prison,
*  unemployment, blockaded from all directions, no airport,
*  regular added restrictions placed even on their ability to fish.
*  Every aspect of Gaza's life has been under occupation. I would argue that it's an injustice
*  to even call it an open air prison because inmates are not bombed in prisons routinely
*  by the most sophisticated weapons in the world. Regular bombardment of Gaza, every single
*  person in Gaza has lived through multiple rounds of bombardment. It is deeply distressing.
*  I remember in 2021, there was an image that I will never forget of children having to go back to school
*  after the bombardment of 2021. Next to them, they would have the empty chairs and the posters
*  of the child that used to sit in that chair. I think what encapsulates it most for me,
*  an image that I grew up with was the image of Mohammed Al-Durrah who was in his father's lap
*  over 20 years ago. His father was begging for Israel to spare his child and Mohammed was murdered
*  in his lap. You know what happened this last round? His other kids were murdered.
*  Mohammed's brothers were murdered and his father's been on the run. Every single person in Gaza has
*  witnessed multiple wars, has witnessed the greatest suffocation of occupation,
*  has even had their diets restricted and has suffered under Israel's state policy, which is
*  called mowing the lawn. Everyone should look this up. This is what Israeli ministers refer to
*  as routine bombardment of Gaza, mowing the lawn, which shows you that before they called us animals,
*  they considered us insects. Unfortunately, the casualty counts get higher and higher every time
*  and people become more and more desperate, more and more helpless. Gaza has been unfortunately
*  the worst manifestation of anti-Palestinian bigotry. I mean, 60% of the population is a
*  refugee population. What that means, and people do need to understand this, is that people move to
*  Gaza from other parts of occupied territory to find refuge. We're practically living on top of
*  each other. There are people that are in the Gaza Strip that know that they had homes right beyond
*  that apartheid wall and those homes were stolen from them and they can't even enter that territory
*  anymore. They know that on the other side of that wall, there's life. On the other side of that wall,
*  there's opportunity. On the other side of that wall, you have a passport, you have an airport,
*  you have the ability to travel, you have the ability to export and import. You can dream,
*  but behind that wall, you are to live until the next airstrike. You are to live until
*  Israel mows the lawn again and hope that you're not part of the grass. That's what Gaza has been
*  all of these years. So pragmatically and psychologically, it is very difficult to flourish
*  when you're just waiting for more bombardment. Because you know that it's around the corner.
*  You always know when you live in Gaza that it's only a matter of time before the next bombs drop.
*  You know if you're in Gaza that you are waiting for your death. People dream about going out in
*  the world and pursuing education. People dream about going out in the world and pursuing economic
*  opportunity. In Gaza, your idea of opportunity is an opportunity to see the next year. That has been
*  the case. So when we talk about this not existing in a vacuum, if people only hear about Gaza
*  on October 7th, that is a major part of the problem. That is again part of the problem of
*  our ignorance and our apathy. Why is it that the plight of the people of Gaza is not brought up
*  until an attack happens on Israel?
*  I've gotten a chance to witness a destroyed school in Ukraine.
*  That's something that is really difficult to see.
*  You have over a hundred destroyed mosques. Every university in Gaza has been demolished.
*  We're seeing TikTok videos of Israeli soldiers laughing and singing as they press a button
*  and we see the demolition of every single university in Gaza. Schools have been reduced
*  to rubble. There's a cultural genocide as well. I want you to think about what you saw in Ukraine.
*  Look, imagine coming back to school in Gaza in some destroyed building. You're missing legs.
*  You're missing arms. You have white phosphorus burns. If you've ever seen what white phosphorus
*  does to a person, there's a reason why it's a war crime. You have white phosphorus burns.
*  Your mom's dead. Your dad's dead. All of your uncles and aunts are dead.
*  All of your siblings are dead. Somehow you got pulled out of the rubble.
*  In my own family, my father's in-laws, my father remarried after my mother passed away.
*  And they're in Gaza. All of them were killed in an airstrike, except for an elderly aunt who
*  somehow made it out of the rubble a day later. If you're a child that's been pulled out of the
*  rubble, what are you going to grow up with? I mean, what are you supposed to feel? What are
*  you supposed to think? And then you have racist commentators that say they could have turned that
*  into a Singapore. The Palestinians are the authors of their own destruction because if they wanted
*  to, they could have turned this into a place of prosperity. But they keep on bringing destruction
*  upon themselves. So at the root of this is a bigotry. And again, this idea that Palestinians
*  are savages, they're animals, and the only way to deal with them is to continuously mow the lawn
*  while simultaneously expanding the occupation and erasing anything
*  that was ever called Palestine and any human being that was ever called a Palestinian.
*  So those kids growing up in Gaza now, to you, they have almost no choice but to have hatred
*  for Israel? It's human. I mean, look, any child that is under that type of oppression
*  is going to hate their oppressor. I don't care who you are. I don't care what you are.
*  But here's my problem with how that gets brought up.
*  You're talking about the future of the security of Israel. Even some people that speak about it,
*  seemingly from a place of being well-meaning, that say the only way that Israel can have its security
*  is to stop killing Palestinians. And so the future of Israel depends upon
*  Palestinians not hating Israel so much. And so we've got to stop tormenting these people so that
*  they don't grow up to want to torment us. You've already decided then whose life is worth more than
*  the other. And so instead of talking about the future of Israeli lives, why don't you talk about
*  the present of Palestinian lives? Instead of talking about whether or not your state will be
*  secure in the future, talk to me about why you're killing children now. Two-thirds of the 30,000
*  civilians are women and children. And so we can't talk about what these children are going to grow
*  up with. We should talk about whether or not these children are going to grow up in the first place.
*  And that should be what dominates our conscience right now and what drives our policies and what
*  drives our emotions right now. So when I had a conversation with Elon Musk, he suggested
*  that what Israel should do is conspicuous acts of kindness. So do as much positive
*  things in Gaza as possible on a basic individual human level and on a policy level at every level.
*  What do you think about that? I mean, you don't pass out candy in a concentration camp.
*  You end the occupation. And so there has to be a solution that is beyond merely acts of kindness.
*  At the end of the day, if you're occupying a people, you have to remove that occupation.
*  Apartheid is not dealt with by acts of kindness on the part of the occupying power. Apartheid
*  is dealt with by ending apartheid. And so there has to be a level of accountability. It's not just
*  acts of kindness. It's not just treating the people with more dignity. It's giving them the
*  ability to pursue their own dignity. There's a reason why it's called Palestinian self-determination.
*  The United States likes to use it in all of its inconsequential statements that we need
*  Palestinian self-determination too. But the United States also voted against 138 states
*  in the United Nations to allow for Palestinian self-determination. Self-determination means I
*  get to pursue my own course of worth. I get to pursue my own happiness. I don't have to depend
*  on the benevolence of my occupier. And when my occupier feels like throwing me a few more crumbs,
*  it has to end. There has to be a point now where the world says, this is not sustainable. It's not
*  just about ending the present genocide. A ceasefire is the bare minimum. I think any decent human being
*  would be calling for a ceasefire right now, but at some point you cease occupation,
*  you cease apartheid. Because what led to the ability of Israel to carry out a genocide
*  without any accountability was that the global arena has permitted it to do so,
*  largely due to American obstruction of justice.
*  – Is violence an effective method of resistance?
*  – So the framework that I would propose is that Dr. King mentioned that peace is not the absence
*  of violence. It's the presence of justice. And so occupation and apartheid are violent even in
*  their most benevolent manifestations. The default of occupation is that it is unjustified.
*  The default of apartheid is that it is unjustified and it must be dealt with.
*  The default of resistance to occupation and apartheid is that it is justified. But there
*  can be transgressions even in resisting occupation and apartheid. And I come to this from an Islamic
*  perspective. My moral framework is Islam. The Prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him,
*  was outraged when he saw a woman or a child that was dead from the other side,
*  the side of his persecutors. And so yes, we have a saying as Muslims that they are not our teachers.
*  Our oppressors are not our teachers. But the concept of resistance to occupation,
*  it is morally justified. It is justified by international law. Any occupied people have
*  the right to defend themselves. We talk about Israel's right to defend itself. Israel is the
*  occupier. Any occupied people by international law have the right to defend themselves.
*  And any occupation is unjustified and illegal. And so that's where I start from. That's the point
*  that I come to this with. I think that the problem is that the Palestinians are told,
*  find better ways to resist, and then they are demonized when they try to find any other way
*  to resist. If you go back a few years ago, you had the Great Return March. People in Gaza marched to
*  the wall in what was one of the most inspiring protests or demonstrations that I had ever seen.
*  March to the wall, nonviolent protest, and snipers took out their legs. AP actually documented
*  that Israeli snipers had knee counts where you had an Israeli soldier that would say,
*  I took out 45 knees. They actually had to register a scroll of knee counts. And so you have all these
*  kids in Gaza walking around without legs now because they were targeted by snipers when they
*  marched to the wall. We're told to find methods of nonviolent resistance. But when we boycott,
*  when we launch boycotts around the world in response to this transgression,
*  in response to this ongoing oppression that the world powers have shown either the inability or
*  the unwillingness to rein in, we're told that that's antisemitic, even though it is based on
*  the South African method of bringing an end to the apartheid regime there.
*  Don't respond with violence. Don't respond nonviolently. Don't protest. Don't try to use
*  people power in the face of global impotence at the political level. Instead, let's just keep
*  talking about the two-state solution. And while talking about the two-state solution, if you were
*  to look at a map, under every single Israeli regime, conservative or liberal, whatever it is,
*  the settlements have expanded. More Palestinian land has disappeared. More Palestinians have been
*  dispossessed. More Palestinians have been killed. And so we have these little pieces of land that
*  keep on shrinking and Jerusalem keeps disappearing. And there's aggression whether Palestinians are
*  resisting or not. But then we're told, why can't you people just pursue peace? Why can't you just
*  believe in a better way? All along, we're hearing Israeli ministers become far more radical
*  and open about their intentions to wipe us off the face of the earth. And that is actually their
*  policy. It's not just slogans. It's not fringe elements. Actual Israeli ministers, starting from
*  the prime minister himself, who has executed a policy of the removal of all Palestinian lands
*  and Palestinian lives. And then we're told, peace, peace, peace, peace. And it is awfully ugly
*  when you use the language of peace to suffocate the work of justice. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.,
*  one of his early sermons was something along the lines of when peace is obnoxious.
*  It was in the 1950s around the Montgomery bus boycott. And he talked about how this obsession
*  with the language of peace is usually used to try to keep people in status quo and make them
*  complacent with their miserable situation. That has been the story of the Palestinian people,
*  that they've been told that if you do things differently, then you will find peace. But
*  everything the Palestinians have tried inside and outside has been met with repression. The most
*  violent forms of it, they're in Gaza and beyond. And so, look, I start from the place of wanting
*  to see peace. I want to see a situation in which no innocent people lose their lives.
*  But we have to analyze the situation with some justice, with some fairness.
*  What would any group of people do in this situation? That doesn't mean that you hope for hell.
*  That means that you analyze the existing circumstances of hell,
*  which was life in Gaza even before October 7th.
*  That said, you did talk about waal al-aqtaqtu and dignity.
*  And you mentioned transgressions. So there is places where violence can go too far.
*  Absolutely. So violence, again, the point is, is that you ask yourself why we've been silent
*  about the violence all of this time. And you know what? When people say, well, what about this?
*  What about that? My response is this. What I would love to see is effective international
*  bodies of justice being able to rein in any party that has committed an act of aggression or committed
*  an act of injustice and hold them accountable. Any reasonable human being would say, yeah,
*  you know what? There should be effective international bodies that can rein in parties
*  that can't be reigned in domestically, that could stop the violence, that could assign blame properly,
*  and then have methods of accountability. The problem is that Israel has been made invincible
*  in the international arena because of the United States. And then we wonder why there's such a rise
*  in global anti-American sentiment. It's not because of American freedom. It's because America is
*  directly participating, the United States government is directly participating in the worst genocide
*  that we have ever seen in our lives, right? Playing out on screen, you know, on social media.
*  And we can't do anything about it. So I think that the point is, is that we need those international
*  bodies. We need methods of effective accountability. And I would love to see blame properly assigned.
*  And anyone that kills any innocent human being taken into account, anyone that is guilty of a
*  war crime taken into account, we have to ask ourselves, why is it that Israel has violated
*  over 63 United Nations resolutions, has expanded its occupation, has killed over 600 Palestinians
*  before October 7th? Why is it that Israel cannot be held accountable? And so when you talk about,
*  you know, words that get thrown around, you know, that are used to justify violence against more
*  innocent people, you know, when I'm asked about terrorism, is it only terrorism if it's a non-state
*  actor? If someone's sitting inside a room, you know, of suits and can press a button and terrorize
*  thousands of people and murder innocent people with no consequences, how is that not terrorism?
*  So if terrorism is only to be assigned to non-state actors, then it's a word without
*  function. In fact, it's a word that justifies more terror that is then reigned upon innocent
*  populations. We have to have moral consistency. Children should not be killed. Non-combatants
*  should not be targeted. We can all agree upon that. Why aren't there proper investigative bodies and
*  then proper international bodies of accountability then that can execute their findings in a way that
*  makes the world a better place and a way that actually brings about more peace? And so, you
*  know, I think this is where we're at right now. And this is the frustration and this is the
*  place that the Palestinians have been left. So to you, violence becomes terrorism
*  when women and children, non-combatants are killed no matter who is doing the killing.
*  Absolutely. Absolutely.
*  In America, for you, for other Palestinians, other Muslims in your community,
*  what has all of this been like?
*  It feels like there's a return to some of the days after 9-11, the dehumanization,
*  the feeling of complete disregard for our humanity at the level of government, at the level of media,
*  the feeling of an increase in surveillance, the feeling of an increase in bigotry.
*  People are losing their jobs and people are being berated on campuses and grocery stores
*  and people are being killed. I went to the funeral of a six-year-old boy
*  who was killed directly due to anti-Palestinian propaganda. And so I think that a lot of us are
*  feeling a return to that, but we also refuse to be cornered into a position where we are told to
*  perpetually condemn acts of violence and not speak about the violence that's committed against us
*  here in Iran. Can you tell the story of this boy, Wadih Al-Fayyum? He's a six-year-old Palestinian
*  American boy who was stabbed 26 times in his home in Plainfield Township, Illinois. It was
*  found to be a hate crime motivated by Islamophobia. And the attacker said, you Muslims must die.
*  So, before Wadir was killed, Wadir was killed on a Saturday. It was the immediate Saturday after
*  October 7th. I remember on Friday, media starts to reach out to every imam in the country,
*  every Muslim leader in the country and say, what are you going to do about this global day of jihad?
*  What are you going to do about the global day of jihad? It's like, what are you talking about?
*  It's like, well, Hamas has called for a global day of jihad, so how are you going to stop Muslims
*  from attacking people? So, it's Friday and I'm like, well, this is the first I'm hearing from you.
*  And I remember responding to a local reporter. Most people I just ignored. I responded to a
*  local reporter. I said, I've got people in my community that have already lost 10, 15 relatives
*  at that point. Now it's 20, 30. And you haven't said a word. And now you're reaching out to me
*  about the potential violence of Muslims in America. This is great. This is just like 9-11.
*  What are you going to do to restrain you angry Muslims from responding to what's happening
*  overseas and responding to the call of a global day of jihad? Guess what? That night,
*  this man takes out a military knife and attacks a six-year-old boy, a six-year-old Palestinian
*  boy. By the way, it gets worse the more details that you know. And I recently had a chance to go
*  and speak to his mom because she was in the hospital when I was there for the funeral.
*  So I had a chance to visit her not too long ago. And she was attacked also. She was attacked first.
*  This is actually their landlord. So Hanan, the mother, was at home with Wadir, a six-year-old boy.
*  Landlord comes in and with absolutely no emotion, just charges at her, starts with her. She was
*  able to fight him off. He stabbed her initially seven or eight times with a military-grade knife.
*  She fought him off, escaped to call 9-1-1. And while she's calling 9-1-1, she hears Wadir.
*  Wadir ran up to the man calling him Uncle Joe because the landlord prior to that had been kind
*  to them. He used to give Wadir toys. Wadir had an infectious, beautiful smile. Every picture you see
*  of that kid, beautiful, beautiful, beautiful smile. And so Wadir runs up to him and says,
*  Uncle Joe, he runs up to him to give him a hug even though he's carrying a military-grade knife
*  with blood on it because Wadir doesn't believe that harm can come to him from that man.
*  And Hanan didn't think that he would do anything to her kid. Even in that fit of rage,
*  the last thing that she says she heard was, Oh no. Wadir says, Oh no. And then he starts to stab him
*  26 times. Says, you Muslims must die. Usually in a scene like that, police are hesitant.
*  To classify something as a hate crime, it was classified as a hate crime the very same day.
*  The thing is that who's complicit in that hate crime? What filled that man's head for him to
*  believe that he was doing an act of good by murdering a six-year-old Palestinian boy?
*  And in reality, Uncle Joe was motivated by President Joe Biden who repeated a debunked
*  report that there were 40 beheaded Israeli babies. And he said, I saw 40 beheaded Israeli babies.
*  The White House walked it back afterwards in a statement that no one reads because it was
*  factually false. But Uncle Joe heard it and had been binge watching media about these violent
*  Palestinians. And suddenly the propaganda overcame his own humanity and what he knew
*  of that family. And he went in and ruined their lives. And now, just like any mom,
*  she hasn't moved a thing. His bike is still in the same place it was. His toys are still in
*  the same place. She's left with this great void, this great emptiness. If that was the only crime,
*  it would be enough to wake this country up and say, oh no, this is not where we need to go.
*  Oh no. The last thing she heard him say was, oh no. If that was it. And I got the news, by the way,
*  when I was ironically at a protest. We were protesting on Saturday, downtown Dallas,
*  and I started getting all these texts about what happened in Chicago. Oh no.
*  Right? No Muslims attacked anyone. The media was in a frenzy over the global day of jihad.
*  I got called by national news outlets and local news outlets. What are you going to do
*  about Muslims that are going to turn into monsters and start killing people in the streets?
*  Next thing we know, we have a dead six-year-old Palestinian boy. He went to his funeral.
*  And that kind of speaks to the proximity part of things.
*  Yeah. It felt like stepping into Gaza for a moment. It didn't feel like America.
*  Didn't feel like America. Felt like stepping into Gaza. His casket was wrapped in a Palestinian flag.
*  There was not just sadness at his funeral, but a deep sense of anger.
*  At the funeral, some of his family members shouted out, Joe Biden, you did this. Joe Biden,
*  you did this. I remember the next day, it was right after the funeral,
*  looking at the front page of CNN and the story of Wadiya was buried in the last section.
*  It was right over all these meaningless ads. I thought to myself, that's it.
*  Like if this was an Arab man, let's be real. Let's be honest here. If this was a Palestinian
*  landlord that stabbed a six-year-old Jewish boy to death, this would have gotten more attention.
*  It would have been the front page of the news. And rightfully so, people would have grieved
*  over the insanity of stabbing a six-year-old boy 26 times. Wadiya became an afterthought,
*  the very next day. It's an extension of the bigotry, an extension of the racism.
*  And there's so much that happens after that. There's the terrible stabbing of
*  Detroit synagogue president, Samantha Wall. And it's horrible. She was stabbed in her driveway.
*  Immediately, front page of all the news outlets, immediately, it's the main news story. And
*  immediately the implications are, there go the Muslims, the Palestinians have lost their minds.
*  The Muslims have… They are who we thought they were. That's what it is. They are who we thought
*  they were. They went and they stabbed a synagogue president. It turned out it wasn't a hate crime,
*  although it was an awful crime. It turned out it wasn't a hate crime.
*  Wadiya is an afterthought. People reach out to me afterwards expressing condolences.
*  And I responded to them, those who have justified the genocide in Gaza.
*  But that we're somehow offering condolences for Wadiya, privately, of course. By the way,
*  if a Muslim would have committed that crime, every single Muslim leader would have had press
*  in front of their door to condemn that crime. We would have all been made complicit.
*  Had people reach out to me, say, I'm sorry about what happened with Wadiya. It's terrible.
*  I saw you at the funeral praying for you. My response was, what's the difference between
*  Wadiya and a boy in Gaza? What's the difference between me and Wadiya? I'm a Palestinian child.
*  My parents made it out of Palestine. I was born in this country. If I didn't have the opportunity
*  to grow up here and to become the person that I became, you would have been justifying my
*  murder right now. You would have been okay with my genocide. You would have been giving the talking
*  points to the press to erase me. But you feel sorry because Wadiya was killed. And I think this
*  is when we say that anti-Palestinian bigotry is an extension of Islamophobia. If a mosque gets
*  targeted here, people rightfully rush to protect that mosque and say, this is horrible and it
*  shouldn't happen. But when you have an Israeli soldier bombing a mosque and laughing like a
*  maniac on video and it's going viral on TikTok and there is no way to rein that in and you don't have
*  a word of condemnation about it, in fact, you are standing in the way of a ceasefire, then you're a
*  hypocrite. There's no way around it. You are a hypocrite. What's the difference between a mosque
*  here and a mosque there? What's the difference between a Palestinian life here and a Palestinian
*  life there? If you're okay with me being murdered there, don't say that you care about my life here.
*  And so that hypocrisy has been laid bare. We have said multiple times, masks are falling.
*  Masks are falling. People that we thought were decent people somehow have found it in themselves
*  to justify a genocide. There is no shortage at this point of videos. And again,
*  I could have made the excuse for you maybe in the first few weeks
*  that you hadn't seen enough. But with all social media suppression across all platforms,
*  there isn't a single platform that hasn't suppressed Palestinian voices. With all that
*  suppression, there are enough videos at this point of children whose heads have been blowing off,
*  of children walking around without limbs, of parents carrying their kids in bags, not body
*  bags. I mean, grocery bags, because they don't even have body bags, and screaming out and saying,
*  why are you doing this to me? Make it stop. And you come back and you tell that person,
*  Tamaas' fault. Where is your humanity? Where is your sense of decency? Isn't that the logic of
*  the so-called terrorism that you condemn? Yeah, you can wipe out entire populations.
*  You should have talked to Tamaas. It's Tamaas' fault. All the kids in the West Bank,
*  where does this end? What are your moral boundaries here? If that's the logic that
*  you're okay with, then in that case, when there's a mass shooter in a school in the United States,
*  just bomb the whole school. In fact, bomb the whole town if you can't find the mass shooter.
*  Where does this end for you? And so, when I say people have lost their humanity,
*  they're killing us overseas, but their hearts are dying. People have lost their humanity.
*  They've lost any sense of morality and their moral boundaries. And being there and
*  I mean, participating in this funeral, it was anger. I'm not used to that. I'm not used to
*  that. I'm an imam. I pastor to people. I went to Christchurch and that was the worst I'd ever
*  seen before where 50 Muslims were killed by a white supremacist. And he murdered them with such
*  callousness. And I remember being at those funerals. And yeah, I mean, there was anger,
*  but it was just profound sadness because at least the rest of the world could all come out in one
*  voice and say, that's wrong. Now, most of the world sees what's happening in Gaza and says,
*  this is disgusting. Most of the world sees this and says, this is a genocide. But we happen to
*  live in this bubble here where we're constantly being told we did this to ourselves. And that's
*  the same logic that led to our initial expulsion, 1948. What was the crime of those 700,000
*  Palestinians that were driven out of their home in 1948? What did they do? They didn't do, they
*  did not commit the Holocaust. They didn't have a mass murder of Jews at their hands. What did they
*  do? What crime were they paying for? And so it's been the consistent theme. This is the story of
*  our people, not since October 7th. This is the story of our people for the last 75 years.
*  There is a deep geopolitical connection between the United States and that part of the world.
*  What is the role of US politicians in all of this?
*  James Baldwin wrote about how Israel was created as an extension of United States policy to be a
*  colonial entity at the gates of the Middle East and to function essentially as a military base out
*  there and as a means of extending its policy throughout the Middle East.
*  And it has functioned as such. The United States is not an honest peace broker. It never has been
*  an honest peace broker. The United States has never shown any meaningful inclination towards peace,
*  has guarded and protected Israel from international accountability, has made Israel
*  invincible. The United States is not just responsible at the governmental level for
*  the genocide. It's responsible for letting it get to this point in the first place.
*  We have funded that arsenal. We've given them the most sophisticated weapons in the world
*  to test on the most desperate population in the world. We've given them the weapons.
*  It's been bipartisan. We have issued at most inconsequential statements of condemnation,
*  but at the same time stopped any international body of law from actually holding it accountable.
*  So the United States at this point, unfortunately, has rightfully lost all credibility.
*  It should remove itself from this because it is not an honest peace broker. I think Americans are
*  probably sick of us paying for wars in general. I think Americans are probably sick of our tax
*  dollars going to funding a genocide while we have a rise of homelessness and income disparity here
*  in the United States. I think that Americans probably don't like that we're making ourselves
*  so deeply unpopular in the world because of Israel's actions. So in any case,
*  in the immediate moment, make the stop. The United States could have had a ceasefire a long time
*  ago. The United States could have ended this genocide right away. The reason why this is
*  continuing is because of US foreign policy. In the process of Joe Biden talking about managing
*  this crisis and talking about making things better, there have only been more bills that
*  have come out of Congress. In fact, he's bypassed Congress to fund the arsenal, to keep replenishing
*  the arsenal. Stop paying for weapons. Stop paying for someone else's war crimes. Stop
*  protecting another country as it commits these war crimes. And if you can't be an honest peace broker,
*  get out of the process. So there's money that you just mentioned and bills, and then there's rhetoric,
*  which you also criticized, that he spoke about the beheading babies and things of that nature.
*  So where has Joe Biden fallen short? We need another podcast. That's going to take a few
*  hours to talk about where Joe Biden has failed. For one, the first time he seemed to find the
*  word Palestinian in his vocabulary was when he accused the Palestinians of lying about
*  the death toll in Gaza. And then that turned out to also be false. In fact, the numbers that were
*  coming out of the Gaza Health Ministry, according to multiple international bodies, have been
*  under-reporting Palestinian casualty counts. Israeli intelligence has said that the civilian count or
*  the death toll is actually higher than what's been coming out of the Gaza Health Ministry. So he's
*  failed on that front. He has failed to speak to Palestinian humanity. He has spoken with deep
*  passion and concern, as has Anthony Blinken, about the devastation in Israel and the way that people
*  are feeling in Israel, and has shown nothing of that sort towards Palestinians. We don't want
*  the rhetoric. We really don't want the rhetoric. When people say, call for a ceasefire, the United
*  States has had an opportunity and has an opportunity to really walk back and reflect on
*  its entire policy towards Israel-Palestine. This is a moment of reflection. This is a moment
*  of restoration, if you want it to be, and to think about what we've enabled in the first place.
*  He's shown absolutely no real empathy. I think that he is under great delusion
*  in thinking that the Muslim community or people of conscience are going to forgive this,
*  are going to forget this come November. You can't tell us that, well, at least I don't have the
*  Trump Muslim ban while also carrying out a genocide primarily against Muslims and think
*  that the Muslims are still going to vote for you. We will make him hear us at the polls.
*  Any politician for Congress or otherwise that has not called for a ceasefire that has been a part of
*  this dehumanization, we will make sure that we see support for them in any way as a community.
*  It's only right.
*  Biden has lost or is losing the hearts and the support of the Muslim
*  Palestinian people and the Muslim people in America.
*  I don't know if you ever had the hearts of the Muslim community, to be honest with you. I mean,
*  I personally was never a Joe Biden fan. I think a lot of people felt the same. This country,
*  unfortunately, leads to the way that our political system is built is that you're always voting for
*  the lesser of the two evils. That's always the way that it is. It's analyzing which evil is lesser.
*  And when people say, if you vote for Donald Trump, and I'm not planning to vote for
*  Donald Trump either, but if you don't vote for Joe Biden, then you are destroying democracy.
*  I'm like a democracy that's given us a choice between Donald Trump and Joe Biden is already
*  a failed democracy. And so he never had the hearts and minds of the Muslim community.
*  People always saw past his rhetoric. He always has had a terrible
*  disposition towards Palestine. He's always had a terrible disposition towards the Muslim world.
*  His segregationist past comes out sometimes when he starts talking about the Muslim world.
*  And you can hear the racism in his voice, and you can hear the way that he talks about
*  Palestinian life in such devalued fashion. So he lost us a long time ago, but he's definitely
*  not getting us back after this in any way. And I can't speak for all Muslims, but I think that
*  I think that come November, he and all of those politicians, especially in swing states,
*  that have turned their backs on the Muslim community, and not just the Muslim community,
*  by the way, 67% of this country wants a ceasefire. Three fourths of Democratic voters want a ceasefire.
*  Half of Republican voters want a ceasefire. It's not just the Muslim community. This is not
*  some radical opinion to call for a ceasefire. And every single politician that has refused to hear
*  us is going to pay a price at the polls, as they should. That doesn't mean that we're under
*  any illusion that the other side promises us anything better. In fact, it feels like
*  Republicans have simply rushed to outrace the Democrats, to outpace them in terms of talking
*  about how they're going to be more unapologetic in supporting Israel unconditionally. It's been
*  pathetic, but something has to change. And I think that Americans of conscience
*  have to look at how this failed political system has hurt people here and abroad,
*  and talk about how to transcend that with just more humanity. Again, when you have 67% of the
*  American public that wants a ceasefire, but only a handful of congressmen out of over 500 can muster
*  up the courage in the face of these super PACs to say that we should stop the genocide.
*  What are you asking for here? You're asking for the genocide to stop. You're asking for Israeli
*  hostages to be brought home. You're asking for Palestinian prisoners to be released. You're
*  asking for peace and to start carving the path out to end this once and for all, in the most ambiguous
*  way possible, by the way, because there aren't many radical American politicians. It's the way
*  that the system is. In the most ambiguous, bare way possible. And you can't even bring yourself
*  to do that. This is already a failed democracy then. All the while, again, it always boggles
*  my mind. If you're from the America First crew, what's America First about funding billions and
*  billions of dollars to Israel while it carries out this genocide, while people are starving here?
*  If you're part of the human rights crew and progressive crew, they have a term called
*  progressive except Palestine, PEP, progressive except Palestine. Where are all your notions of
*  social justice? You talk about policing here, but you don't talk about who trains our police
*  departments in many major cities and the type of brutality that's being carried out there. You talk
*  about human rights at the border here, but you don't talk about the assault on people at the
*  border there. You talk about all of these things here, but you somehow use the exact same framings
*  against the people there. So it's exposed, I think, the moral bankruptcy of both political
*  polar opposites that exist in this country right now. And hopefully evoked a greater societal
*  sentiment to say this is ridiculous. One of the things that is happening is that more people are
*  getting their news outside of legacy media outlets. You can't hide that many dead babies anymore.
*  You just can't. More people have woken up to the Palestinian plight now than ever before. More
*  people are outraged that this has been our American foreign policy all throughout democratic and
*  republican administrations. This is what we've been paying for? This is what we've been excusing?
*  And Israeli leaders literally spit in the faces of whoever the American president is
*  and says, yeah, we don't care what they tell us to do. American leadership says we're pushing
*  Israel to minimize the casualties, to get less indiscriminate with its bombing, to manage the
*  crisis, get a few more humanitarian corridors in, to make sure that Gaza is not evacuated and not
*  ethnically cleansed, to make sure Palestinians can come back. And Netanyahu comes on TV and says,
*  from the river to the sea. How ironic is that? From the river to the sea, and that is his policy.
*  We're going to make sure that Israel controls from the river to the sea, and we're going to push
*  Palestinians into Sinai, and Muslim countries need to take them in. You have Israeli ministers,
*  national defense ministers saying things openly, like, we want to thin out the population, i.e.
*  ethnic cleansing. We want to remove people. And the Muslim world needs to step up and take in
*  these refugees. And the American administration or the American president says and American
*  secretary of state says, we're talking to them and we're making sure that that's not going to happen.
*  And if one of their ministers says something, blink in, maybe tweets out something about how
*  that's not going to happen, but then it happens anyway, and then we still write them the checks.
*  So I think most of the American public is probably going to get sick of this at some point.
*  Just people of decency and people of conscience are going to say,
*  yeah, this is not something we want to be a part of anymore.
*  Do you think there's something that Donald Trump can do
*  to help move this in the right direction?
*  Yeah. Trump's first words were about how he's going to be worse on this. So he talked about how
*  he's going to deport people, revoke visas of students that are part of these pro-Palestinian
*  rallies. Also, the focus was on the rallies versus what's going on abroad.
*  Yeah. But look, we had a Donald Trump presidency. He moved the embassy to Jerusalem. He was not
*  better on this. Unfortunately, this is a bipartisan problem. And so again, we're under no illusion
*  here. We're not looking to Donald Trump as a savior here, but we are going to penalize Joe Biden.
*  And I can't speak for everybody, but I think that that's where a lot of our minds are at right now.
*  You spoke at the November 4th demonstration in Washington called the Free Palestine March.
*  It had a lot of people, several hundred thousand people there.
*  What do you remember from that experience?
*  Well, the first thing I remember is that there was no news coverage of it.
*  So 400,000 people march on DC, one of the largest marches in history.
*  It was nowhere to be found in mainstream media coverage. Whereas when the Stand with Israel
*  rally happened, between the 300,000 strong Palestine rally and the 400,000 strong Palestine
*  rally, there was a Stand with Israel rally where congressmen were bused from Congress to speak at
*  that rally. Democrats and Republicans and high profile celebrities. And it was live streamed
*  across multiple places. I have to say this, the ICJ, if that wasn't the greatest display
*  of media bias in the domain of United States mainstream media, then I don't know what is.
*  They live streamed the Israeli defense on multiple news outlets,
*  defending itself against the case for genocide and completely omitted the South African
*  presentation of the crimes of Israel the day before. So what I remember first and foremost
*  about the protest is that there were nowhere to be found on mainstream media, which was expected.
*  But what I also remember from the actual day of and from all of the pro-Palestine rallies
*  is that I have never seen a more multi-faith, more diverse group of people connect with the
*  consistently coming out for Palestine against the genocide in Gaza that I have this time around.
*  And I think that has been the experience all around. There has been a pronounced Jewish presence,
*  Jewish voice for peace, if not now, other anti-Zionist Jewish groups, groups that are against
*  the genocide, against the occupation, former Israeli soldiers even, that have been showing
*  up at these protests. There has been a pronounced presence from Native American groups,
*  Indigenous groups, all across the board, Christians, Jews, Muslims. I have never seen
*  more diversity at these rallies than I have seen this time around, which I think is a sign
*  of where things are going. And if you look at the under 35 opinion polls, it is very clear
*  that there is a generational gap here, that the country is moving into
*  a more coherent direction and understanding what has been happening over there.
*  And people from all backgrounds are standing up to it now.
*  R. What do you think about the protests on campus against Israel?
*  B. Every protest I have been to has had the exact same tenor, has had the exact same messaging,
*  but you always have that idiot or two that shows up with a sign.
*  And no one knows who that idiot is, ironically. He never comes with anybody else, always shows
*  up somehow in the middle of the protest and puts up a sign that says something completely contrary
*  to the messaging of the protest. And then all the cameras shift towards that guy.
*  I see it every single time, but the overwhelming tenor of all of these protests
*  has been consistent. It has been calling for freedom, it has been calling for liberation,
*  it has been calling for an end to the genocide, a ceasefire, an end to the occupation,
*  an end to the apartheid. I will tell you what many people are not seeing.
*  Columbia University, two IDF soldiers, former IDF soldiers, spraying Palestinian protesters
*  with skunk water, which is what the IDF uses on Palestinian protesters and sometimes on
*  worshippers on their way to Mazal al-Aqsa, which has multiple health repercussions.
*  And so I was reading about how one of the students that was sprayed on campus at Columbia,
*  Palestinian student, has showered at this point of us doing this podcast 11 times,
*  cannot get the smell out of her, has suffered all sorts of health issues as a result of being
*  sprayed. Again, people are not seeing the other side here. People are not seeing
*  what we've had to deal with at these protests, the open bigotry. And I want you to think about
*  this, by the way. People go and serve in the IDF and then come back to the United States or
*  the United Kingdom, and they're not stigmatized for participating in apartheid policies or
*  participating in a genocide. How am I supposed to feel as a Palestinian knowing that this guy
*  right next to me participated in murdering my relatives in Gaza and has open reign to say what
*  he wants to say or do what he wants to do? And so we haven't seen the other side of that as well,
*  but I'd recommend to anyone that's talking about pro-Palestine protests to actually go see one.
*  If you go to the protests, you listen to what's being said, and you don't just capture them,
*  you've got 400,000 people. Don't just go try to find... You're going to find four stupid people
*  at a protest of 400,000 people, right? Because the protest scene is always messy. But I think that
*  this is a sign of the outrage and the anger and the frustration that many students have about
*  being silenced, again, in the media and academic settings. Professors are losing their jobs.
*  Students are having their faces put on trucks, being doxed. These shady watch lists that get
*  put out. I'm on a few of them as well, and I just don't care anymore, right? But you've got these
*  shady watch lists. People are losing their jobs at law firms. They're losing all of their future
*  opportunities, young Palestinian students, because of something that they tweeted that's
*  being taken out of context 10 years ago, right? When they were 17 years old. It's ridiculous.
*  We have to listen to the overwhelming majority of voices of people that are demonstrating for
*  justice. Not demonstrating against anyone, but demonstrating for people. Again, there's a large
*  pronounced Jewish presence at every single pro-Palestine march. In fact, if you look at
*  the organizations, the groups that have taken over Capitol Hill and train stations, it's been,
*  if not now, not in our name. Never again means for anyone, right? It's been Jewish groups,
*  many Jewish anti-occupation groups that have been at the forefronts. And I think that that's
*  where we have to pay attention to the beauty of how diverse this movement for free Palestine
*  has actually been. So the average sentiment is anti-occupation, not anti-Semitic.
*  It's incredibly lazy, incredibly lazy to say that anti-Zionism or that anti-occupation
*  is anti-Semitic. First and foremost, the Palestinians are a Semitic people. That's number
*  one. Number two, look, I'm proud of my community. My community has stood against anti-Semitism in
*  this country. The Muslim community has been at the forefront of condemning anti-Semitism. We have
*  stood in front of synagogues. We have stood with the Jewish community when the Jewish community is
*  attacked. This is about occupation. This is a story of a colonial entity that has driven us out of
*  our homes and has done so in such a way that has forced us to try to be the voice of a people
*  that are being exterminated overseas right now. This is not an anti-Semitic movement. This is a pro-freedom
*  movement. Do you think the protests ever go too far? The protest scene is a messy scene. And so,
*  again, you're going to have sometimes that odd speaker or people get carried away in their
*  emotions. And yes, sometimes people chant things or do things that are contrary to the protests.
*  It's pretty unfair when you judge the entire protest movement by some of these incidents
*  that have happened at protests and you don't pay attention to what they're protesting about
*  in the first place, which is a genocide. Right now, everything is secondary to ending a genocide
*  that is ongoing. In the course of this discussion, it's not an exaggeration to say that at least
*  30, 40 people would have been killed just over the last few hours because we're averaging 135
*  to 150 a day. So, everything else is secondary to that. This is where we all need to be right now as
*  people of conscience. How do we stop this? Because every single day is deeply costly.
*  Do you think there has been a rise of anti-Semitism and anti-Muslim hate in the US?
*  Yeah, I think that's factual. Look, anti-Semitism is always to be condemned. It's wrong. It's
*  something that as a Muslim community and as people of conscience, we have always taken a stand against.
*  Jewish people should not be attacked for being Jewish people here or anywhere else.
*  Synagogues should be protected. And if a person is attacked for being Jewish,
*  we will be the first to go and to stand with them and to reject that attack on them.
*  And there has been, as I said, an inspiring pronounced Jewish presence in the movement
*  to end the occupation. And so, we're being morally consistent here. As far as the rise
*  in Islamophobia, it is felt, it's under reported, and it is part of the same framing
*  that has led to the devastation of our people overseas. So, there's a rise in Islamophobia,
*  there's a rise in anti-Semitism, there's a rise in hatred. All of that is true,
*  but there's also an ongoing genocide and that should be our priority right now to end.
*  I think we spoke last time about a year ago. How is your view on Benjamin Netanyahu evolved over time?
*  Benjamin Netanyahu has committed himself to the erasure of Palestinian people
*  and Palestinian symbols and Palestinian land from the very beginning of his political career.
*  This is who he has been. We just haven't been listening to him. He campaigns on bigotry and
*  racism and on the promise that there would never be a Palestinian state. He campaigns on the promise
*  that Gaza would be wiped out. He campaigns by saying the Arabs are rushing to the polls.
*  We need to make sure that they don't infect our policy. He has always been this person.
*  This has always been his policy. He has always indicated that genocide and ethnic cleansing
*  is where he wants to go. So, he's simply manifesting what his message has always been.
*  Anyone that ignores that is being disingenuous. You can find statements from Benjamin Netanyahu
*  in the 80s, 90s, 2000s. You can find him talking about this prior to October 7th and after October
*  7th. He's definitely doing this now to save his political career. I think he wants to drive this
*  as long as he possibly can because he knows that his days in office are numbered.
*  But let's also ask ourselves why is it that Benjamin Netanyahu was able to rise to power
*  in the first place? There's something deeply troubling about the fact that his messaging
*  ever resonated and what the prospects are for peace if Benjamin Netanyahu was able to rise
*  with such pronounced hateful messaging.
*  So, the claim that security of Israel is the primary concern is, you're saying, a dishonest claim?
*  I think he's trying to secure his seat in office. He knows his days are numbered. This is not about
*  Israel. This isn't about the hostages for him. This isn't about anything but Benjamin Netanyahu.
*  He is a narcissist. He's a tyrant. He is despised around the world and I think even amongst
*  Israelis, I think there's a deep hatred for him. I think the hostages' families know that he doesn't
*  care about the families or about the hostages, but he's driving a political agenda that doesn't
*  care about people, not Palestinian people or otherwise. However, he's not a terrorist.
*  However, the problem of the occupation is not Benjamin Netanyahu. The problem of the occupation
*  is the occupation. Yair Lapid was the progressive, moderate alternative and he drove just as bigoted
*  of an agenda against the Palestinian people as possible. So, to the Palestinian that's living
*  in Gaza or the Palestinian in the West Bank, whoever's sitting in that seat has meant the
*  same thing to them. Benjamin Netanyahu is certainly the loudest bigot that we have seen
*  in that seat. Do you think Israel has the right to defend its borders?
*  I think Israel has a responsibility to protect those that it occupies.
*  I think you have to ask that question differently. Noura Araqat wrote a tremendous article on this
*  from a legal perspective. When you talk about Israel defending itself,
*  Israel is bound to occupation law. This is the problem all along. When John Kerry said,
*  of course, the US is great sometimes at issuing inconsequential statements that Israel has to
*  choose whether or not it wants to be a Jewish or a democratic state, but it can't be both.
*  If Israel wants to occupy and deny and at the same time not be held to the standards
*  of being an occupier, but be treated as if it's some normal state, those borders were drawn across
*  occupied land and have been expanding into Palestinian territory and people have been
*  thrown out of their homes systematically and transgressed upon even in the places that they
*  fled to, which is Gaza. So, when you talk about Israel having a right to defend itself,
*  you should be talking about Israel's duty to protect everyone under its occupation,
*  either lift the occupation or protect everyone under your occupation.
*  Where are your borders? What is your responsibility? Who are you protecting?
*  I think that it speaks to the fact that Israeli policy considers Palestinians to be animals.
*  They say as much and they do as much. I've spoken about James Baldwin and James Baldwin
*  talked about this pious silence surrounding Israel that we're supposed to pretend
*  like it's just another state and ignore how it came into being and what it functions as.
*  I think that pious silence has to be broken. I remember John Stewart when he had The Daily
*  Show several years ago and he talked about this policy of we have to defend ourselves and if
*  someone was attacking your home, what would you do? The response was, well, why are you forcing
*  people into a closet? So, you force people into this desperate situation. You drive them out of
*  their homes, claim their homes and then say that you're defending yourself against them. The default
*  is that an occupied people have a right to defend themselves. The occupier is obligated to those
*  that they occupy. Can you speak to this term occupation in Gaza?
*  Because the people that say it is not an occupation say that Israeli troops have been pulled out from
*  there before October 7th for many years. To you, it still is a de facto occupation.
*  Israel doesn't get to set the terms and then define them. It is an occupation according to
*  any international legal standard. Israel controls the movement of everyone in Gaza.
*  It controls the air and the seas. It controls the ability to import or export.
*  The people that live in Gaza and the people that live in the West Bank,
*  the Palestinians have had their identity stolen from them.
*  There's the freedom of movement. There is the freedom of thriving. There is self-determination.
*  All of that has been stolen from the people of Gaza. There's no airport in Gaza that was destroyed
*  by Israel as well. It is an occupation at every level and by any meaningful legal determination.
*  What do you think about Yemen's Houthi rebels attacking Israel in response to October 7th?
*  Then the United States and the UK initiating bombing of multiple targets in Yemen in response
*  to that. Yeah, I think that it's clear that the United States cares more about its shipping lanes
*  than it does about Palestinian lives and that actually has proved it. Look, I do not support
*  the Houthis as Houthis or their policies in general. But if you look at what has transpired
*  and what they have said, they're attacking these ships in response to the occupation
*  or in response to the genocide and saying that they will continue to do so, to stop business as
*  usual until a ceasefire is reached. They have not killed anyone. They have seized ships. They have
*  blocked the lanes. But they have said that if a ceasefire happens, they will cease their activity.
*  Instead of the United States trying to get a ceasefire through, the United States decided,
*  let's go bomb Yemen too. Let's spend more money on weapons and killing innocent people,
*  which shows you exactly where our policy always leads itself to, unfortunately. So
*  I think that most reasonable people would say that the problem is not with
*  Yemeni rebels attacking ships. The problem is with Israel attacking innocent Palestinian lives.
*  You mentioned paying respects to the legacy of EBJ, Eddie Bernice Johnson,
*  and remembering Palestinian child prisoners. Can you explain?
*  So Congresswoman Eddie Bernice Johnson was one of the few co-sponsors of a bill that has been on the
*  floor of Congress for years, initially sponsored by Congresswoman Betty McCollum to penalize Israel
*  for its detention of child prisoners, thousands of children arbitrarily detained, put in military
*  courts, solitary confinement, and yes, sexual violence that's been documented by human rights
*  organizations against them. And there have been no repercussions. So I want you to think about this,
*  just the thought of conditioning aid to Israel so that it doesn't indiscriminately bomb entire
*  populations has not been able to find any home in mainstream American politics. For years,
*  just trying to stop Israel from picking up children and throwing them into military prisons
*  where they disappear for decades at times has not found any thrust in mainstream American politics,
*  whereas any resolution that is pro-Israel will make it past both chambers relatively quickly.
*  When people talk about Israeli hostages and then talk about Palestinian prisoners,
*  there's already a problem with that framing. First of all, all 2.2 million people in Gaza
*  are hostages. Every Palestinian that lives under occupation is a hostage, but all of those prisoners
*  that have been picked up, women, children, innocent people with absolutely no process
*  of making sure that they're treated right or given fair trials or even given a communication line
*  with their families or with any government to help them is absolutely criminal. All of those
*  prisoners are also hostages. When you already propose this idea that there are Israeli hostages
*  and Palestinian prisoners, you're already implying that one group is complicit in their own
*  devastation, whereas another group has had devastation visited upon them entirely out of
*  their own doing. So it's important for people to learn about children prisoners who are indeed
*  hostages to an apartheid system. Even what happened during that four-day truce,
*  which all of us hoped would be extended and become permanent, where 150 Palestinian prisoners were
*  released, Israel just went and picked up another 135 in the West Bank and threw them in prisons.
*  That's what I mean when I say you're not addressing the root of the problem. The root of the problem
*  is the occupation. The root of the problem is the apartheid. The root of the problem
*  is the desperation that then drives the creation of all sorts of circumstances that will only
*  further lead to the devastation of everyone. If you don't solve that problem, and at the root
*  of that problem is the dehumanization of the Palestinian because no one is raising alarms
*  for those Palestinian hostages in Israeli military prisons. No one's putting up their pictures
*  and no one's talking about who they are and their human stories and the violence that's been wreaked
*  against them at every level. So if you don't solve not just the root of occupation, but also
*  the dehumanization that drives the occupation, which is unfortunately so pervasive right now
*  in the discourse, then you're going to continue to have this gap in how the world sees the plight
*  of the Palestinians and how unfortunately the American public sees the problem of the Palestinians.
*  And to you, big peace agreements like
*  of the like of Abraham Accords should include Palestine.
*  Abraham Accords is nothing but an agreement in which you slap the name of Abraham on arms deals
*  in exchange for countries being able to undertake their own unholy pursuits.
*  They use one of the holiest names in history and continue to erase the main victims of this
*  atrocity. And so the Abraham Accords are an insult to humanity, an insult to the Palestinians,
*  and an insult to the name of Abraham.
*  But do you think something like that, agreements of that nature, of that scale could be made
*  that include the Palestinian people and that would actually have make progress?
*  If they're honest to the plight of the Palestinians, if they are honest to the roots of the problem,
*  absolutely. Look, again, peace is sought, but peace cannot be used to silence.
*  The entire peace process has been hung over the Palestinians all these years,
*  while settlements continue to expand and their situation only continue to get worse.
*  Is Israel really going to remove the 700,000, 800,000 settlers, right? And suddenly changes
*  tune on a two-state solution. Benjamin Netanyahu is saying right now, and he's speaking to
*  unfortunately what is clearly a majority of the Israeli public, that there will never be a
*  Palestinian state. So these peace talks cannot be used to suffocate all of the work of justice
*  and bringing Israel to accountability. The world has to act when they see apartheid. The world has
*  to act when they see occupation. If the world fails to bring Israel to a place of accountability,
*  bring Israel to a place of accountability, then a few countries that have their own agendas
*  cannot put forth anything meaningful for the victims of Israel being the Palestinian people.
*  LW There's a lot of questions I want to ask you about
*  the nature of resistance and what is the proper way to resist, what is the practical, pragmatic,
*  effective ways of resisting. So one example that is often brought up is the difference between MLK
*  and Malcolm X. One emphasized nonviolent resistance, the other emphasized any means
*  necessary resistance. Which do you side with in general and in this particular case of what has
*  happened over the past 100 plus days? CB So in general, that framing relies on
*  a sanitization of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and a vilification of Malcolm X that a lot of people
*  do put forth and present as two polar opposites in how they approach the plight of black people
*  in America and resisting racism here in America. When I taught a course at Southern Methodist
*  University on MLK and Malcolm X and Islam and the Civil Rights Movement, what I'd often do is I'd
*  give my students a set of quotes and I would say assign this to Malcolm or Martin and they'd always
*  get it wrong. So you can find quotes from MLK and breaking the silence and especially when he took
*  a stand against the Vietnam War that sounds so radical when you compare them to the image of MLK.
*  Malcolm has of course turned into this militant angry Muslim who just wanted violence and was
*  seeking chaos here in the United States. So let's be clear about something here that Malcolm
*  never himself was part of any violence. Malcolm never did anything violent. Malcolm found it
*  hypocritical to commit the oppressed people to nonviolence while not restraining the oppressor
*  from its violence. And I agree with Malcolm. It is absolutely hypocritical to focus your attention
*  and your energy on the oppressed people and committing them to nonviolence while not directing
*  your attention to the oppressor. When you have such asymmetry, when you have a clear aggressor
*  and aggressed upon, you have a clear colonial entity and a clear colonized people, you focus
*  your energy on restraining the colonial power. You focus your energy on restraining the oppressor,
*  not the oppressed. And so that was Malcolm's point. And it's clear in his messaging throughout
*  his religious growth because of course Malcolm did evolve as a person, but Malcolm found it
*  deeply hypocritical to commit the oppressed to nonviolence. Malcolm also had a deep understanding
*  of the way that brutality here, state violence in the United States was connected to its state
*  violence abroad and American imperialism as a whole. Malcolm was the first to speak on Vietnam,
*  the first major African American leader to speak on Vietnam. Martin followed. Malcolm also went to
*  Gaza in 1964. 1964, went to Khan Yunus, which is now under heavy bombardment, and Malcolm penned
*  an essay on Zionism and connected Zionism to American imperialism and the broader implications
*  of America's foreign policy. So Martin and Malcolm, if you look at them in the capacity
*  of what's happening right now, where I would say you can find something that is deeply profound.
*  James Cohn wrote a book called Malcolm and Martin Dreams and Nightmares. And he wrote something
*  profound to the effect that Martin tried to liberate white people from their own racism,
*  whereas Malcolm tried to liberate black people from the effects of that racism on them. And so
*  they both played a deeply important role. Self-determination is crucial to maintain the
*  fuel of a movement. And I think one of the things that probably deeply frustrates those that have
*  sought the erasure of Palestine is that Palestinian consciousness has only continued to grow
*  after 75 years. Palestinians in diaspora and Palestinians within occupied territory,
*  all are deeply rooted in their Palestinian identity and existence, and they're not going away.
*  So I think that that's where the function is important of this,
*  whereas those that are complicit in the oppression need to be liberated from their own oppression,
*  you know, and liberated from what they're participating in. Most Americans that I talk to
*  that have absolutely no idea about what's going on, when they come to hear just a few stories
*  of the plight of the Palestinian people and the types of brutality that we have encountered,
*  wake up to this and say, oh my God, this is what my tax dollars go to.
*  This is what I'm a part of, right? So we have to liberate people across the board from being
*  oppressors or from being oppressed. What do you think about the seeming fact that
*  the majority of Palestinians support the October 7th attacks? You have to see the world,
*  their world through their eyes. You can't try to see their world through your eyes.
*  If you live under occupation, you're routinely harassed at Israeli checkpoints.
*  The occupation is expanding into your territory. You're meeting families, you know, regularly
*  that have been thrown out of their homes and that are looking for a new place in the shrinking
*  territory. You deal with routine airstrikes. You have no way to get out. You have no way to grow.
*  You don't even have a passport. Your education is subpar. Your standards of living are lower
*  than the rest of the world. And all you hear from the other side, which dominates the discourse
*  and dominates every element of your existence, are promises of erasure, of complete erasure.
*  13,000 people I mentioned, 2023, 13,000 new settlement units being advanced.
*  If that happened anywhere, just think about what that means when you clear out a village or two.
*  It's not that big of a territory. When you know that that's happening and when you have been
*  subjected to that, anyone that claims to be supporting you or uplifting you from that state
*  of misery is going to have sympathy. Whether you agree with their mission or their methods or not,
*  it's human. It is human that if anyone says that they are going to get you out of this misery
*  and inflict pain on those who have given you a life of pain and promised you a future of pain,
*  you're going to have sympathy to that group, whether you agree with them or not.
*  I think that the question also has to be asked. What about the Israeli public? Israel holds all
*  of the power in that region, holds all of the power over that territory, is able to dominate
*  the expansion of its own territory and diminish any Palestinian territory, is able to place
*  restrictions whenever it wants on Palestinian movement trying to get to their holy sites or
*  otherwise, whether it's Mezal Aqsa or the Holy Sepulchre or the Church of Nativity.
*  The majority of the Israeli public before October 7th, unfortunately, according to all polls,
*  favors a non-democratic regime, the end of a two-state solution, does not care about the plight
*  of Palestinian people. The majority of the Israeli public, why is that and what does that mean for
*  Palestinians? Especially now after this genocide, the vast majority of the Israeli public does not
*  favor a ceasefire. What are we supposed to do when we see mainstream media coming out of Israel,
*  pop culture, TikTok videos that only speak to a greater desire to eliminate the Palestinian people?
*  So anyone that says that they are going to support your plight, whether you agree with
*  their mission or their methods, is going to resonate with that child that has grown up
*  in those desperate circumstances. Bassem Youssef had an interview with Piers Morgan and he was
*  talking about this. He literally gave it a human story. If you're a child that's grown up,
*  you've lost limbs, your parents are dead, your friends are dead, you have been made a refugee
*  two or three times already, you have no future in sight,
*  and then someone comes to you and says, I'm going to help you and I'm going to fight back on your
*  behalf. Of course it's going to resonate, it's human, right? And so I think that it's important
*  for us to see the world through their eyes rather than try to see the world through our eyes.
*  So as Malcolm X did, you're calling for highlighting the asymmetry in violence and
*  asymmetry in moral reasoning. Absolutely. It's important. You're not going to be able to solve
*  this problem unless you're able to do that. And so when Malcolm said that if you stick a knife
*  nine inches into my back and pull it out six inches, that's not progress. Progress is healing
*  the wounds and you're not even willing to acknowledge that the knife is there yet.
*  Those that don't acknowledge what is determined now by any international human rights organization,
*  even Israeli human rights organization, Betislam and others, to be apartheid, a state of apartheid
*  and a state of occupation, and now an unfolding genocide, are not partners for peace.
*  It just hurts me to think how long it takes to heal. Even if the healing begins now with a knife,
*  metaphor, it's just going to be generations because people don't forget when your father
*  and mother were murdered or somebody that you know in your family was killed. They don't forget.
*  Look, I think the point is that we have to come to terms with the fact that
*  the trauma of the past does not justify the murder of the present and the fear of the future
*  does not justify the murder of the present. The urgency of the world right now should be
*  entirely focused on ending this atrocity that unfortunately the world has become so complacent
*  with. Again, prior to October 7th, this status quo was not acceptable and there was no means in sight
*  in the global arena to rein this in, to make Israel more accountable, to stop this.
*  I do believe in the power of healing. I do believe in the power of growth. I
*  do believe that we have seen ugly episodes of history before that have been rectified.
*  I also believe in the heart of my people. I believe that the Palestinian people are people
*  of resistance. They're people of resilience. They're people of courage and they're people of
*  benevolence and magnanimity and they're people who have been made to grow
*  under the worst of circumstances. I don't see in the hearts of young Palestinians that have been
*  tormented. I don't see darkness. I see light. I see the ability to still laugh and find joy
*  despite everything that's happened. And so I think that the urgency right now just has to be
*  towards ensuring that they have a life, that they're not being killed anymore.
*  I was wondering if you can comment on an idea and a notion that comes up often in conversations about
*  this of why can't other nations in the region take in Palestinian refugees?
*  So I think that we have to tackle what's implied by that at multiple levels. And I actually want
*  to walk back. I was listening to Nikki Haley when she said in one of her interviews,
*  you know, and why is it that you think no one wants to take the Palestinians in? And she had
*  like this deeply disturbing laugh to it. Or Ben Shapiro when he said,
*  Israelis like to build and Arabs like to bomb crap and live in their sewage.
*  Or, you know, why is it that no one wants to govern the Palestinians? Suggesting that Palestinians
*  are ungovernable and not fit to bring into your countries. And that's why they're being turned
*  away. You know who else faced that bigotry? Jews trying to escape the Holocaust. 1939,
*  300,000 Germans applied for refuge here in the United States. I think only about 10,000
*  were allowed in. And we also turned away ships of Jews that were seeking refuge here in the United
*  States on what basis? That they were a national security threat and could not be trusted. They
*  could not be taken in. That's the same bigotry that's driving this. And I want you to think
*  about it, you know, from that perspective, how deeply offensive that is. When you have
*  millions of Palestinians in diaspora, where have Palestinians caused trouble where they've gone?
*  Everywhere Palestinians are, they have overcome significant hurdles to become scientists and
*  doctors and to grow themselves and to grow the places that they're in. Where have Palestinians
*  that have been displaced all over the world caused issues for people, right? So it's both racist
*  and factually incorrect. That's not the right question that should be asked. The question
*  that should be asked are why are these people driven from their homes? Not why won't other
*  people around them open their homes to them? And so I'll just share with you that even on a
*  personal level, you know, it's really interesting because sometimes on Twitter or wherever it is,
*  it'll be like, go back home, right? Why don't you go back home? And I'm sitting there thinking to
*  myself like, sure, you know, my parents were driven from their homes. Yeah, sure. I was born
*  in this country as a consequence of bad policy. Now, I embrace my complicated identity in that
*  regard and I hope to be productive as an American, but I am a Palestinian and Palestinians in diaspora
*  that have been fortunate enough to have the ability to build and to overcome circumstances
*  should not be an excuse for eliminating the Palestinians that remain in their homes under
*  that torment. So this bigotry is not new. Unfortunately, its manifestation is ugly
*  and, you know, we have to push back on it whenever it shows itself, no matter who it's being spoken
*  about. How difficult has it been for people in Gaza to flee? I mean, they're blockaded from all
*  directions. There is nowhere for people in Gaza to go. They cannot get out. And, you know, the
*  reality is that they don't want to leave. They do not want to leave. The Palestinian people want to
*  live in their land, in their homes, and to continue to produce, you know, an extension of the
*  beautiful culture and legacy that was handed to them. They don't want to leave. In fact, those
*  that have fled for whatever reason or have been able to get out for medical treatment or because
*  they have some sort of citizenship in other countries, all they're talking about is going
*  back and rebuilding. You can't bomb Palestine out of our hearts. You cannot starve Palestine out of
*  our hearts. I think that's a critical mistake that Israel is making. And it thinks that if it
*  destroys Gaza enough, if it wipes out all the buildings, that people will never want to come
*  back. We don't want to go anywhere as a Palestinian people, you know, in a way that would remove us
*  from our homes. The Palestinian people are proud people. Yeah, you've met a lot of them, right?
*  When you sat with Mohammed Al-Qurdu people in East Jerusalem, what those people have been subjected
*  to, you know, the harassment. I think about the tenacity and the character that it takes to still
*  try to walk back into your home after an intruder has been brought in by the state
*  that's sitting in your living room that is pushing you around and you're saying,
*  I'm not leaving my home. This is literally what's been happening in East Jerusalem.
*  And we're not going anywhere. I think those of us that are in diaspora,
*  Palestine is not leaving our hearts. And those of us that are still there are not leaving their land.
*  And the world has to make the occupier more accountable, not tell the occupied how to cope.
*  Do you ever imagine that if your family did not flee and you were now living in,
*  in say, in Gaza, what you would be doing?
*  I think about what could have been all the time. You know, I actually mentioned this in the first
*  DC protest that I remember getting a notification, a news notification
*  just prior to October with my name in it. You know, so I always get these notifications,
*  right? If my name's been mentioned in an article. And so, oh, your name's been mentioned in an
*  article. And it was a 16 year old, Omar Suleiman, who was murdered in the West Bank.
*  He literally had my name. I held up his picture and I realized that could have been me.
*  So, I think of why God chose me to not be there and hopefully him choosing all of us that are not
*  there to be for those that are still there, to be their voices. I'm grateful and I'm also in pain.
*  I'm grateful for the opportunity to be able to speak on their behalf, but I'm also guilty
*  that they have to bear the brunt of this evil hatred that unfortunately displaced our parents
*  in the first place. You mentioned that Palestinians invoke the plight of indigenous people,
*  like Native Americans. What works and doesn't work about this analogy?
*  So, I think that there is a powerful connection between the Palestinian people and the indigenous
*  and this land and in other places that have been wronged. We are living here in the United States
*  on stolen lands that is drenched in the blood of the natives. And that was built upon with the
*  blood, sweat and labor of enslaved Africans that were brought from overseas. It's a
*  great evil that we have to reckon with constantly. And so, I think that's the power of solidarity.
*  If you look in Canada and you look in places like Australia, there has been a refocus on the crimes
*  against the indigenous of those places. I think that what makes the Palestinian plight
*  deeply painful and maybe where the analogy even doesn't do justice is that from the river to the
*  sea is less than 500 times what the United States is in terms of land. It's not that big of a piece
*  of land. And so, the original lie was a land without a people for a people without a land.
*  And the problem was that there were people on that land that were forcibly removed. So,
*  I think that the sheer size, we're talking about a tiny piece of land and a lot of people that were
*  removed forcibly from their land and that continue to be brutalized under those
*  miserable conditions. Why is Palestine a special place, a holy land?
*  It's the land of prophets. It is a land that holds deep significance, obviously, to
*  Jews, Christians and Muslims. It's the land of Abraham, peace be upon him. It is the land
*  that has such a rich history to it that connects multiple peoples in multiple ways. It's precious.
*  I think that history, while it tells the story of tragedy and struggle over that piece of land,
*  also tells a beautiful story of sanctity. So, you mentioned Abraham, prophets,
*  Prophet Muhammad is deeply venerated in Islam, obviously, but other prophets are as well,
*  Jesus being one of them. What are the similarities and differences in the teachings from these
*  two prophets? Well, Islam refers to this idea of submission to one God and attaining peace in the
*  process and refers to the way of life that prophets have all come with, which is this idea of
*  monotheism and serving that one God in the way that he commands you to serve him. So, to us,
*  as it says in the Quran that we do not distinguish between the prophets, all the prophets came with
*  one message, one mission. There's a coherence in the creed. There's a beauty in the way that
*  coherence and the creed, there's a beauty in the foundation of what would become the
*  legislation of each of those prophets. And we see them all as siblings in prophethood.
*  And so, we say Abraham, peace be upon him. We say Jesus, peace be upon him. We say Moses,
*  peace be upon him. We say Muhammad, peace be upon him. We believe that Moses came to confirm what
*  came from Abraham. Jesus came to confirm what came from Moses. Muhammad came to confirm what
*  came from Jesus. They upheld the same message. God did not change over time, nor did the centrality
*  of his message of monotheism change over time. And so, to us, it's one beautiful house. There's
*  a saying from the prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him, where he describes the house of prophethood,
*  each prophet being a brick and him simply being the last brick of a beautiful house.
*  And so, we love the prophets of God and we believe that they each came with the legislation that was
*  necessary for the time, but with the same message. So the message is fundamentally the same. Is there
*  a difference in emphasis? For example, the emphasis on love for Jesus. Yeah, you know,
*  this is, it's like when you talk about MLK and Malcolm to an extent. Except there was actually
*  some difference between MLK and Malcolm. I just think that the difference is exaggerated between
*  them. But I don't think that Moses didn't emphasize love, but Jesus emphasized love,
*  and then Muhammad didn't emphasize love, peace be upon them all. I think that they each emphasized
*  the same attributes and names of God and ways of knowing God. But there were, of course,
*  changes within legislation, changes within the divine law, but the divine spirit remain the same.
*  And so, I don't see them as being counter to each other, nor do I see that any prophet
*  betrayed the message that came before them. I think they're all part of the same beautiful message
*  that we have to be at harmony with our creator and that we turn towards him for our guidance
*  and that when we do so, we establish a greater existence here on earth. And so,
*  I think that that's something that's consistent throughout the message of all the prophets.
*  You have been longtime friends with and had amazing conversations with people of other faiths,
*  Christian, Jewish. How has the events of October 7th and the days after affected this?
*  In the United States, your ability to have interfaith conversations,
*  connections, relationships, friendships?
*  Complicated, very complicated. And it's not just Muslims and Jews, it's also Christian Zionists.
*  Christian Zionism is at the root of the problem, in my opinion, especially when we talk about what
*  drives America's unshakable, unconditional commitment to Israel. It's devastating,
*  I think, to Palestinian Christians in particular when Israel can bomb some of the oldest churches
*  of Christianity in Gaza and kill Palestinian Christians. And Palestinian Christians are barred
*  from going to the Holy Sepulcher or to their places of worship in Bethlehem or Jerusalem.
*  And Christians here in the United States turn their back on them. I think that it
*  is particularly outrageous. So, it's complicated. Look, I expect more from people
*  in the face of a genocide. We don't have to agree on all the particulars,
*  but we can agree that what is happening is morally outrageous. And so, I think that
*  I've had a few people that have reached out and said, I want to say something, but I can't.
*  And I've had to respond with, that's not good enough. So, I think that we have a problem.
*  And instead of focusing on that problem, I'd like to focus on the more morally consistent voices
*  across faiths that have risen to the moment rather than those that have failed.
*  So, you wish more rabbis would be able to have a conversation like we're having today
*  and also not allow it to be seen as them turning their back on their religion?
*  Rabbis, pastors, again, it's not just Jewish leadership, it's also Christian leadership.
*  I think that it's important for those that have claimed to be allies in the fight against
*  Islamophobia to see that you cannot be opposed to Islamophobia while also extending anti-Palestinian
*  bigotry. Yeah, one of the things since we last spoke, I've gotten to meet a lot of Palestinian
*  Christians, including in West Bank. And that was fascinating and those are beautiful people.
*  I think people should watch Reverend Undar Haq's sermon on Christmas, Jesus and the Rebel.
*  It was deeply profound. I had a chance to speak to Mitri Rahib from the Lutheran Church there as
*  well. No, they're devastated. It was eye-opening to many people here when Justin Amish, who was a
*  Republican congressman, right? Palestinian Christian Republican congressman posted about his own family
*  dying in one of the church bombings. So it's strange. Strange times and I think that it shows
*  that the philosophy of hate that drives this terrible policy is secular at its root and not
*  religious. One of the criticisms of Islam points to specific verses of the Quran
*  and the criticism being that it is not a religion of peace. Can you speak to that?
*  So objectively speaking, if you were to take the verses of the Quran about violence and compare
*  them just from a purely percentage-based comparison to the New Testament and the
*  Old Testament, you would find less verses about war in the Quran than the Old Testament or the
*  New Testament. And there are plenty of studies to speak to that. Deeper than that, contextualizing
*  the birth of Islam, the revelation of the Quran, which was over 23 years,
*  in response to deep persecution of the Prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him,
*  makes it very clear that none of those verses are what they've been made out to be.
*  If Muslims believed that they had to kill people wherever they are,
*  mankind would not exist. There are two billion of us. If we believe that we were called by the
*  Quran to hurt people and to kill people simply for being non-believers, it would
*  not make for a sustainable world. So Islam is not violent. And I think that the history of Muslims
*  also bears witness to that. The history of Islam is a history of contribution, is a history of
*  building, is a history of medicine and science and math. And of course, Muslims have sometimes
*  fallen short of Islamic standards in the past and in the present. But if you look at the overall
*  history of Islam and the history of the Muslim community, that's not the case. And when you look
*  at the present Muslim community around the world, Muslims do not account for a greater proportion of
*  violence than other faith communities. And again, the word terrorist is a functionless and meaningless
*  word because to me it's no less violent if it's commanded by a head of state or by a government
*  than by a non-state actor. So Muslims do not account for a greater portion of violence now,
*  nor have they accounted for a greater portion of violence in the past.
*  LW – What do you think these narratives have taken hold in present
*  discourse, at least in the United States?
*  JS – Because they allow for greater violence against the Muslim community domestically and
*  abroad. The United States has launched wars against primarily Muslim countries,
*  right? And has a particularly violent foreign policy towards the Muslim world.
*  And the Muslim community here in the United States has dealt with, unfortunately, multiple
*  aggressive iterations of programs of suppression and surveillance under Republican and Democratic
*  administrations. And so there's a convenience to that Islamophobia. There's a convenience to that
*  framing of the Muslim community that also distracts from other forms of violence that are
*  deeply pervasive and present, including the ones that are committed by the government itself.
*  LW – If it's okay, you've mentioned the Al-Aqsa mosque a couple of times. I would love it if you can
*  describe why it is such an important place, a holy place for Muslims in general,
*  but also for this particular crisis that we have been speaking about today.
*  JS – So Muslims honor the history of all of the prophets, right? So all of the prophets that have
*  walked in that place, all of the prophets that have worshiped in that place, all of that makes
*  it sacred, right? So it's not separated for Muslims from, you know, post-Muhammad, peace be upon him,
*  versus prior to Muhammad, peace be upon him, in terms of the sanctity of that place. So we honor it.
*  And Masjid Al-Aqsa in particular is the place where the Prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him,
*  leads the other prophets in prayer in the night of what's known as Al-Isra' al-Miraj, the night
*  journey of the Prophet, peace be upon him, and then he ascends to the heavens and back. And it's also
*  the first Qibla, which is the first place of direction of prayer for us. So before Muslims
*  faced Mecca in prayer for the first half of Islam, they actually faced towards Jerusalem
*  in their prayer. It was our direction of prayer, and it remained a fundamental part of our faith.
*  A fundamental holy sanctuary. There are three sanctuaries in Islam, Mecca, Medina, and Jerusalem,
*  and Masjid Al-Aqsa is precious to us. And so you can imagine then the pain of watching,
*  innocent Palestinian worshippers being stomped on by Israeli soldiers or skunk water being
*  sprayed on people as they're trying to walk in or tear gassing taking place in the nights of
*  Ramadan in that place, the restrictions on people that live right next to it and that cannot pray in
*  it due to the certain classification of Palestinian that they've been given or the age, because
*  generally speaking, if you're younger, you're not allowed to go to Masjid Al-Aqsa,
*  even if you live within the occupied territories. So it's tough to watch such a sacred place
*  with such an ugly occupation. But I'll also say this, that the sanctity of a human being,
*  the sanctity of just one person is greater than the sanctity of any place of worship to us.
*  So the sanctity of one individual in Gaza or one individual in Jerusalem is greater to us than the
*  sanctity of a place of worship, but it is all certainly interconnected.
*  That's a really powerful idea. The value of a human being is greater than even the Al-Aqsa mosque.
*  So that's a foundational idea for Islam.
*  The Prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him, says to the Kaaba itself
*  that the value of a believer's dignity and honor is greater than the value of the structure itself.
*  And so when I see a person in Gaza, a rest upon, when I see one Wala Dakhduh, when I see one child,
*  that's greater to me than even Al-Aqsa. But Al-Aqsa is at the heart of who we are
*  as well. And it's certainly at the heart of the Palestinian cause. It's a place of prophets,
*  and it's a place that should be treated prophetically.
*  You mentioned to me that since October 7th, a lot of young people in the United States and in general
*  have been showing interest in Islam. First of all, can you explain what you've been seeing
*  and experiencing in terms of that trend?
*  Yeah, we have Quran TikTok trends where you had a few people that went on camera and said,
*  I'm reading the Quran for the first time. And I think that that's
*  the beauty of the faith of the people of Gaza, the beauty of their resilience.
*  When you're looking at these people living what's hell on earth, but they're seeking paradise outside
*  and they're able to still be inspired towards words of faith and determination and certainty,
*  you're like, what is their secret? What are they reading? What are they on that allows them
*  to still face this brutality with such grace? They're not shouting profanities, they're not
*  shouting words of emptiness or despair, but rather they are pouring out their hearts that are full of
*  faith for the world to see. And I think that a lot of people have seen that and said, what is that?
*  And so, we've had multiple people come to the mosque. I've never seen more people become Muslim
*  in my life, but not just that, gain an appreciation for Islam. What type of an engineering is there
*  that allows for people to have that type of faith? So people are opening the Quran for the first time,
*  people are asking questions about Islam in a way that shows that they're inspired,
*  even though they're heartbroken by what they're seeing.
*  What's a good way to get introduced to Islam? The faith, the spiritual experience of it?
*  Well, I think, look, you go to our websites, you go to yislam.org, you come to Yaqeen's website,
*  yaqeenistude.org, you go to multiple Islamic websites to get those questions answered.
*  But there's nothing like going to a mosque. There's nothing like actually going to a mosque
*  and meeting Muslims and asking questions. And I tell people, like, you have to step out of your
*  comfort zone and go there and let your world be complicated a bit. Experience it, listen to the
*  sermon, meet people from different backgrounds, and ask questions. Muslims love to be asked,
*  by the way, about their faith because they're so sick of hearing other people talk about it.
*  So Muslims love to be asked about their faith. Palestinians love to be asked about Palestine
*  because they're so sick of other people talking about it. So ask questions and you will have them
*  answered, but there's nothing like a physical connection. There's nothing like a human
*  connection. So definitely try to reach out to your local Islamic organizations and meet people.
*  How difficult is it to convert to Islam?
*  Takes 20 seconds, man.
*  What's the most important?
*  You testify to the one. There's no pool, there's no baptism. I often joke with people,
*  I'm like, all right, we got the pool in the back, we're going to do the baptism now.
*  It's literally testifying to the oneness of God and testifying that Muhammad is his final messenger.
*  That's called the Shahadah. When you testify to the oneness of God and to
*  the Prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him, being his final prophet, you are accepting
*  what's known as the six articles of faith. Six articles of faith are belief in one God,
*  belief in the angels, belief in the messengers. So you can't be a Muslim without believing in Jesus
*  or Moses or Abraham or Muhammad to believe in the messages that God has spoken to humanity
*  through divine revelation, the Quran being the last revelation to believe in the day of judgment
*  and to believe in divine decree and predestination. So those are six articles of faith.
*  So when you testify to the oneness of God and to the Prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him,
*  being the final messenger, that's called the Shahadah, you embrace the package of those
*  articles of faith, that's the implication. Then you learn the prayers, you learn to fast in Ramadan,
*  you give what's known as Zakah, the mandatory charity, 2.5% of your retained earnings,
*  and Hajj, which is the pilgrimage to Mecca, if you can. So that's the growth part, the journey.
*  You know, once a person takes the testimony, they then grow. It's really interesting because
*  we always have those people that convert to Islam like a week before Ramadan or even a day
*  before Ramadan. So you're Muslim and you got to fast the next day, you know, and that's always
*  a challenging experience for people, but a fulfilling experience for many people when
*  they embrace Islam at that point. And again, I mean, it's simple and I think that the beauty
*  of Islam to many people is in its simplicity. One God, one humanity, one body of prophets,
*  and one community.
*  Because for you, as a Palestinian American, this year, the Ramadan
*  perhaps would be especially difficult spiritually. What
*  are you anticipating? What do you think is the difference this year?
*  I hope and pray that we have a ceasefire before Ramadan. I hope that at that point,
*  we're rebuilding Gaza, talking about rebuilding Gaza and helping people
*  that have been damaged in so many different ways. I hope that Ramadan is turning a corner.
*  Every Ramadan, the aggression against the Palestinian people seems to grow. So we're
*  usually dealing with the last 10 nights of Ramadan and then the incursions on Masjid al-Aqsa really
*  sour it for the entire Muslim world, right? Because you're watching worshippers being assaulted
*  in one of the holiest places in the world. And at the same time, you're trying to find your deep
*  connection, your own deep holy connection in Ramadan. This time we're going in,
*  and if this is still ongoing, we're dealing with a continued genocide. So I think that the mood has
*  been somber in the community. The mood has been different from anything I've ever seen before. So
*  I anticipate this Ramadan would be different from anything we've ever seen before. I think the focus
*  will continue to be on Gaza and on either stopping the aggression on Gaza or beginning
*  the rebuilding of Gaza. So the general heaviness permeates
*  just your prayers and your thoughts throughout this?
*  Yeah. I mean, look, every sermon I've given since October 7th has had to have some inclusion of
*  this because it's what's on everyone's hearts and minds. We also have people in our communities
*  that have lost 20, 30, 40 people in our midst. It's not the same. If we start to have refugees
*  or people that escape for medical treatment or that are able to get out through Egypt and
*  join their families, it's becoming more real, right? It's becoming more personal for people.
*  So I think that Ramadan will surround both in terms of messaging as well as community
*  the pain of the moment with a prayer for hope and healing.
*  Not to put you on the spot, but in your sermons, in your private life,
*  what is the passage in the Quran that is one you find yourself returning to often?
*  Hmm. You know, the part of the Quran I get asked this question that resonates with me
*  most usually has to do with what is heaviest for me at the moment.
*  There's a verse in the chapter of Mary, a part of the verse,
*  Your Lord does not forget. Your Lord does not forget. And so,
*  as you see what's transpiring right now, our hope is not in creation. Our hope is in our creator
*  and our hope is not in this life. Our hope is in the afterlife.
*  And so, that verse deeply resonates because I think that, you know, many of us
*  often wonder how are they going to rebuild? How are they going to get past this?
*  And we know that God has a way of restoring everything.
*  God will restore everything, if not in this life, then in the next.
*  So, there's an eternal flame of hope that burns there.
*  Yeah. And the people of Gaza have it. You know, you can be more easily deluded by this material
*  world if you're hostage to it. But the people of Gaza have never been deluded by the material
*  world because they never really had it. They've always been attached to a greater idea, to a
*  greater place. And so, it is part of the secret ingredient that they have, right? That they believe
*  in something greater than this. And so, you can't survive hell on earth unless you believe in paradise
*  outside of it. When you look far into the future, 20, 30, 40 years from now, we're doing another
*  podcast in the 80s and 90 years old. What do you hope to see in the Middle East? What do you hope
*  to see change in the Middle East, in the United States, as a people, as a set of policies,
*  cultures, nations? I think that the nation-state
*  model and nationalism are becoming so unsustainable just with the growth of refugee populations,
*  desperate refugee populations, the rise of, unfortunately, fanaticism and fascism
*  in different parts of the world, climate, and all that that presents to us in terms of displacement.
*  We're going to have to figure out how to function as a world rather than as nations and states.
*  We're going to have to figure out how to not see everyone outside of our borders as threats,
*  and people that are different from us within our borders as threats. We're going to have to start
*  seeing people as people. And so, my hope would be that we would have,
*  made people uncomfortable enough to transcend some of the barriers in their hearts,
*  and some of the barriers that we have in the world that don't allow us to see other people as people.
*  And then, that drives horrific policies towards people that are so distant from us.
*  You have been fearless in walking through the fire. What gives you strength psychologically?
*  What gives you strength psychologically to keep going, to speak out, but just also maintain an
*  optimism and a hope for the future? I don't believe that anyone gives me success or causes
*  me failure without the permission of God. I don't seek fuel from anyone else. I don't seek
*  hope from anyone else. I believe in a creator that has a greater plan, and I want to be a greater
*  part of that plan. And I'm inspired by the resilience of the people of Gaza. I'm inspired
*  by the resilience of my parents and our grandparents and Palestinians around the world that have
*  refused to succumb to their erasure, that have refused to give up. And so, we have both the energy
*  that we need, and we have the examples that we need. The energy is from above.
*  The examples are all around us. Well, Omar, Imam, this is a huge honor to once again speak
*  with you. And I just want to say thank you not just for this, but for many private notes you
*  have sent me of kindness and support and love through some of the low points,
*  for as silly as they are for me personally. So, it's just great to be able to call you a friend
*  and to be able to have you in my corner. I'm forever grateful to you for that.
*  I appreciate it. Thank you so much.
*  And thank you for talking today.
*  Thanks for listening to this conversation with Omar Suleiman. To support this podcast,
*  please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, let me leave you with some words from
*  Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
*  We shall overcome. Because the arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends towards justice.
*  Thank you for listening, and hope to see you next time.
