---
Date Generated: September 06, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 9980s
Video Keywords: ['elon musk', 'joe rogan', 'jordan jonas', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex friedman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex pod', 'lex podcast']
Video Views: 289950
Video Rating: None
Video Description: Jordan Jonas is a wilderness survival expert, explorer, hunter, guide, and winner of Alone Season 6, a show in which the task is to survive alone in the arctic wilderness longer than anyone else. He is widely considered to be one of the greatest competitors in the history on that show. Please support this podcast by checking out our sponsors:
- HiddenLayer: https://hiddenlayer.com/lex
- Notion: https://notion.com/lex
- Shopify: https://shopify.com/lex to get $1 per month trial
- NetSuite: http://netsuite.com/lex to get free product tour
- LMNT: https://drinkLMNT.com/lex to get free sample pack
- Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/lex to get $350 off

AMA - Submit Questions to Lex: https://lexfridman.com/ama-questions

TRANSCRIPT:
https://lexfridman.com/jordan-jonas-transcript

EPISODE LINKS:
Jordan's Instagram: https://instagram.com/hobojordo
Jordan's YouTube: https://youtube.com/@hobojordo
Jordan's Website: https://jordanjonas.com/
Jordan's X: https://x.com/hobojordo

PODCAST INFO:
Podcast website: https://lexfridman.com/podcast
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/2lwqZIr
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/2nEwCF8
RSS: https://lexfridman.com/feed/podcast/
Full episodes playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLrAXtmErZgOdP_8GztsuKi9nrraNbKKp4
Clips playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLrAXtmErZgOeciFP3CBCIEElOJeitOr41

OUTLINE:
0:00 - Introduction
1:19 - Alone Season 6
35:38 - Arctic
51:53 - Roland Welker
59:29 - Freight trains
1:11:14 - Siberia
1:29:40 - Hunger
1:49:23 - Suffering
2:04:09 - God
2:19:10 - Mortality
2:24:54 - Resilience
2:36:40 - Hope
2:39:24 - Lex AMA

SOCIAL:
- Twitter: https://twitter.com/lexfridman
- LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/lexfridman
- Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/lexfridman
- Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/lexfridman
- Medium: https://medium.com/@lexfridman
- Reddit: https://reddit.com/r/lexfridman
- Support on Patreon: https://www.patreon.com/lexfridman
---

# Jordan Jonas Survival, Hunting, Siberia, God, and Winning Alone Season 6  Lex Fridman Podcast #437
**Lex Fridman:** [July 21, 2024](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WA9gVKKPsBo)
*  The following is a conversation with Jordan Jonas, winner of Alone Season 6, a show where
*  the task is to survive alone in the Arctic wilderness longer than anyone else. He is
*  widely considered to be one of, if not the greatest competitors on that show.
*  He has a fascinating life story that took him from a farm in Idaho and hoboing on trains across
*  America to traveling with nomadic tribes in Siberia. All that helped make him into a world
*  class explorer, survivor, hunter, wilderness guide, and most importantly, a great human being with a
*  big heart and a big smile. This was a truly fun and fascinating conversation. Let me also mention
*  at the end, after the episode, I'll start answering some questions and will try to
*  articulate my thinking on some top of mind topics. So if that's of interest to you,
*  keep listening after the episode is over. This is the Lex Grunin Podcast. To support it,
*  please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, dear friends, here's Jordan Jonas.
*  You won Alone Season 6 and I think are still considered to be one of,
*  if not the most successful survivor on that show. So let's go back. Let's look at the big picture.
*  Can you tell me about the show Alone? How does it work?
*  Yeah, it's a show where they take 10 individuals and each person gets 10 items off of the list.
*  You know, basic items would be an axe, a saw, a frying pan, you know, some pretty basic stuff.
*  And then they send them all, drop them off all in the woods with a few cameras. And so the people
*  are actually alone. There's not a crew or anything. And then you basically live there as long as you
*  can, you know. And so the person that lasts the longest, you know, once the second place person
*  taps out, they come and get you in that individual wins. So it's a pretty legit challenge, you know.
*  They drop you off, helicopter flies out and you're not going to get your next meal until
*  you make it happen. So you have to figure out the shelter, you have to figure out the source of food
*  and then it gets colder and colder because I guess they drop you out in a moment
*  where it's going into the winter. Yeah, they typically do it in
*  temperate, colder climates, things like that. And they start in September, October. So times
*  ticking when they drop you off. And yeah, the pressure's on. You know, you get overwhelmed with
*  all the things you have to do right away, like, oh man, I'm not going to eat again until I actually
*  shoot or catch something. Got to build a shelter. It's pretty overwhelming. Figure your whole
*  location out. But it's interesting because once you're there a little while, you kind of get into a,
*  at least for me, there was like a week or maybe not a week, but that I was kind of a little more
*  annoyed with things. You know, it's like, oh, my sight sucks. And then, and then you kind of accept
*  it. Like, you know what, it is what it is. No, no amount of complaining is going to do anybody any
*  good. So I'm just going to make it happen. And so then, or, you know, do my best to, and then I felt
*  like I got in a zone and I felt like I was right back in kind of Siberia or in that head space.
*  And I, I found to actually really enjoyed it. I'd been a little bit out of, I guess you call it the
*  game because I had had a child. And, and so when we had our daughter, we came back to the States and
*  then a bunch of things happened and I just ended up, we didn't end up going back to Russia. So
*  it'd been a couple of years that I was just, you know, we were raising the little girl and boy then.
*  And then she's gotten a little soft. So I was like, did I got a little soft? But then it was fun. How
*  like after just some days there, I was like, oh man, I feel like, I feel like I'm at home now.
*  And then it was like, you're kind of in that flow state. And it was actually, there's a few moments,
*  like when you left the ladder up or with the moose that you kind of screwed up a little bit.
*  Oh yeah. How do you go from that moment of like frustration to the moment of acceptance?
*  I mean, the more you put yourself in life and positions that are kind of outside your comfort
*  zone or push your abilities, the more often you're going to screw up. And then, yeah,
*  the more opportunity you have to learn from that. And then to be honest, it's kind of funny,
*  but you almost get to a position where you don't feel that uncomfortable. It's not unexpected.
*  You kind of expect you're going to mess up here and there. I remember particularly with
*  the moose, the first moose I saw, I had a great shot at it, but I had a hard time judging distance
*  because it was in a mud flat, which means it's hard to tell yardage. You know, because you're
*  usually typically going by trees or markers and be like, oh, I'm probably 30 yards away.
*  This was a giant moose and he was 40 something yards away. And I estimated that he was 30
*  something yards away. So I was way off and shot and dropped between his legs. And then I realized
*  I had not grabbed my quiver. So I only had one shot and I just watched him turn around and walk
*  off. But I was struck initially with like, I actually noticed how un-mad I was. I was like,
*  oh, this is actually, I was like, that was awesome. I was like seeing a dinosaur. That was really cool.
*  And then I was like, oh, what an idiot. How'd I miss? But then I was like, but it made me that
*  much more determined to make it happen again. It was like, okay, nobody's going to make this happen
*  except myself. You can't complain. It wouldn't have done me any good to go back and mope about it.
*  And so then I was like, I had a thought. I was like, oh, I remember the native guys telling me
*  they used to like build these giant fences and funnel game into certain areas and stuff. And
*  I was like, man, that's a lot of calories, but I have to make that happen again now. So I kind of
*  went out there and tried that and that was kind of a attempt at something too. It could have failed
*  or not worked, but sure enough it worked and the opportunity came again. The moose came
*  wandering along and I was able to get it. But being able to take failure as soon as you can,
*  the better. Accept it and then learn from it is kind of a muscle you have to exercise a little
*  bit. Well, it's interesting because in this case, the cost of failure is like, you're not going to
*  be able to eat. Yeah, that was really interesting. I mean, the most interesting thing about that show
*  was how high the stakes felt because it didn't feel, you didn't tell yourself you're on a show.
*  At least I didn't. You just felt like you're going to starve to death if you don't make this happen.
*  The stakes felt so high and it was an interesting thing to tap into because I mean, so many of our
*  ancestors probably all just dealt with that on a regular basis, but it's something that we're
*  thought all the modern amenities and such and food security that we don't deal with. It was
*  interesting to tap into what a kind of a peak mental experience that is when you really,
*  need something to survive and then it happens. You can't imagine, I mean, that's what all our
*  dopamine and receptors are tuned for that experience in particular. So it was pretty
*  awesome, but the pressure felt very on. I always felt the pressure of providing or starving.
*  And then there's the situation when you left the ladder up and you needed fat and what is it,
*  dover? You need some of the fat. Yeah, well, when I got the moose, I was so happy. The most joy I
*  could almost experience maxed out, but I didn't think I won at that point. I never thought like,
*  oh, that's my ticket to victory. I thought, holy crap, it's going to be me against somebody else
*  that gets a moose now and we're going to be here six, eight months, who knows how long. And so I
*  can't be here six, eight months and still lose. So I've got to outproduce somebody else with a
*  moose. So I had all that in my head. Already was, of course, pretty thin. And so I was just like,
*  man, somebody else gets a moose, I'm still going to be behind. And so everything felt like
*  precious to me. And then I had found a plastic jug and I put a whole bunch of the moose's fat
*  in this plastic jug and set it up on a little shelf. I thought, you know what, if a bear comes,
*  I'll probably hear it and I'll come out and be able to shoot it. So I went to sleep and I woke
*  up the next morning and I went out and I was like, where's that jug? And then I was like, wait,
*  it's like, what are all these prints? And then I started looking around and it took a second to
*  dawn on me because I haven't interacted with Wolverines very often in life. And I was like,
*  oh, those are Wolverine tracks. And he was just so much sneakier than a bear would have been or
*  something. So it kind of surprised me and he took off with that jug of fat. And so then I went from
*  feeling pretty good about myself to like, now I'm losing again against whoever this other person is
*  with a moose. So again, kind of the pressure came back to, oh no, I got to produce again. It wasn't
*  the end of the world. And I think they may have exaggerated a little bit how little fat I had left.
*  I still had, a moose has a lot of fat, but it did make me feel like I was at a disadvantage again.
*  And so yeah, that was pretty intense because those Wolverines, they're bold little animals
*  and he was basically saying, no, this is my moose. And I had to counter his claims.
*  LWJ Well, yeah, they're really, really smart. They figure out a way to get to places
*  really effectively. Wolverines are like fastening in that way. So let's go to that happy moment,
*  the moose. You are the first and one of the only contestants to have ever killed a moose on the
*  show, a big game animal with a bow and arrow. So this is day 20. So can you take me through the kill?
*  LWJ Yeah. So I'd missed one and I just decided I'm not here to starve. I'm here to like, try to
*  become sustainable. So I was like, I don't care if it's a risk. I'm going to build that fence. I
*  built it. I would just pick berries and call moose every, you know, every day. And it was actually
*  really pleasant to sit in a berry patch and call moose. But then I also had this whole trap and
*  snare line set out everywhere. So I had all these, I was getting rabbits. But I went and I was actually
*  taking a rabbit out of a snare when I heard a clank, because I'd set up kind of an alarm
*  system with string and cans. So it's brilliant idea. Yeah, another thing that could have not
*  worked, but it did. And it came through and I was like, Oh, I heard the cans clink. And I was like,
*  no way. And so I ran over, I didn't know what it was exactly, but something was coming along the
*  fence. And I ran over and jumped in the bush next to the funnel exit on the fence. And sure enough,
*  the big moose came running up and you know, your heart gets pounded like crazy. You're just like,
*  no way, no way. I probably could have waited a little longer and had a perfect broadside shot.
*  But I took the shot when he was, he was pretty close, like 24 yards, but he was quartering
*  towards me, which makes it a little harder to make a perfect kill shot, you know, and so I hit it and
*  it took off running. And I just thought, you know, I was super excited. I couldn't believe I actually,
*  you know, I was like, Oh my gosh, got the moose. I think that was a really good shot. You get all
*  excited. But then it plays back in your head. And particularly when you're first learning to hunt,
*  there's always an animal that gets away, you know, and you like make a bad decision or not a great
*  shot or something. And it's just, it's just part of it. And so of course you're like, I'm not going
*  to be satisfied until I see this thing. So I followed the blood trail a little while and I saw
*  some bubbly blood, which meant it was hitting the lungs, which meant it's not going to live, you know,
*  you'll get it. And so as long as you don't mess it up. And so I went back to my shelter and waited
*  an hour. I skinned that rabbit that had caught and then super nervous, the slowest hour ever.
*  And then I followed it along, ended up losing the blood trail. I was like, no, no. And then I was
*  like, well, if there's no blood, I'm just going to follow the path that I would go if I was a moose,
*  you know, like the least resistance through the woods. So I followed kind of along the shore there
*  and sure enough, I saw him up there. I was like, Oh, you know, I was so excited, lay down, but,
*  uh, but he hadn't died yet. And so he just sat there and he would stand up and I would just
*  like, no, no, no, no. And he would lay back down and he was like, yes. And then he would stand
*  and it was like that for a couple hours that took them. And then finally, at one point,
*  and a lot of people have asked like, why wouldn't you go finish it off? So when an animal like that
*  gets hit, it had no idea what hit it, you know, just all of a sudden it's like, ah, something got
*  it and it ran off and it lays down and it's actually fairly calm and it doesn't really know
*  what's going on. And if you can leave it in that state, it'll kind of just bleed out and as, as
*  peaceful as possible. Um, if you go chase after it, that's when you lose an animal. Cause as soon as
*  it knows it's being hunted, you know, it gets panicked adrenaline and it can just run and run
*  and run and you'll never find it. So I didn't want it to see me. I knew if I tried to get it
*  with another arrow, there's a chance I could have finished it off, but there's also a
*  not bad chance that it would see me take off or even attack cause moose can be a little dangerous.
*  And so, uh, I just chose to wait it out. And at one point it stood up and
*  fell over and I could tell it had died and walked over. Like you actually touch it and you're just
*  like, whoa, no way. Like that whole burden of weeks of you're going to starve, you're going to
*  starve. And it got rid of that demon. To be honest, it's one of the happiest moments of my life.
*  It's really hard to replicate that joy because it was just so, so real. You're so directly
*  connected to your needs. It's also simple. It was, it was a peak experience for sure.
*  And were you worried that it would take many more hours and would take it into the night?
*  Yeah, it was. I mean, I, until you actually have your hands on it, I was worried the whole time.
*  It's a pretty nerve wracking period there between when you get it and when you actually
*  recover the animal, get your hands on it. So it took longer than I wanted, but I finally got it.
*  Can you actually speak to the, the kill shot itself just for people who don't hunt?
*  Yeah.
*  What it takes to stay calm to, to not freak out too much, to like wait, but not wait too long.
*  Yeah. Yeah. I mean, another thing about hunting is that for every animal you get,
*  you probably don't get, you know, nine or 10 that, that this turned the wrong way when you were
*  drawn back or went way behind a tree or you never had a clean shot or whatever it is. And so,
*  every time you can see a moment coming, you know, your heart really starts beating and you have to
*  like breathe through it. I can almost, you know, you almost feel the nervousness of it. And then,
*  and then you just try to stay calm, you know, like whatever you do, just
*  try to stay calm, wait for it to come up, draw back. You've practiced shooting a lot. So you
*  have like kind of a technique, like I'm going to go back, touch my face, draw my elbow tight,
*  and then the arrow is going to let loose.
*  So muscle memory mostly.
*  It's kind of muscle memory. You have a little trigger, like draw that elbow tight and then,
*  and then, then it happens. And then you just watch the arrow and see where it goes. Now with the
*  animal, you know, you try to do it ethically. That is like make as good of a shot as you can,
*  make sure it is either hit in the heart or both lungs. And when that happens,
*  it's a pretty quick death, which is, death is a part of life. And, but honestly, for a wild animal,
*  that's probably the best way to go. They could, they could have. Now when an animal's kind of
*  walking towards you, if it's walking towards you, but not directly towards you, that's what you call
*  quartering towards you. You can picture it's actually pretty difficult to hit both lungs
*  because the shoulder blade and all that bone is in the way. So you want to, so you have to make a
*  perfect shot to get them both. And to be honest, when I took my shot, I was a couple inches or
*  few inches right. And so it went, it went through the first lung and then it sunk the arrow all the
*  way into the moose. And, but it didn't, it allowed that second lung to stay breathing, which, which
*  meant the moose stayed alive longer.
*  What's your relationship with the animal in the situation like that? You said death is a part of
*  life. Yeah, that's an interesting thought because no matter what your relationship to,
*  however you choose to go through life, whether, you know, whatever you eat, whatever you do,
*  death is a part of life. You know, like every animal that's out there is living off of a dead,
*  even plants, you know, it's all, it's all, we're all part of this ecosystem. I think it's really
*  easy in a particularly in an urban environment, but anywhere to think that we're separate from
*  the ecosystem, but we are very much a part of it. Whether it be, you know, farming requires,
*  you know, all this habitat to be turned into growing soybeans and da da da da. And when you
*  get the plows and the combines, you know, you're losing all kinds of different animals and all
*  kinds of potential habitat. So it's not cost free. And so when you realize that, then you want to
*  produce the food and the things you need in an ethical manner. So I, so for me, hunting
*  plays a really major role in that. Like I literally know how many animals a year it takes
*  to feed my family and myself. I actually know the exact number and it's like, and I know what the
*  cost of that is. And I'm aware of it because I'm out in the woods and I see these like beautiful
*  elk and moose and I really love the species, love the animals, but there is a fact that
*  one of those individuals, you know, is going to have to feed me. And I, and particularly
*  like on alone, it was very heightened that experience. So I shot that one animal and I was
*  so, so thankful, you know, that I wanted to give that big guy a hug and like, Hey, sorry, it was
*  you, but had to be somebody. There's that picture. You just almost hugging it.
*  And you can also think about it, the calories, the protein, the fat, all of that, that comes
*  from that, that will feed you. Right. You're so grateful for it. Like the gratitude is like,
*  you know, definitely there. What about the bow and arrow perspective? Well, when you hunt with a bow,
*  you just get so much more up close to the animals. You know, you can't just get it from
*  600 yards away. You actually have to sneak in within 30 or so yards. And when you do that,
*  the experiences you have are just, they're way more dragged out. So, you know, your heart's
*  beating longer. You have to control your nerves longer. More often than not, it doesn't go your
*  way. And the thing gets away and you know, you've been hiking around in the woods for a week. And
*  then your opportunity arises and floats away. But at the same time, that's the only time
*  when you like really have those interactions with the animals where you got this bugling bowl,
*  you know, like tearing at the trees right in front of you and other cow, elk and animals
*  running around, you know, you get, you end up having really, I don't know, dare I say,
*  intimate experiences with the animal just because you're in it. You're kind of in its world. You're
*  playing its game. It has its senses to defend itself and you have your wit to try to get over
*  those. And it really becomes, you know, it's not easy. They're not, it becomes kind of that
*  chess game. And those prey animals are always tuned in. It's, you know, slight a stick there
*  looking for wolves or for whatever it is. So there's something really pure and fun about it.
*  I will say there is an aspect that is fun. There's no denying it. It's like how we're,
*  you know, people have been hunting forever. And I think it speaks to that part of us somehow.
*  But, and I think bow hunting is probably the most pure form of it and that you get those
*  experiences more often than with a rifle. So I don't know, I enjoy it a lot. And the way they
*  do regulations and such, kind of the best times to hunt are usually allowed for bow because they're
*  trying to, you know, keep it fair for the animal and such. So the distance, the close distance
*  makes you more in touch with a sort of the natural way of the predator and prey.
*  You're one of the predators where you have to be clever. You have to be quiet. You have to be calm.
*  You have to all of that and the full challenge and the luck involved in catching it. The same
*  thing as the predators do. Exactly. How many times do they snap a stick and watch them run off and
*  like, darn, my stock was failed. So yeah, you're just, you're in that ecosystem.
*  How'd you learn to shoot the bow? Yeah, I didn't grow up hunting. I grew up in an
*  area that a lot of people hunted, but my dad wasn't really into it. And so I never got into it until
*  I lived in Russia with the natives. It was just such a part of everything we did and a part of our
*  life that when I came back, I got a bow and I started doing archery in Virginia. It was a pretty
*  easy way to hunt because the deer were overpopulated and you could get these urban archery permits.
*  So you'd go out and, you know, every couple days you'd have an opportunity to shoot a deer that
*  they needed population control. And so there were a lot of them and it gave you a lot of
*  opportunities to learn quickly. So that's what got me into it. And then I found I really enjoyed it.
*  Do you practice with the target also or just practice out? Oh no, I would definitely practice
*  with a target a lot. You want to, again, you kind of have an obligation to do your best because you
*  don't want to be flinging arrows into like the leg of an animal. And it's a cool way, honestly,
*  to provide quality meat for the family. You know, it's all raised naturally and wild and free until
*  you bring it home into the freezer. So if we step back, what are the 10 items you brought and
*  what's actually the challenge of figuring out which items to bring? Yeah, the challenge is that you
*  don't exactly know what your site's opportunities are going to be. So you don't really know should
*  I bring a fishing net? Am I going to even have a spot to net or not? And things like that. I brought
*  a axe, a saw, a Leatherman Wave, a ferro rod, it's like a mix sparks to start a fire, a frying pan,
*  a sleeping bag, a fishing kit, a bow and arrow, trapping wire and paracord.
*  And so those are my 10 items. Is there any regrets? No major regrets. I took
*  the saw kind of, I thought it would be more of a calorie saver than I didn't really need it.
*  In hindsight, if I was doing, you know, season seven instead of six and got to watch, I would
*  have taken the net because I just planned to make a net, but I would have rather just had two nets,
*  brought one and left the saw because in the northern words in particular, every tree is,
*  you know, the size of your arm or leg, you can chop it down with an axe and a couple swings.
*  So axe is fine.
*  Yeah, yeah, you don't really need the saw. And so it was handy at times and useful,
*  but I think it was my, if I had to do nine items, I would have been just fine without the saw.
*  So two nets would just expand your-
*  Food gathering potentially.
*  And then in terms of trapping, you were okay with just the little you brought?
*  The snare wire was good. I ran some, you know, I put out, I used all my snare wire. I ran
*  trap line, which is just a series of traps through the woods and brush every place you see sign,
*  put a snare, put a little mark on the tree so I knew where that snare was and just make these
*  paths through the woods. And I put out, you know, I don't know how many 150, 200 snares. So every day
*  I'd get a rabbit or two out of them. And then I had a lot of rabbits, but once I got the moose,
*  I actually took all those snares down because I didn't want to catch anything needlessly. And
*  well, you come to find out you can't live off of rabbits. Man cannot live off rabbit alone.
*  So you set up a huge number of traps. You were also fishing and then always on the lookout for
*  moose. So like what's in terms of survival if you were to do it over again, over and over and over
*  and over like, how do you maximize your chance of having enough food to survive for a long time?
*  You have to be really adaptable because everything's gonna, it's always gonna look
*  different in your situation, your location. I actually had what I thought was a pretty good
*  plan going into alone. And then it just, the, you know, the location didn't allow for what I
*  thought it would. What was the plan? Well, I thought I would just catch a bunch of fish
*  because I'm on a really good fishing lake. I catch a whole bunch of fish and let them rot for a little
*  while and then just drag them all through the woods and to a big pile and then hunt a bear
*  on that big fish pile. That was the plan. And I thought, but when I got there, for one, I had a
*  hard time catching fish off the bat. They didn't come like I was hoping. And then for two, it had
*  burned prior, so there were no berries. And so there were very few berries, which meant there
*  weren't grouse, there weren't bear. They had all gone to other places where the berries were. And
*  so what I had grown accustomed to kind of relying on in Siberia wasn't there, there. So in Russia,
*  which was a similar environment, it was just grouse and berries and fish and grouse and berries
*  and fish. And then occasionally, you know, you get a moose or something, but I had to reassess,
*  which was part of me being grumpy at the start, like, this place sucks. And then, and then once
*  I reassessed and, and, and, you know, right away I saw that there were moose tracks and such. So
*  I just started a plan for that. I moved my camp in a, into an area that was as removed as I could
*  be from where all the action is, where the tracks were so that I wasn't disturbing animal patterns.
*  I made sure the wind, the predominant wind was blowing out my scent to see, or, you know, to the
*  water. And then really, to be honest, if you want to actually survive somewhere is different than
*  alone, but you do have to be active. And it has to, you're going to have to, you're not going to live,
*  you're not going to be sustainable by, you know, starving it out. You'd have to unlock the key that
*  is sustainability. And I think there's a lot of areas that still have that potential, but you have
*  to figure out what it is. It's usually going to be a combination of fishing, you know, trapping,
*  and then hunting. And then once you have some, the fishing and trapping will get you until you
*  have some success hunting, and then that'll buy you three or four months of time to continue,
*  you know, to keep hunting again. And you just have to roll off of that, but every, you know,
*  depends on where you are, what opportunities are there.
*  So, okay, so that's the process, fishing and trapping until you're successful hunting.
*  And then the successful hunt buys you some more time.
*  Just go year round.
*  And then you just go year round like that. And that's how people did it forever. The pressure,
*  I noticed it, you know, with the, you got that moose and then you're happy for a week or so.
*  And then you start to be like, you know, this is finite. I'm going to have to do this again.
*  And you imagine if you had a family that was going to starve if you weren't successful,
*  this next time, and there's just always that pressure, you know, it made me really
*  appreciate what people had to deal with.
*  Well, in terms of being active, like, so you have to do stuff all day. So you get up and planning.
*  Like, what am I going to, in the midst of the frustration, you have to figure out,
*  like, what's the strategy? Like, how do you put up all the traps? Is that a decision? Like,
*  you know, most people like sit at their desk and have like a calendar.
*  Are you like figuring out like,
*  one thing about wilderness life in general is it's remarkably less scheduled than anything we deal
*  with. Schedules are fairly unique to the modern context. So you'd wake up and you just sort of,
*  you have a, you know, confluence of things you want to do, things you need to do,
*  things you should do, and you just kind of tackle them as you see fit as it flows in, you know? So,
*  and that's actually one of the things that people really, that I really appreciate about that
*  lifestyle is it really is, you're kind of in that flow. And so I'd wake up and be like,
*  maybe I'll go fishing. And then I'll wander over and fish. And then I'd be like, I'm going to go
*  check the trap line, add every day if I add five or 10 snares, you know, you're constantly adding
*  to your productive potential. And then, but nothing's really scheduled. You're just kind of
*  flying by the seat of your pants. But then there's a lot of instinct that's already loaded in.
*  There's so much. Yeah. Like you already, just like wisdom from all the times you've had to do it
*  before. You're just actually operating a lot on instinct. Like you said, where to place a shelter.
*  Like how hard is that calculation? Where to place a shelter? If you're like dropped off,
*  and this is all new to you, of course, all those things are going to be things you have to really
*  think through and plan. When you're thinking about a shelter, you have to think of, oh, here's a nice
*  flat spot. You know, that's a good place. But also is there firewood nearby? And if I'm going
*  to be here for months, is there enough firewood that I'm not going to be walking a half a mile
*  to get a dry piece of wood? Is the water nearby? Is there, is it somewhat open, but also protected
*  from the elements? Because sometimes you get a beautiful spot. It was great on a calm day.
*  And then the wind comes like, and so there's all these factors, you know, even down to taking in
*  what game is doing in the area also and how that relates to where your shelter is. You said you
*  have to consider where the action will be and you want to be away from the action, but close enough
*  to it. To see it. Yeah. You want to be, yeah, right. And so ideally, you know, it depends,
*  you're always going to make given takes. And one thing with shelters and location selection and
*  stuff, that's another thing you just have to trust your ability to adapt in the situation
*  because everybody has a particular, you know, he got an idea of a shelter you're going to build,
*  but then you get there and maybe there's a good cliff that you can incorporate, you know, or
*  and then you just become creative. And that's a really fun process too, to just allow your
*  creativity to try to flourish. What kind of shelters are there? There's all kinds of philosophies
*  and shelters, which is fun. People, it's fun to see people try different things. Mine was fairly
*  basic for the simple reason that I had lived, you know, winters through winters in Siberia in
*  a teepee. So I knew I didn't need like anything too robust. As long as I had calories, I'd be warm.
*  And I wasn't particularly worried about the cold, but you'll see. So I kept my shelter really pretty
*  simple with the idea that I built a simple A-frame type shelter. And then most of my energy is going
*  to be focused on getting calories. And then of course, there's always going to be downtime.
*  And in that downtime, I can tweak, modify, improve my shelter. And that'll just be a constant
*  process that by the time you're there a few months, you'll have all the kinks worked out.
*  It'll be a really nice little setup, but you don't have to start with that necessarily because you
*  got other needs you got to focus on. That said, you'll see a lot of people on alone that really
*  focus on, you know, building the log cabin because they want to be secure or incorporating,
*  you know, whatever the earth has around, whether it be rocks or whether it be
*  digging a hole, you know, and we've seen some really cool shelters and I, I,
*  I'm not going to knock it. Everybody's got different strokes for different folks,
*  but I mean, my particular idea was to keep it fairly simple, improve it with time,
*  but spend most of my energy. You know, the shelter, you really need to think about it.
*  Can't be smoky because that'll be miserable, but it is nice to have a fire inside. So you need to
*  have a fire inside. That's not going to be dangerous and smoke free and then also air tight
*  because you're never going to have a warm shelter out there because you don't have seals and things
*  like that. But as long as the air is not moving through it, you can have a warm enough shelter
*  with a fire, with a fire and dryer socks and stuff. How do you get the smoke out of the shelter?
*  If you have good clay and mud and rock, you can build yourself a fireplace, which is surprisingly
*  not that hard. You know, you just, oh really? Yeah. It's fun thing to do. It works. What,
*  you know, take a little hole, start stacking rocks around it, make sure it's opening
*  and it actually works, you know? So that's not as hard as you might think. For me, where I was, I,
*  I kind of came up with it as I was there with my A-frame, you know, I hadn't built an A-frame
*  shelter like that before. And so when I built it and then I had put a bunch of tin cans in the
*  ground so that air would get the fire. So it was fed by air, which helps create a draft. But I
*  realized in an A-frame, it really doesn't, the smoke doesn't go out very well. Even if you leave
*  a hole at the top, it like collects and billows back down. So then I cut some of my tarp and made
*  this and cut a hole in the, in the A-frame. And then I made like a hood vent that I could pull
*  down and catch the smoke with. And so while the fire was going, it would just billow out the hood
*  vent. And then when it was done burning and it was just hot coals, I could close it, seal it up
*  and keep the heat in. So it actually worked pretty well. So start with something that kind of works
*  and then keep improving. Yeah, exactly. I was wondering, I mean, the, the, the log cabin,
*  it feels like that's the thing that takes a huge amount of work before it worked. The difference
*  between a log cabin and a warm log cabin is like an immense amount of work and all the chinking
*  and all the door sealing and, you know, the chimney has to be anyway. So otherwise it's just
*  going to be the same ambient temperature as outside. So, uh, I don't think alone's the
*  proper context for a log cabin. I think like, um, log cabins great in as a hunting cabin, as you know,
*  if you're going to have something for years, but in a three, six month scenario, I don't know that
*  it's worth the calorie expenditure. And it is a lot of calories, but that's an interesting sort of
*  metaphor of just like, get something that works. You see a lot, a lot of this with companies,
*  like successful companies, they, you know, get a prototype, get a system that's working and improve
*  fast in response to the conditions to the environment. Yeah. Cause it's constantly
*  changing. Yeah. Yeah. And you end up being a lot better if you're able to learn how to respond
*  quickly, uh, versus like having a big plan that takes a huge amount of time to accomplish.
*  Forcing that through the pipeline, whether or not it fits.
*  Can you just speak to like the place you were the Canadian Arctic? It looked cold.
*  Yeah, we were right near the Arctic circle. I don't know. It was like
*  60 kilometers south of the Arctic circle. So, uh, it was, it's a really cool area, really remote
*  thousands of little lakes, you know, when you fly over here, just like, man, it's incredible. There
*  must be so many of those lakes that people haven't been to, you know, it really was a neat area,
*  really remote and for the show's purpose, I think it was perfect because it did have enough game
*  and enough different avenues forward that I think it really did reward activity. So I think, uh,
*  but it's a special place. It was, uh, Dené or is the tribe that lived there, the Dené people,
*  which interestingly enough, here's a side note. When I was in Siberia, I floated down this
*  river called the Padkamene Tunguska and you get to this village called Sulamai and there's these
*  Ket people they're called and there's only 600 of them left, but in the middle of Siberia, not in like
*  the Pacific coast, but their language is related to the Dené people. And so somehow, you know,
*  that connection was there thousands of years ago. Super interesting. But yeah,
*  language travels somehow. Right. And the remnants stayed back there. It's very interesting to think
*  through history. Yeah. Within languages contains a history of a people's and it's interesting how
*  that evolves over time and how wars tell the story. Like language tells a story of conflict and
*  conflict shapes language and we get the result of that. Right. So fascinating. And the barriers
*  that language creates is also the thing that leads to wars and misunderstandings and all this
*  kind of stuff. It's a fascinating tension. But it got cold there, right? It got real cold.
*  Yeah. I mean, I think I don't know what the, I didn't have a thermometer, but I imagine it
*  probably got to negative 30 at the most. You know, I might've gotten, it would've definitely
*  gotten colder had we stayed longer. But, uh, yeah, I, to be honest, I was just had, I never felt cold
*  out there. I was pretty, I had that one pretty dialed in. And then once you have calories,
*  you can stay warm. You can stay active. You can, you know, you got to dress warm. You know, you
*  don't never let others a good one. If you're in the cold, never let yourself get too cold
*  because what happens is you'll stop feeling what's cold and then frostbite and then issues. And then
*  it's really hard to warm back up. So every, I, it was so annoying. I'd be out going to ice fish or
*  something. And then I would just notice that my feet are cold and you're just like, ah, dang it.
*  I just turn around, go back, start a fire, dry my boots out, make sure my feet are warm and then
*  go again. I wouldn't ignore that. You know, also you want to be able to feel the cold.
*  Yeah. You want to make sure you're still feeling things and that you're not tough and through it
*  because you can't really tough through the cold. It'll just get you. So what's your relationship
*  with the cold? Um, psychologically, physically. Uh, it's interesting. Well, I actually, there's
*  some part of it that really makes you feel alive. You know, I imagine, you know, sometime in Austin
*  here, you come go out and it's hot and sweaty and you get that kind of, kind of saps you. There's
*  something about that brisk cold that hits your face that you're like, wakes you up, makes you feel
*  really alive, engaged, you know, it feels like the margins of air smaller. So you're alert and
*  engaged a little more. There is something that's a little bit life-giving just because you feel on
*  an edge. You're walking, you're on this edge, but you have to be alert because even, you know,
*  some of the natives I lived with, the lady had face issues because she let her head get cold.
*  When they're on a snowmobile hat was up too high, you know, that little mistake. And then it just
*  freezes this part of your forehead and then the nerves go and then you got issues. One just,
*  that wasn't high enough. So you kind of, kind of got to be dialed in on stuff.
*  Well, there's a psychological element to just, I mean, it's unpleasant. If I were to think of
*  what kind of unpleasant would I choose, you know, fasting for long periods of time,
*  going without food in a warm environment is way more pleasant than being fed in a cold.
*  Exactly. Like if you were to choose to.
*  I choose the opposite.
*  Well, there you go. I wonder if that's, I wonder if you're born with that or if that's developed
*  maybe your time in Siberia, like you, or do you gravitate towards, I wonder what that is?
*  Cause I really don't like survival in the cold.
*  I think a little bit of it is learned. He like almost learned not, you learn not to fear it.
*  You learn to kind of appreciate it. And a big part of that is, I mean, to be honest, it's like
*  dressing warm, being in good. It's not that, you know, there's no secrets to that is you just can't
*  beat the cold. So you just need to dress warm. The native, you know, all that fur, all that stuff.
*  And then all of a sudden you have your little refuge, have a nice warm fire going in your
*  teepee, you know, and then you, I bet you, you could learn to appreciate it.
*  Yeah. I think some of it is just opening yourself up to the possibility. There's something enjoyable
*  about it. Like here, I run in Austin all the time in like a hundred degree heat and I go out there
*  with a smile on my face and like, and learn to enjoy it. And so you just like, I look kind of like
*  you do in the cold. I don't think I enjoy the heat, but you just allow yourself to enjoy it.
*  Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I do feel that way. I mean, I don't mind the heat that much, but I think you
*  could get to a place where you appreciated the cold. It's probably just a lack of, it's kind of
*  scary when you haven't done it and you don't know what you're doing and you go out and you feel cold.
*  It's like not fun, but I bet you could, you'd enjoy it. You'll have to come out sometime.
*  I mean, you're right. It does make you feel alive. That it like, maybe that's the thing
*  that I struggle with is the time passes slower because it does make you feel alive. You get to
*  feel time, but then the flip side of that is you get to feel every moment and you get to feel alive
*  in every moment. So that it's both scary when you're inexperienced and beautiful when you are
*  experienced. Were there times when you got hungry? I got shot a rabbit on day one and I
*  snared a couple of rabbits on day two and then more and more as the time went. So I actually
*  did pretty well on the food front. The other thing is when you have all those berries around
*  and stuff, you do have an ability to like fill your stomach. And so you don't really notice if
*  you're getting thinner or if you're losing weight. So I can say on a loan, I was not that hungry.
*  I've definitely been really hungry in Russia. There were times when I lost a lot of weight.
*  I lost a lot more weight in Siberia than I did on a loan.
*  Oh, wow. Okay. We'll have to talk about it. So you caught a fish. You caught a couple.
*  I think I caught like 13 or so. They didn't show a lot of them.
*  You caught 13 fish? 13 of those big fish. I caught a couple that were small.
*  This is like a meme at this point. You're a perfect example of a person who was thriving.
*  I was thought, you know, in hindsight. Again, when I was out there, I never let myself think
*  you might weigh in. I just was going to be out there as long as I could and tried to remain
*  pessimistic about it. But then I remember a thought that I was like, I wonder if they're
*  going to be able to make this look hard. I did have that thought at one point.
*  Because it went pretty well. It was hard psychologically because I didn't know when
*  it was going to end. I thought this could go, like I said, six months. It could go eight months,
*  a year. Then you start to, you know, I had a two and a three-year-old and you start to weigh in the,
*  is it worth it if it goes a year? It's not worth it if it goes eight months and I still lose.
*  I feel like I had this pressure and it was psychologically difficult for that reason.
*  Physically, it wasn't too bad.
*  This is off mic, we're talking about Gordon Ryan competing in Jiu Jitsu. Maybe that's the challenge
*  he also has to face is to make things look hard. Because he's so dominant in the sport that,
*  in terms of the drama and the entertainment of the sport, and in this case of survival,
*  it has to be difficult.
*  I'll add for sure though that it's the woods, it's nature. You never know how it's going to go.
*  You know what I mean? It's like every time you're out there, it's a different scenario.
*  Whenever, hallelujah, it went well.
*  You won after 77 days. How long do you think you could have lasted?
*  When I left, I weighed what I do right now. I just weighed my normal weight. I had a couple
*  hundred pounds of moose. I had at least 100 pounds of fish. I had a pile of rabbits,
*  a wolverine. I had all this stuff. I hadn't gotten cold yet. I just thought,
*  but in my head, I thought if I get to day 130 or 40, even if someone else has big game,
*  I had a pretty good idea they might quit because it would be long, cold, dark days.
*  How miserable is that? It's so boring. It's freezing.
*  The only time I thought I could think about winning is when I got to day 130 or 40.
*  I definitely had that with what I had. I probably would have gotten more. I had caught that big
*  20-something pound pike on the last day I was there. Maybe catch some more of those.
*  I don't know how many calories I had stored, but I had a lot. How long would that have lasted me,
*  assuming I didn't get anything else? I definitely would have reached my goal of 130 or 40 days.
*  Then after that, I thought we were just going to push into the who. Then it's just to see how much
*  who has what reserves and we'll go as far as we can. That would get me through January into February.
*  I just thought, man, that's going to be miserable for people.
*  You were like, I can last.
*  What aspect of that is miserable?
*  The hardest thing for me would have been the boredom because it's hard to stay busy when it's all
*  dark out, when the ice is three, four foot thick, you can't fish. I just think it would have just
*  been really boring. You would have had to been a real Zen master to push through it. Because I had
*  experienced it to some degree, I knew I could. Then I think things that might... You start thinking
*  about family and this and that in those situations. I just knew that those... Because I'd gone to all
*  these trips to Russia for a year at a time, the time context was a little broader for me than I
*  think for some people. I knew I could be gone for a year and come back, catch up with my loved ones,
*  bring what I got back, whether that be psychological, whatever it is, and we'd all
*  enrich each other. Once it's in hindsight, that year would have been like that, talking about it.
*  I had that perspective and I knew I wasn't going to tap for any other reason other than running out
*  of food someday. That was my stressor.
*  You're able to, given the boredom, given the loneliness, zoom out
*  and accept the passing of time. Just let it pass.
*  For me, I'm an act, fairly act. I like to be active. I would try to think of creative ways
*  to keep my brain busy. We saw the dumb rabbit for skit, but then I did a whole bunch of elaborate
*  Normandy re-invasion, re-enactments and stuff. Every day I would think of something to make me
*  laugh and then do some stupid skit. Then that would fill a couple of hours of my time. Then I'd
*  spend an hour or two, a few hours fishing, and then you spend a few hours, whatever you're doing.
*  Would you do that without a camera?
*  Yeah. No, the skits, funny question. That's a good question. I don't know. I actually don't know.
*  I will say that was one of the advantages of being on the show versus in Siberia. No,
*  because I didn't in Siberia just do skits by myself, but I didn't film it. It was quite nice
*  to have this camera that made you feel like you weren't quite as alone as if you were
*  just in the woods by yourself. I think for me, it was a pain. It was part of the cause of me missing
*  that moose. There's issues with it, but I just chose to look at it as like this is an awesome
*  opportunity to share with people a part of me that most people don't get to see. I just chose to look
*  at it that way. It was an advantage because you could do stuff like that.
*  I think there's actual power to doing this kind of documenting, like talking to a camera or an
*  audio recorder. That's an actual tool in survival. I had a little bit of an experience of being out
*  alone in the jungle and just being able to talk to a thing is much less lonely.
*  It is. It really is. It can be a powerful tool just sharing your experience. I definitely had
*  the thought. Going back to your earlier comment, but I definitely had the thought if I knew I was
*  the last person on earth, I wouldn't even bother. I would just give up, I'm sure, because even if I
*  had a bunch of food and this and that. But because I knew you know you're a part, you're sharing,
*  it gives you a lot of strength to go through. Having that camera just makes it that much more
*  vivid because you know you're not just going to be sharing a vague memory, but an actual experience.
*  I think if you're the last person on earth, you would actually convince yourself. First of all,
*  you don't know for sure. Hope dies last. Hope really does die last. You really don't know.
*  You really hope to find. If an apocalypse happens, I think your whole life will be going
*  about finding the other person. It would be. I guess I'm saying if you knew for some reason,
*  knew you were the last. I wonder if you would. That was the thought I had. If I knew I was the
*  last person. Because here I was having a good time, having fun fishing, plenty of food. But if I knew
*  I was the last person on earth, I don't know that I would even bother. But now if that was for real,
*  would I bother? That's the question. No, no. I think if you knew, if somebody,
*  some way you knew for sure, I think your mind will start doubting it. That whoever told you
*  you're the last person, whatever was lying. The power of hope might be more stronger than
*  I accounted for in that situation. Also, if you are indeed the last person,
*  you might want to be documenting it for once you die. An alien species comes about. Because
*  whatever happened on earth is a pretty special thing. And if you're the last one, you might be
*  the last person to tell the story of what happened. And so that's going to be a way to convince
*  yourself that this is important. And so the days will go by like this, but it would be lonely.
*  Boy, would that be lonely. It would be. Wow. You'd be delving into the dredges, the depths of
*  something. There is going to be existential dread. But also, I don't know, I think hope will burn
*  bright. You'll be looking for other humans. That's one of the reasons I was looking forward
*  to talking to you. I think that I appreciate about you is you're always not out of naivety,
*  but you always choose to look at the positive. You know what I mean? And I think that's a
*  powerful mindset to have. I appreciate it. Yeah. That'd be a pretty cool survival
*  situation though, if you're the last person on earth. Yes, you can share it.
*  You can share it. Yeah. Like I said, many people consider you the most successful
*  competitor on a loan. The other successful one is Roland Welker, rock house guy.
*  Oh yeah.
*  This is just a fun, ridiculous question, but head to head, who do you think survives longer?
*  If you want to get into the competitive side of it, I would just say, well, I'm pretty dang sure
*  I had more pounds of food. And I didn't have the advantage of knowing when it would end,
*  which I think would have been a great psychological. It would have made it really
*  easy. Once I got the moose, I could have shot the moose and just not stressed. That would have been
*  a... So that was a big difference between the seasons that I felt like... I mean, I felt like
*  the psychology of season seven, they kind of messed up by doing a hundred day cap because
*  from my own experience, that was the hardest part. But Roland's a beast.
*  So for people who don't know, they put a hundred day cap on. So it's whoever can survive a hundred
*  days for that season. It's interesting to hear that for you, the uncertainty, not knowing when it ends
*  is the hardest. That's true. It's like you wake up every day.
*  I didn't know how to ration my food. I didn't know if I was going to lose after six months,
*  and then it was all going to be for naught. I didn't know if it... There's so many unknowns.
*  You don't know... Like I said, if I shot a moose and it was a hundred days done, if I shot a moose
*  and you don't know, it's like, crap, I could still lose to somebody else, but it's going to be way in
*  the future. So anyway, that for me was definitely the hard part.
*  And when you found out that you won and your wife was there, it was funny because you're really
*  happy. There's great sort of moment of you reuniting, but also there's a state of shock of
*  you look like you were ready to go much longer.
*  That was the most genuine shock I could have. I hadn't even entertained the thought yet.
*  You'd hear the helicopters and I just assumed there was other people out there.
*  I just hadn't... I thought... For one, the previous person that had gone along,
*  this had gone 89 days. So I just knew whoever else was out here with me, somebody's got that
*  in their crosshairs. They're going to get to 90 and they're not going to quit at 90. They're
*  going to go to a hundred. I just figured we can't start thinking about the end until
*  a couple months from when it ended. So I was just
*  shocked. And they tricked me pretty good. They know how to make you think you're not...
*  So they want you to do the surprise.
*  Yeah, they want it to be a surprise.
*  You really weren't... I mean, you have to do that, I guess, for survival. Don't be counting the days.
*  No, I think that would be... Then you see that on some of the people do that.
*  For myself, that would be bad psychology because then you're just always disappointing yourself.
*  You have to be resettled with the fact that this is going to go a long time and suck.
*  Once you come to peace with that, maybe you'll be pleasantly surprised, but
*  you're not going to be constantly disappointed.
*  So what was your diet like? What was your eating habits like during that time?
*  How many meals a day?
*  I was trying to eat the thing. The more the moose is hanging out there, the more the critters,
*  every critter in the forest is trying to peck at it or mice trying to eat it and stuff.
*  So one of the ways you can protect the food is by eating it.
*  So I was having three good meals a day and then I'd cook up some meat and go to sleep and then
*  wake up in the middle of night because they're long nights and have some meat at night,
*  eat a bunch at night. So I'd usually have a fish stew for lunch and then moose for breakfast and
*  dinner and then have some for a nighttime snack because the nights were long. So you'd be in bed
*  14 hours and wake up and eat and think around and go back to sleep.
*  Is it okay that I was pretty low carb situation?
*  Yeah, I actually felt really good. I think I would have felt better if I would have had a
*  higher percentage of fat because it's still more protein than if you're on a keto diet,
*  you want a lot of fat. And so I didn't try to mix in nature's carbs, different reindeer lichen,
*  and things like that. But honestly, I felt pretty good on that diet.
*  What's the secret to protecting food? What are the different ways to protect food?
*  Yeah, a lot of times in a typical situation in the woods hunting, you'll raise it up in a tree in a
*  bag, put it in a game bag so the birds can't peck at it and hang it in a tree so it cools.
*  You got to make sure first to cool it because it'll spoil. So you cool it by whatever means
*  necessary, hanging it in a cool place, letting the air blow around it. And then you'll notice
*  that every forest freeloader in the woods is going to come and steal your food. And it was
*  just fun. I mean, it was crazy to watch. It was like all the J, all the camp Js pecking at it.
*  Everything I did, there was something that could get to it. They put on the ground,
*  the mice get on it, and they poop on it and they kind of mess it up. So I ultimately,
*  it kind of just dawned on me, shoot, I'm going to have to build one of those
*  evenki food caches. So I did and I put it up there. And I thought I kind of solved my problem.
*  To be honest, the evenki then, so they would have taken a page out of, they would have mixed me in
*  Roland's solution. They build this tall stilt shelter and then put a box on the top that's
*  enclosed. And then the bears can't get to it. The mice can't poop on it. The birds, the wolverine,
*  it's safe. And I never finished it. I mean, in hindsight, I don't actually know why. I think I
*  was just, the way it timed, I didn't think something was going to get there. Then it did.
*  And then you're counting calories and stuff. I should have in hindsight just boxed it in right
*  away. To get ready for the long haul. Yeah. Is a rabbit starvation a real thing? Yeah. So you can't
*  just live off protein and rabbits are almost just protein. I'd kill a rabbit, eat the innards and
*  the brain and the eyes, and then everything else is just protein. And so it takes more calories to
*  process that protein than you're getting from it without the fat. So you actually lose, I lost,
*  I had a lot of rabbits in the first 20 days. I had 28 rabbits or something, but I was losing weight
*  at exactly the same speed as everybody else that didn't have anything. So that's interesting.
*  Yeah. And I'd never tried that before. So I was wondering if I'm catching a ton of rabbits. I
*  wonder if I can last what, six months on rabbits, but no, you just starve as fast as everybody else
*  and so I had to kind of learn that on the fly and adjust. I wonder what to make of that. So you need
*  fat to survive, like fundamental. Yeah. And you'll notice when the wolverine came or when
*  animals came, they would eat the skin off of the fish. They would eat the eyes,
*  they'd steal the moose fat. They'd leave all the meat. Yeah. Like behind the eyes is a bunch of fat.
*  So yeah, you can kind of observe nature and see what they're eating and know where the
*  gold is. What do you like eating when you can eat whatever you want? What do you feel best?
*  What do I feel best? I just try to eat clean. I think I'm not like super stricter on anything,
*  but I think when I eat less carbs, I feel better meat and vegetables. I like, we eat a lot of,
*  you know, I eat a lot of meat. So basically everything you ate on alone, plus some veggies,
*  plus veggies, throwing some buckwheat. I like buckwheat. Let's step to the, the early days of
*  Jordan. So, your Instagram handles hobo, Jordan. So early on in your life, you hobo it around.
*  The U S on freight trains. What's the story behind that?
*  My brother, when he was 17 or so, he just decided to go hitchhiking and he hitchhiked down to Reno
*  from Idaho, where we were and ended up loving traveling, but hated being dependent on other
*  people. So he ended up jumping on a freight train and, and just did it. He honestly, he pretty much
*  got on a train and traveled the country for the next eight years on trains, lived in the streets
*  and everywhere. But, you know, he was sober, so it gives you a different experience than a lot. But
*  at one point when I was, I guess, yeah, 18, he invited me to come along with him. He'd probably
*  been doing it five or so, four or five years and, or more. And I said, sure. So I quit my job and
*  went out with him. Hobo Jordan is a bit of an overstep. I feel self-conscious about that
*  because I rode, I rode trains across the country, up and down the coast, back, you know, spent the
*  better part of the year running around, riding trains and all the staying in places related to
*  that. But all the people, you know, the real hobos, those guys are out there doing it for years on end.
*  But it was such a, for me, what it felt like was a, it felt like a bit of a rite of passage experience,
*  which is kind of missing, I think, in modern life. So I did this thing that was a huge unknown. I'd
*  been, kind of was there with me and my brother for most of it. We traveled around, got pushed
*  my boundaries in every which way, you know, froze at night and did all the stuff. And then,
*  and then at the end, I actually wanted to go back and go back home. And so I went on my own and
*  went from Minneapolis back, you know, up to Spokane on my own, which was my first stint of time by
*  myself for like a week, which was interesting. Alone with your own thoughts. With your own
*  thoughts is my first time in my life. Hadn't been like that, you know? And so it was, it was
*  powerful at the time. You know what it did too, is it gave me a whole different view of life.
*  Cause I had gotten a job when I was 13 and then 14, 15, 16, 17. And then I was just in the normal
*  run of things kind of, and then that just threw a whole different path into my life. And then I
*  realized some of the things while I was traveling that I wouldn't experience again until I was living
*  with natives and such. And that was, you know, you wake up, you don't have a schedule. You
*  literally just have needs and you just somehow have to meet your needs. And so it's, it's a,
*  there's a really a sense of freedom you get that is hard to replicate elsewhere. And so
*  that was eye-opening to me. And I think once I did that, I went back. So I went back to
*  my old job at the salad dressing plant and there's this old cross-eyed guy and he was,
*  hobo Gordo is back. And that's kind of where I got it. But that freedom always was very
*  important to me, I think from that time on.
*  What'd you learn about the United States, about the people along the way? Cause I took a road trip
*  across the U S also, and there was a, there's a romantic element there too, of like, of the freedom
*  of the, well, maybe for me not knowing what the hell I'm going to do with my life,
*  but also excited by all the possibilities. And then you meet a lot of different people and a lot
*  of different kinds of stories. And also like a lot of people that support you for traveling,
*  because there's a lot of people kind of dream of experiencing that freedom, at least the people
*  I've met. And they usually don't, they usually don't go outside of their little town. They
*  have a thing and they have a family usually, and they don't explore, they don't take the leap.
*  And you can do that when you're young. I guess you could do that any moment.
*  Just say, fuck it and leap into the, the abyss of being on the road. But anyway,
*  what'd you learn about this country, about the people in this country?
*  You're in an interesting context when you're on trains, cause the trains always end up in the
*  crappiest part of town. And you're always outside interacting. Oh, the interesting things.
*  Every once in a while, you'll have to hitchhike to get from one place to another.
*  One interesting thing is you notice you always get picked up by the,
*  the poor people or stuff. They're the people that empathize with you, stop, pick you up.
*  You go to whatever ghetto you end up in and people are really, oh, what are you guys doing?
*  Real friendly and, and, and relatable. It kind of broadened my horizons for sure from being just
*  Idaho kid and then meeting all these different people and, and just seeing the goodness in people
*  and this and that. It's also very, you know, a lot of drugs and a lot of people with mental issues
*  that you're friends with, dealing with, you know, all that kind of stuff. So any memorable characters?
*  Well, there's a few for sure. I mean, a lot of them, I still know that are still around, but the,
*  Rocco was one guy we traveled with. He's become like a brother, but he's,
*  he was, he traveled with my brother for years because they were the two sober guys kind of,
*  he rather than traveling because he was hooked on stuff, did it to escape all that. And so he was
*  kind of sober and straight edge and he always, he's a five, seven Italian guy that was always
*  getting in fights and like he has his own sense of, uh, ethics that I think is really interesting
*  because he's super honest, but, but he expects it of others. And so it's funny in the modern
*  context, the thing that pops in my head is when he got a car for the first time, which wasn't that
*  long, you know, he was in his thirties or something, uh, and he registered it,
*  which he was mad about that he had to register. But then the next year they told him he had to
*  register again. And he's like, what did you lose my registration? Went down there to the DMV,
*  chewed them out that he had to re-register because he already registered. Where's the paperwork? And
*  but just kind of views of the world from a different lens. I thought, uh, but on everything,
*  he's the character now he just lives by digging up bottles and finding treasures in them.
*  But he notices the injustices and he notices in a very interesting and speaks up and he's always
*  like, why doesn't everybody else speak up about the car registration? And then there was like,
*  you know, Devo comes to mind because he was such a unique character as far as just for one, he
*  would have lived to be 120 because the amount of chemicals and everything else you put into his
*  body and still, Hey man, you know, you can always get a dime, you know, spare time, spare time.
*  Bum change. And, uh, I'd see him sometimes and I'd be gone and then go to New York to visit my
*  sister or something. And I sure enough, there's Devo on the street. What do you know? And, uh,
*  you go visit him in the hospital because he got bit by 20, you know, 27 hobo spider bites.
*  He's just always rough, but, uh, charismatic, vital, like the vitality of life was in him,
*  but it was just so permeated with drugs and alcohol too. It's kind of,
*  cause I've met people like that. They're like, there's just, yeah, joy permeates the whole way
*  of being. And they're like, they've been through some shit. They have scars. They've got rough,
*  but they're always got a big smile. There's a guy I met in the jungle and then Pico, he lost the leg
*  and he, uh, drives a boat and he just always has a big smile. Even given that, like the hardship he
*  has to get, everything requires a huge amount of work, but he's just big smile and stories in those
*  something about enduring difficulty that makes you able to appreciate life and look at it and
*  smile. Any advice for her to take a road trip again, or if somebody else is thinking of hopping
*  out on a freight train, it's way easier now because you have a map on your phone. You'd feel
*  you're going, you're kind of cheating now. It's not about the destiny because the map is about
*  the destination. Uh, but here's like, yeah, right. Give it to him. Where are you going? Yeah.
*  Going anywhere. I say do it like go out and do things, especially when you're young, uh,
*  experiences and stuff help create the person you will be in the future putting doing things
*  that you think like, Oh, I don't want to do that. I'm a little scared of that. I mean, that's what
*  you got to do. You just get out of your comfort zone and you will grow as a person and you'll
*  go through a lot of wild experiences along the way. Say yes to life. Yes. So like, yeah,
*  I love the boredom of it. Freight train riding is very boring. And like you'll wait for hours
*  for a train that never comes and then you'll go to the store and come back and it'll be gone.
*  You're like, no. And I remember we went to jail, we got out and then, uh,
*  how'd you end up in jail? Oh, you know, it was things trespassing on a train, but we were,
*  we were riding a train and my brother woke up and they had a dead outland on his head and he
*  hit the train and fell on them. And we were like, woke up and we were laughing at us. Got to be
*  some kind of bad omen. And then we were like looking out of the train and we saw a train
*  worker look and sauce and he went, Oh, we know that's a bad omen. Anyway, sure enough, the police
*  stopped the train. Somebody had seen us on it and they searched it, got us and threw us in jail.
*  It was not a big deal. We were in jail a couple of days and then, uh, uh, but when we got out,
*  of course they put us, we were in some podunk town in Indiana and we didn't know where to
*  catch out of there. And so we were at some factory and we just banning factory and we're
*  right there for like four days. No train that was going slow enough that we could catch. And then
*  we found this big old roll of aluminum foil and now I gotta apologize to this woman because we
*  were so bored just sitting there. We built these like hats, you know, like horns coming out every
*  which way and loops and just sitting there. And then it was that night and some minivan pulled up
*  to this train that was going by. We're like entertaining yourself with whatever you can.
*  Poor lady was terrified. Hitchhiking was tough. I didn't like hitchhiking just cause you're
*  depending on the other people and it is not, I don't know why you just want to be independent,
*  but if you do meet really cool people, a lot of times there's really nice people that pick you up
*  and that's cool. But I just personally actually didn't do it a lot.
*  And I wasn't, you know, if you're on the streets for 10 years, you'll end up doing it a lot more
*  because you need to get from point A if it won't be, but we just tried to avoid it as much as we
*  could because it didn't appeal to us as much. Well, one downside of hitchhiking is people talk
*  a lot. Oh, they do. It's both the pro and the con. Yeah. Cause they'll, you know, sometimes you just
*  want to be sort of alone with your thoughts or it's, there is a kind of lack of freedom
*  and having to listen to a person that's giving you a ride. It's so true. And then you don't know how
*  to react to it. I mean, I was young when I got picked, I was probably 19 or something. And then
*  I was just like, Hey, how's it going? She's like, my husband just died. And then, and then just all,
*  and I got diagnosed with cancer and this is that, but it's been pretty bitter and all that.
*  And understandably so, but you're just like, I have no idea how to respond here.
*  Cause you kind of, then you're young and you gotta be nice. And I, and I remember that ride
*  being interesting cause I didn't really know how to respond. And she was angry and going through
*  some stuff and, and dumping it out. She didn't have anyone else to dump it out on. I was like,
*  wow, I'm going to take the freight train next time. So how'd you end up in Siberia?
*  I'll try to keep it a little bit short on the how, but I bet the long story short was I had
*  a brother that's adopted. And when he grew up, he wanted to find his biological mom and just tell
*  her thanks. And, and, uh, so he did. And when he was, he was probably 20 or something, he found
*  his biological mom, told her things. Turns out he had a brother that was going to go over to Russia
*  and, uh, help build this orphanage. And that brother was about my age. I mean, I remember
*  at that time, I read this verse that said, if you're in the darkness and see no light,
*  just continue following me. Basically. I was like, okay, I'm going to take that to the bank,
*  even though I don't know if it's true or not. And then the only glimpse of like light I got in all
*  that was when I heard about that orphanage, you go build that orphanage. And, and I prayed about it
*  and I felt, and I can't explain, like it brought me to tears. I felt so strongly that I should go.
*  And so I was like, well, that's a clear call. I'm just going to do it. Yes. I just bought a
*  ticket and got a visa for a year. And then I went and helped build an orphanage and we got that
*  built and I wanted, but he was an American and I wanted to live with the Russians to learn a
*  language. And so he sent me to a neighboring village to live with a couple Russian families
*  that needed a hand, uh, somebody to watch their kids and cut their hay and milk the cow and all
*  that. So, uh, I found myself in that little Russian village, just getting to know these two
*  guys and their families. It was a, it was pretty fascinating. And of course I didn't know the
*  language yet and they were two awesome dudes. Both of them had been in prison and met each other in
*  prison and like, we're really close cause they had like found God in prison together and, and
*  stayed to get, uh, you got out and stayed connected. And, uh, so I'd bounce backs between
*  those two families and they used to always tell me about their third buddy they'd been in prison
*  with who was a native fur trapper now in the North. And so they'd go meet our buddy up North.
*  And, uh, one day that guy came through to sell furs in the city and he like invited me to come
*  live with them. And my visa was about to expire, but I was like, when I come back, I'll come. And
*  so I, uh, went back home, earned some more money and did some construction or whatever, then went
*  back and, uh, headed North to hang out with Yura and fur trap. And, and that started a whole new,
*  you know, open a whole new world that I didn't know about.
*  Before we talk about your own fur trapping, let's actually rewind and would you describe that moment
*  when you were in the darkness as a crisis of faith? Yeah, yeah, for sure. It was like, uh,
*  it was dark in this, in that I, I didn't know how to parse, you know, what is this thing? That's my
*  faith and, and what, and what is, what's the wheat and what's the chaff and how do I get through it?
*  And, um, I basically just clung to keeping it really simple. And, and oddly enough,
*  in my Christian path, it would, God was actually defined in a certain God is love. And I was just
*  the only thing I'm going to cling to, you know, and I'm going to try to express that in my life
*  in whichever way I can and, and just trust that if I do that, if I act like I, you know, we've,
*  I've heard this lately, but if you just act like you believe over time, that world kind of opens
*  to you. When I said I would go to Russia, I, I pray and I was like, Lord, I don't see you. I
*  don't know, but I got this, but I felt like it was a clear call. I have only one request and that
*  is that you would give me the faith to match my action. You know, I'm choosing to believe,
*  like I could choose not to because, you know, whatever, but, uh, I'm going to choose the act.
*  And I just asked to have faith someday. And then, um, and then, and honestly, the whole first year
*  I went through, and that was a very crazy time for me learning the language, being isolated,
*  being misunderstood, blah, blah, and then, but then trying to approach all that with a loving
*  open heart. And then I came back and I realized that that prayer had kind of been answered. That
*  wasn't the end of my journey, but it was, I was like, Whoa, that was like my deepest request that
*  I could come up with. And somehow that had been answered. So through that year, you were just like,
*  first of all, you couldn't speak the language. That's really tough. That's really tough.
*  Because it's unlike on a loan where, because not only can you not speak and you feel isolated,
*  but you're also misunderstood all the time. So you seem like an idiot and all that. And so
*  that was tough. I felt very, uh, alone at that time at certain times in that journey.
*  But you were sort of radiating, like you said, lead with love. So you were radiating this kind
*  of camaraderie. I was really intentional about trying to, that that was, I don't know why I'm
*  here. I just know that I, you know, that that's my call is to love one another. And so I just
*  tried to like, and that had meant digging people's wells. It might meant just going and visiting that
*  old laid babushka up at the house. It's lonely. And I was really cool. I got to talk to some
*  fascinating ladies and stuff and in what go to that village, help those families. I'm going to be like,
*  cut the hay, be the most, the hardest worker I can be because that's my goal here. I didn't have
*  any other agenda or anything except to try to live a life of love. And I couldn't define it beyond
*  that. What was it like learning the Russian language? Oh, it was super interesting. I think, uh,
*  I had the thought while I was learning it, one that it was way too hard. Like if I would have
*  just learned Spanish or German, I would be so much farther, but here I am a year in and I'm like,
*  how do you say I want cheese properly? And then, uh, but at the same time, uh, it was really cool
*  to learn a language that, uh, that I thought in a lot of ways was richer than English. It was,
*  it's a very rich language. I remember there was a, uh, comedy act in Russian, but he was saying,
*  you know, one, one word you can't have in English is naidopetri pilsa, meaning like,
*  I didn't drink enough to get drunk, but you know, that type thing. And, but it's just,
*  you can make up these words using different prefet, you know, prefixes and suffixes and like
*  blend them in a way that is quite unique and interesting. And honestly would be really good
*  for poetry because it also doesn't have sentence structure and the same way English does, the words
*  can be jumbled in a way. And somehow in the process of jumbling, some humor, some, uh,
*  musicality comes out. It's interesting. Like you can be witty in Russian much easier than you can
*  in English, like witty and funny. And also with poetry, you can say profound things by messing
*  with words in the order of words, which is hilarious because, uh, you had a great conversation
*  with Joe Rogan. And on that program, you talked about, you know, how to say, I love you in Russian.
*  Hilarious. It was for me the first time. I don't know why it's you were a great person to articulate
*  the flexibility and the power of the Russian language. That's really interesting because
*  you were saying like, yeah, I love you. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
*  You could say every single order, every single common combination of ordering of those words
*  is, has the same meaning, but slightly different. You could like, and it would change the meaning
*  if you took ya out and just said, Lou blue, tibia. Yeah. There's like a different emphasis
*  or maybe, or ya tibia Lou blue or something, you know, like all these different. Or just tibia Lou
*  blue also. Right. Exactly. So it is rich in that. And it was interesting coming from an English
*  context and getting a glimpse of that. And then wondering about all those, you know, Russian
*  authors that we all appreciate that. Oh, we actually aren't getting the full, the full deal
*  here. Oh yeah, definitely. I've recently become a fan actually of a Larisa Volkansky and Richard
*  Pervier. They're these world famous translators of Russian literature. Tolstoy, Dostoevsky,
*  Tchaikov, Pushkin, Bulgakov, Pasternak. They've helped me understand just how much of an art form
*  translation really is. Some authors do that art more translatable than others. Like Dostoevsky
*  is more translatable, but then you can still spend a week on one sentence. Like just how do I exactly
*  capture this very important sentence? But I think what's more powerful is not like literature, but
*  conversation, which is one of the reasons I've been, I've been carrying and feeling the
*  responsibility of having conversations with Russian speakers because I can still see the
*  music of it. I can still see the wit of it. And in conversation comes out like really
*  interesting kinds of wisdom. You, like, you, when I listen to like world leaders that speak Russian,
*  speak, and I see the translation and it loses, it loses the irony, the, like in between the words
*  if you translate them literally, you, you lose the reference in there to
*  the history of the peoples. Yeah, for sure. And I've definitely seen that on, like, you know,
*  when, if you listen to, I think it probably was a Putin speech or something and you just see that,
*  oh wow, something major is being lost in translation. You can actually see it happen.
*  I wouldn't be surprised if that wasn't the case with the, you know, that whole greatest tragedy
*  is the fall of the Soviet Union that I hear him being quoted as saying all the time. I bet you
*  there's something in there that's being lost in translation that is interesting. I think the thing
*  I see the most lost in translation is the humor. I'll just say that that was the hardest, that was
*  the tangibly the hardest part about learning the language is that humor comes last and you have to
*  like wait, you have to wait that whole year, you know, or however long it takes you to learn a
*  language to be able to start getting the humor. You know, some of it comes through, but you miss
*  so much nuance and it, and, and that was really difficult in interaction with people to like,
*  just be like, you know, when, when there's humor going on and you're totally oblivious to it.
*  Yeah. Everybody's laughing and you're like, trying to laugh along. What did they make of you?
*  To be honest, this person that came from no descendant upon us,
*  all full of love. If I had a nickel for every time I heard like,
*  oh, Americans suck, but you're a good American. You're like the only good American I've ever met.
*  But then of course they never met. But, you know, I think because I was just, I tried to work hard,
*  tried to be more useful than I was a drain, all that. They all, I think, I think it was
*  pretty appreciated me out there. I definitely heard that a lot. And so that's nice.
*  Can you talk about their way of life? So like when you, when you're doing fur trapping.
*  As a bird trapping was an interesting, uh, experience. You basically what you do in,
*  uh, October or something, you'll go out to your hunting cabin and you'll have there,
*  you'll have like three hunting cabins. You'll go stock them with noodles or whatever it is.
*  And then for the next couple months or however long you'll go from one cabin. Usually the guys
*  are just out there doing this on their own. So they'll go out and they'll, uh, go from one cabin
*  and each cabin will have five or six trap lines going out of it. Every day. It'll take a half a
*  day to walk to the end of your trap line, open all the traps and a half a day to get back. And
*  they'll do that. This will spend a week at a cabin, open up all the traps, and then it'll take a day
*  to hike over to the other cabin, go to that one, open up all those traps and then there, and then
*  like three weeks later. So they'll end up back at the first cabin and then check all the traps.
*  And so it's kind of that rhythm and they'll do that for, uh, you know, a couple, few months
*  during the winter and you're trapping sable. They're called sable. Like pine Martin is what
*  we would have the equivalent of over here. And, uh, what is it? It's like a weasel, a furry little
*  weasel and they make coats out of it. And so when I went, he showed me how to open the trap,
*  showed me the ropes, gave me a topographical map. There's one cabin, there's the other,
*  and we parted ways for like five weeks. We did run into each other once in the middle there,
*  at a cabin. But other than that, you're just off by yourself, hoping to shoot a grouse or something
*  to add to your noodles and make your meal better, catch a fish and then working really hard,
*  trying not to get lost and stuff. How do you get from one trap and location to the next?
*  That's funny. Cause like it was both basically by landmarks and feel like I didn't have a compass
*  and things like that. So I got myself into trouble once and I, the first time I went to
*  one cabin, I got myself into trouble. First time I went to the other cabin, I nailed it. And so I
*  had two different experiences on my first trip, but the, the one that I nailed it, I remember I had to
*  go and it's like a day hike. I was like, well, I know the cabin South. And so if I just walk South,
*  you know, the left, the sun should be on the left in the morning and right in front of me in the
*  middle of the day. And by evening it should like end up at my right and just kind of guess what
*  time it is and, and follow along. And, and it's, you know, it takes all day and kiddin' not, I ended
*  up like a hundred yards from the cabin. I was like, Whoa, this is the trail and that's the cabin.
*  Like, Oh, amazing. And then the other time I went out and I heading over the mountains and I thought,
*  you know, hours had passed. I probably had gotten slightly lost. And then I thought I was halfway
*  there. So I thought, okay, I'm going to sit down and cook some, cook some food and get a drink.
*  I'm thirsty. So I sat down and went to start a fire and my matches had gotten all wet because
*  the snow had fallen on me and soaked me and I didn't have them wrapped in plastic. I was like,
*  Oh no, I can't drink water. You know, so I was like, well, I'm just going to power through. I'm
*  halfway there where I kept hiking. And then I realized it was getting night. And, and then I
*  realized I was at the halfway point. Cause I saw this rock that I was like, Oh no, that's the halfway
*  point. I was like, I can't do this. And so I need to go get water. I ended up having to divert down
*  the mountain and head to the water. I ended up, you know, there was a whole ordeal. I had to take
*  my skis off cause I was going through an old forest fire burn. So they were all really close
*  trees, but then the snow was like this deep. So I was just trudging through and just wishing a bear
*  would eat me. Get it over with. But I finally made it down to the water, chopped the hole through
*  the ice was able to take a sip. So you're severely dehydrated, severely dehydrated and exhausted,
*  exhausted, cold, like, you know, you feel sort of nervous. You're in over your head. And then I,
*  and then I got down to the river, chopped the whole night, drank it, hiked up the river and
*  eventually got to the other cabin. It was probably three in the morning or something. He chopped a
*  hole in the ice to get some water. It was, this gotta be like the one of the worst days of your
*  life. You know, it was a bad day for sure. I'm out of here. It was a bad day. And it, here's what was
*  funniest. I got to the cabin at like three in the morning and I brushed over a lot of the, like the
*  misery that I felt. And I laid down, I was about to go to sleep and then Europe charges in from,
*  from there. I was like, Whoa, dude, Europe, what are you doing? And I was like, how's it going?
*  He's like, Oh, it sucks. And he laid down and just fell asleep. I fell asleep and I was like,
*  Oh, that's funny. The last few weeks that we've been apart, who knows what he went through? Who
*  knows why he was there at that time at night, all just summarized in the sucked. And we went to sleep
*  and the next morning we parted waves and who knows what happened. Neither of us said what happened.
*  It's just like, Oh, that's interesting. Yeah. And he probably was through similar kinds of
*  things. Like what gave you strength in those, in those hours when you're,
*  you know, just going to waste high snow, all of that you're laughing, but like that's hard.
*  Yeah. You know that Russians that phrase, the glass by Atsarukhidili eyes are afraid hands do.
*  I'm sure there's a poetic way to translate that. Right. It's kind of like, you know,
*  just put one foot in front of the other. You know, when you think about what you have to do,
*  it's really intimidating. But you just know, if I just do it, if I just do it, if I just keep
*  trudging, eventually I'll get there. And pretty soon you realize you'll have covered a couple
*  kilometers. And so when you're really in it in those moments, I guess you're just,
*  you're just putting your head down and getting through. I've had similar moments. There's wisdom
*  to that. Like once, just take it one step at a time. I think that a lot. I tell myself that a
*  lot when I'm about to do something really hard, just, you know, glass by Atsarukhidili, one step
*  at a time. I'm just going to get, don't like sit there and think, oh, that's a long ways.
*  Just go. And then you'll look back and you covered a bunch of ground. One of the things I've realized
*  was helpful in the jungle. That was one of the biggest realizations for me is like, it really
*  sucks right now. But when I look back at the end of the day, I won't really remember exactly how
*  much it sucked. I'll have a vague notion of it sucking and I'll remember the good thing. So being
*  dehydrated, I'll remember drinking water and I won't really remember the hours of feeling like
*  shit. That's absolutely true. I got a total, it's so funny how like this awareness of that,
*  having been through it and then being aware of it means next time you face it, you're like,
*  you know what, once this is over, I'm going to look back on it and it's going to be like that
*  and nothing. And I'll actually laugh about it and think it was, it's the thing I'll remember. You
*  know, I remember that story of that miserable day going down to the ice and I can smile about it
*  now. And now that I know that I can be in a miserable position and realize that that's what
*  the outcome will be once it's over. It's just going to be a story. If you survive though.
*  If you survive and that can be.
*  So you mentioned you've learned about hunger during these times. Like
*  when was like the hungriest you've gotten?
*  It was the first time. So to continue the story slightly, I went for trapping with that guy and
*  then it turned out all his cousins are these native nomadic reindeer herders. And after I like earned
*  his trust and he liked me a lot, he took me out to his cousins who were all these, you know, nomads
*  living in teepees. I was like, this is awesome. I didn't even know people still lived like this.
*  And they were really open and welcoming because their cousin just brought me out there
*  and vouched for me. But it was during fencing season and fencing in Siberia for those
*  reindeers, like an incredible thing. You take an ax, you go out and you just build these 30 kilometer
*  loop fences with just logs interlocking. It's tons of work and all these guys are more efficient
*  bodies. They're better at it. And I'm just like working less efficiently and also a lot bigger,
*  dude, but we're all just on the same rations kind of. And I got down, that was like 155 pounds,
*  you know, getting down pretty dang skinny for my six, three frame and just working really hard.
*  And then in the spring in Siberia, there's no like, there's not much to forage. You know,
*  in the fall you can have pine nuts and this and that, but in the spring you're just
*  stuck with whatever random food you've got. And so that's where I lost the most weight and felt
*  the most hungry and had a lot of other issues. You know, I was new to that type of work. And so
*  working as hard as I could, but also making mistakes, chopping myself with the axe and
*  getting injured, all kinds of stuff, you know? So injuries plus very low calorie intake.
*  Yep.
*  And exhausted.
*  I remember if you got, you're this poor son of a gun, they get stuck slicing the bread, you know,
*  like you're here cutting the bread and somebody throws all the spoons and drops the pot of soup
*  there. And it's like, before you can even slice and you slice all the meats, like you've gone
*  from the bowl. Everybody else has grabbed the spoon in midair and you're just like, ah, hoping
*  this one little noodles is going to give me a lot of nourishment.
*  Wow. So everybody gets, I mean, yeah, first come first serve, I guess.
*  Cause it's like all the dudes out there working on the fence.
*  So you mentioned the axe and you gave me a present. This is probably the most badass
*  present I've ever gotten. So tell me the story of this, of this axe.
*  So the natives, when I got there, I thought, you know, I grew up on a farm. I thought I was
*  pretty good with an axe, but they do tons of work with those things. And I really grew to love
*  their type of axe or style of axe and just an axe in general. They'd always say it's the one
*  tool you need to survive in the wilderness. And I agree. And what is this one has certain,
*  yeah, design features that the natives, that was unique to the event key to the natives I was with.
*  One is with these Russian heads or the Soviet heads, whatever they had,
*  they're a little wider on top here, meaning you can put the handle through from the top,
*  like a tomahawk. And it, I mean, you're not dealing with a wedge and if it ever
*  loosens and you're swinging, it only gets tighter. It doesn't fly off. And so that's
*  something that's kind of cool. Then they have what's, what they do that's unique
*  is so you can see, and there's the Wolverine X. So it's got the little Wolverine head in
*  honor of the Wolverine I fought on the show. So you have actually two axes, this is one of the
*  small. This is a little smaller. I didn't want to make it too small because you need something to
*  actually work out there. You need something kind of serious. But then they sharpen it from one side.
*  So if you're right-handed, you sharpen it from the right side. And that means when you're in the woods
*  and living, there's a lot of times where you're, whether you're making a table or a sleigh or an
*  axe handle or whatever you're doing, that you're holding the wood and doing this work. And it makes
*  it really good for that planing. The other thing it is, especially in Northern woods, all the trees
*  are like this big, you know, that you're never cutting down a big giant tree. And so when you
*  swing with a single sided acts like this, sharpen from the one side, it really, with your right hand
*  swing like this, it really bites into the wood and gives you a, because with that, if you can picture
*  it, that angle is going to cause deflection. And without that angle on your right-handed swing,
*  it just like bites in there like crazy. And so that there's other little, you know, the handle
*  was made by some Amish guys in Canada. This is all hand forged by. Oh, it's hand forged. Yeah. I mean,
*  yeah. And so it's a pretty sweet little. Yeah, it's amazing. There's the other thing, you know,
*  like I slightly rounded this pole here. It's just a little nuance because when you pound a stake in,
*  if you picture it, if it's, if it's convex, when you're pounding it, it's going to blow the
*  fibers apart. If it has just a slight concave, it helps hold the fibers together. And so it's
*  a little nuance, not too flat, cause you want to still be able to use the back as you would.
*  What kind of stuff are you using the axe for? Oh, so the axe is super important to chop through ice
*  in a winter situation, which you probably hopefully won't need. But what I use an axe all the time for
*  is when I'm, when it's wet and rainy and you need to start a fire, like it's, it's hard to get to the
*  middle of dry wood, if just a knife or a saw. And so you can, I can go out there, find a dead tall
*  tree, you know, dead standing tree, chop it down, split it apart, split it open, get to the dry wood
*  on the inside, shave it some little curls and have a fire going pretty fast. And so if I have an axe,
*  I feel always confident that I can get a quick fire in whatever weather and I wouldn't feel the
*  same without it in that regard. So that's the main thing. Of course you can use it. I use it
*  if you're taking an animal apart or if you're, you know, all kinds of,
*  what else, building a shelter, skinning TP poles or whatever you're doing.
*  What's the use of a saw versus an axe?
*  I greatly prefer an axe. A saw though has, its value goes up quite a bit when you're in hardwoods.
*  Like when you're in a hardwood, oaks and hickory and things like that, it's, they're a lot harder
*  to chop. So a saw is pretty nice in those situations, I'd say. In those situations,
*  I'd like to have both in the North woods and in like more coniferous forests. I don't think there's
*  enough advantages that a saw incurs. With a good axe, now you'll see people with little like,
*  camp axes and stuff and they just don't think they like axes. It's like, well, you haven't actually
*  tried to try a good one first and get good with it. The one thing about an axe, they're dangerous,
*  so you need to like practice, always control it with two hands. Make sure you're not,
*  you know where it's going to go. It doesn't hit you or when you're chopping, like say you're
*  creating something, that you're not doing it on rocks and stuff. So that it's, you do it on top
*  of wood so that when you're hitting the ground, you're not dulling your axe. You know, there's,
*  you gotta be a little bit thoughtful about it. Have you ever injured yourself from an axe in
*  the early days? Oh yeah. That first, so I'd gotten a knee surgery and then about three months later,
*  torn my ACL and went over to Russia and I was like, well, I got a good knee, it's okay. And then
*  that's when I was building that fence that first time. And at one point I chopped my rubber boot
*  with my axe because it reflected off and I was new to them and I was really frustrated because
*  I'd done it before. And the native guy was like, oh, you know, I think there's a boot we left,
*  you know, a few years ago we left a boot like four kilometers that way. So we got the reindeer,
*  took them, rode them over. Sure enough, there's a stump with a boot upside down.
*  Pull it off, put it on. I was like sweet and back in business. Went back a couple of days later,
*  chopped it, cut your foot, cut my rubber boot. And I was just like, dang it. And I was mad enough
*  that I just grabbed the axe and swung it at the tree and it just one handed and deflected off and
*  bam, right into my knee. Oh no. And I was like, oh, I fell down. I was like, oh my gosh, because
*  you get your axe really like razor sharp and then just swung it into my knee. I didn't even want to
*  look. I was like, oh no. I looked and it wasn't a huge wound because it had hit right on the bone
*  of my knee, but it split the bone, cut a tendon there and I was out in the middle of the woods.
*  So I literally like, I knew I was in shock because I'm just going to go back to TP right now. So I
*  ran back to TP, laid down and honestly I was stuck there for a few days. I was in so much pain and
*  my other knee was bad. It was rough. I literally couldn't even walk at all or move. There was a
*  plastic bag. I had to poop in it and roll to the edge of the TP, shove it under the moss.
*  It's just totally immobilized. I guess that should teach you to
*  not act when you're in a state of frustration or anger. There you go. I mean, it's such a lesson
*  there were so many of those and it was always, I was always in a little bit over my head,
*  but like I said, you kind of do that enough and you make a lot of mistakes. But every time you
*  learn, I'm like, now it's like an extension of my arm. That's not going to happen because
*  I just know how it works now. You mentioned wet wood. How do you start a fire when everything
*  is around you is wet? I mean, it depends on your environment, but I will say in most of the forests
*  I spend a lot of time in, in all the Northwoods, the best thing you can do is find a dead standing
*  tree. So it can be downpouring rain and you chop that tree down. And then when you split it open,
*  no matter how much it's been raining, it'll be dry on the inside. So chop that tree down, chop a
*  piece, you know, foot long piece out and then split that thing open and then split it again.
*  And then you get to that inner dry wood and then you try to do this maybe under a spruce tree or
*  under your own body so that it's not getting rained on while you're doing it. Make a bunch
*  of little curls that'll like catch a flame or light. And then you make a lot, a lot more
*  kindling and little pieces of dry wood than you think, cause what will happen, you'll light it
*  and it'll burn through and it's like, dang it. So just be patient. You're going to be fine, you know,
*  like make a nice pile of curls that you can light or spark and then get a lot of good dry kindling
*  and then don't be afraid to just boom, boom, boom pile a bunch of wood on and make a big old fire,
*  get warm as fast as you can. It's amazing how much that is of a recharge it is when you're cold and
*  wet. You can throw relatively wet wood on top of that. Once you get that going, yeah, then it'll
*  dry as it goes, but you need to be able to split open and get all that nice dry wood on the inside.
*  I saw that you mentioned that you look for fat wood. What's fat wood?
*  So on a lot of pine trees, a place where the tree was injured when it was alive, it like pumps sap
*  to it. And then this is a good point because I use this a lot. It pumps that tree full of sap and then
*  years later, the tree dies, dries out, rots away, but that sap infused wood, it's like turpentine
*  in there. It's oily and so if it gets wet, you can still light it. It repulses water. And so
*  if you can find that in a rainstorm, you can just make a little pile of those shavings,
*  get the crappiest spark or quickest light and it'll just sit there and burn like a factory
*  fire starter. It's really, really nice. So it's good to spot. It's a good thing to keep your eye
*  out for. Yeah, it's really fascinating. And then you make this thing. That's just to get the sauna
*  going fast. What was that? That was oil? Oh, it was used motor oil. I had to mix it with some sawdust
*  and then no, sauna's going just like homemade fat wood. I don't know how many times I've watched
*  Happy People, a year in the tie go by Wanda Herzog. You've talked about this movie.
*  Where is that located relative to where you were? So there's this big river called the Yenisei
*  that feeds through the middle of Russia and there's a bunch of tributaries off of it.
*  And one of the tributaries is called the Podkameneyatunguska and I was up that river.
*  And just a little ways north is another river called the Bakhta and that's where that village
*  is where they filmed Happy People. So in Siberian terms, we're neighbors. Nice. Similar environment,
*  similar place. The fur trapper that I was with knew the guy in the films. What would you say about
*  their way of life? Maybe in the way you've experienced it and the way you saw in Happy
*  People? There's something really, really powerful about spending that much time being independent,
*  depending on what we talked about a little bit earlier, but you're putting yourself in these
*  situations all the time where you're uncomfortable, where it's hard, but then you're rising to the
*  occasion. You're making it happen. When you're fur trapping by yourself, there's nobody else to
*  look at to blame for anything that goes wrong. It's just yourself that you're reliant on.
*  And there's something about the natural rhythms that you are in when you're that connected to
*  the natural world that really does feel like that's what we're designed for. And so there's
*  a psychological benefit you gain from spending that much time in that realm. And for that reason,
*  I think that people that are connected to those ways are able to tap into a particular...
*  I noticed it a lot with the natives. So if I met the natives in the village,
*  I would think of them as unhappy people. They drink a lot. They're always fighting. The murder
*  rate is through the roof. The suicide rate is through the roof. But when you meet those same
*  people out in the woods living that way of life, I thought, these are happy people. And it's an
*  interesting juxtaposition to be the same person. But then I lived in a native village that had the
*  reindeer herding going on around it and everybody benefited because of that. I also went to a native
*  village that they didn't hold those ways anymore. And so everybody was just in the village life.
*  And it just felt like a dark place. Whereas the other native village, it was rough in the village
*  because everybody was drunk all the time. But it had that escape and it had that escape valve.
*  And then once you're out there, it's just a whole different world. And
*  it was such an odd juxtaposition. It's funny that the people that go trapping
*  experience that happiness and still don't have a self-awareness to stop themselves from drinking
*  and doing all the dark stuff when they go to the village. It's strange that you're in it, you're
*  happy, but you're not able to reflect on the nature of that happiness.
*  Pete Slauson It's really weird. I've thought about that a lot and I don't know the answer.
*  It's like there's a huge draw to comfort. And it's all multifaceted and somewhat complex because
*  you can be out in the woods and have this really cool life. I will say it's a little bit different
*  for men than women because the men are living the dream as far as what I would like. So you're
*  hunting and fishing and managing reindeer and you got all these adventures. So what ends up
*  happening is a lot more guys than young men out there in the woods. And so there's a draw also,
*  I think, to go to the village probably to find a woman. And then there's a draw of technology
*  and the new things. But then once they're there, honestly, alcohol becomes so overwhelming that
*  everything else kind of just fiddles away. And I just said-
*  Jared Ranere But it's funny that the comfort you find, there's a draw to comfort.
*  Pete Slauson Mm hmm.
*  Jared Ranere But once you get to the comfort, once you find the comfort, within that comfort,
*  you become the lesser version of yourself.
*  Pete Slauson Yeah, for sure.
*  Jared Ranere It's weird.
*  Pete Slauson What a lesson for us.
*  Jared Ranere We need to keep struggling.
*  Pete Slauson Yeah. A lot of times you have to force yourself in that. So like if we took
*  them as an example. I mean, a lot of times you drag this drunk guy into the woods,
*  literally just drag him into the woods, and then he'd sober up. And then he was like,
*  a month blackout drunk and now he's sobered up and now boom, back into life, back into being a
*  knowledgeable, capable person. And because comfort's so available to us all, you almost
*  have to force yourself into that situation. Plan it out. Okay, I'm gonna go do that.
*  Jared Ranere Do the hard thing.
*  Pete Slauson And do that hard thing and then deal with the consequences when I'm there.
*  What do you learn from that on the nature of happiness? What does it take to be happy?
*  Jared Ranere Happiness is interesting because it's like,
*  it's complex and multifaceted. It includes a lot of things that are out of your control and a lot
*  of things that are in your control. And it makes, it's quite the moving target in life,
*  you know what I mean? So, one of the things that really impacted me when I was a young man and I
*  read the Gulag Archipelago was don't pursue happiness because the ingredients to happiness
*  can be taken from you outside of your control, your health, but pursue like a spiritual fullness,
*  pursue, I think he words it duty, and then happiness may come alongside or it may not.
*  But so, he gave the example that I thought was really interesting in the prison camps.
*  Everybody's trying to survive and they've made that their ultimate goal. I will get through this
*  and then, and they've all basically turned into animals in pursuit of that goal and like
*  lying and cheating and stealing. And then he was like, somehow the corrupt Orthodox
*  church produced these little babushkas who were like candles in the middle of all this darkness
*  because they did not allow their soul to get corrupted. And he's like, what they did do is
*  they died. They all died, but they were lights while they were alive and lost their lives,
*  they didn't lose their souls. So for myself, that was really powerful to read and realize
*  that the pursuit of happiness wasn't exactly what I wanted to aim at. I wanted to aim at
*  living out my life according to love like we talked about earlier.
*  Trying to be that candle.
*  Trying to be that candle. Yeah, make that your ideal. And then in doing so is interesting. So
*  for me personally, my personal experience of that is I thought when I went to Russia that I kind of
*  gave up. I was like, in my 20s, I spent my whole 20s living in teepees and doing all this stuff
*  that I thought I should be getting a job. I should be pursuing a career. I should get an education
*  of some sort. Like what am I doing for my future? But I felt I knew where my purpose was. I knew
*  what my calling was. I was going to do it. And it sounds glamorous now when I talk about it,
*  but it sucked a lot of the times. And there was a lot of loneliness, a lot of like giving up what
*  I wanted, a lot of watching people I cared about. You put all this effort in and you just see the
*  people that you put all this effort in and just die and this and that. And then that happened all
*  the time. And then the other thing I thought I gave up was like a relationship because you couldn't,
*  I wasn't going to find a partner over there. And so interestingly enough, now in life I can look
*  back and be like, whoa, weird. Those two things I thought I gave up is where I've been like almost
*  provided for the most in life. Now I have this career guiding people in the wilderness that I
*  love. I genuinely love it. I find purpose in it. I know it's healthy and good for people. And then
*  I have an amazing wife and an amazing family. Like how did that happen? But I didn't exactly aim at
*  it. I consciously in a way, I mean, I hoped it was tangential, but I aimed at something else,
*  which was those lessons I kind of got from the Gulag Archipelago.
*  So you have, just cause you mentioned Gulag Archipelago, I gotta go there. You have some
*  suffering in your family history, whether it's the Armenian, Assyrian genocide or the Nazi
*  occupation of France. Maybe you could tell the story of that. What, this survival thing,
*  it runs in your blood, it seems. I love history. Like I find so much richness in knowing what other
*  people went through and find so much perspective in my own place in the world. I have the advantage
*  of in my direct family, my grandparents, yeah, they went through the Armenian genocide. They were
*  Assyrians, which was a, you know, it was like a Christian minority, indigenous people in the
*  Middle East. They lived in Northwestern Iran. And during the chaos of World War I, you know,
*  the Ottoman Empire was collapsing and it had all kinds of issues. And it, one of its issues was it
*  had a big minority group and it thought it would be a good time to get rid of it. And, you know,
*  they can justify it in all the ways you can. Like there were some people that were rebelling or this
*  or that, but ultimately it was just a big collective guilt and extermination policy against
*  the Armenians and the Assyrians and the, my grandparents. My grandma was 13 at the time and
*  my grandpa was 17, which is interesting because it happened almost a hundred years ago, but our
*  general, just my dad was born when my mom was, my grandma was pretty old. So, but my grandmother,
*  her dad was taken out to be shot. You know, the Turks were coming in and rounding up all the men
*  and they took them out to be shot. And then they took my grandma and her, she had seven brothers
*  and sisters and her mom, and they like drove her out into the desert. Basically she, her dad got
*  taken out to be shot. So his name was Shalman Umar or whatever, took them out. They were all tied up,
*  all shot. He stayed a quick prayer before they shot him, but he fell down and he
*  uh, found he wasn't hit. And usually of course they'd come up and stab everybody or finish them
*  off, but there was some kind of an alarm and all the soldiers rushed off and he found himself in
*  the bodies and was able to untie himself. They were naked and you know, hungry and all that. And he
*  ran out of there, escaped, went into a building and found the loaf of bread wrapped in his shirt and
*  was able to escape and fled. He never saw his family for, so to continue the story,
*  my grandma got taken with her, with her mother and brothers and sisters and all just, they just
*  drove them into the desert until they died basically and run them around in circles and
*  this and that. And then all the raping and pillaging that accompanies it. And um,
*  uh, at one point her mom had the baby and the baby died and her mom just collapsed and said,
*  I just can't go any further. And, and my grandma and her sister like picked her up to T we got to
*  keep going and like picked her up and they left the baby along with the other. Everybody else had
*  died. It was just the three of them left and somehow they bumbled across this British military
*  camp and were rescued. Uh, neither the sister nor my great grandmother ever really covered as far,
*  you know, recovered from what I understand. But my grandma did, um, at the same time in another
*  village in North, in Iran there, the Turks came in and were burning down my grandpa's village and
*  they caught and my grandpa's dad was in a wheelchair and he had like some money belt and he stuffed all
*  his money in it and told it, gave it to grandpa and just told him to run and don't turn back.
*  And they came in the front door as he was running out the back and they, uh, he never saw his dad
*  again, but he said he turned around and saw the bill, you know, the house on fire, never knew what
*  happened to his sister. She then, so he was just alone. He ran. Yeah. At some point he, uh, I can't
*  remember. He like lost his money belt and like he took his jacket off, forgot it was in there.
*  Something happened. Um, anyway, so he got, he was in a refugee camp. He ended up getting taken in
*  by some Jesuit missionary. So anyway, both of them had lost basically everything. And then
*  at some point they met in Baghdad, started a family, immigrated to France. And then it just
*  so happened to be right before world war two. And so then the Nazis invaded my aunt. She's still
*  alive, but she, uh, she actually met a resistance fighter, you know, for the French and under a
*  bridge somewhere and they, and they fell in love and she got married. So she had kind of an in on
*  the, on the French resistance at one point. And of course they were all hungry. They'd recently
*  immigrated, but also had this Nazi occupation and all that. And so the uncle Joe, the resistance
*  fighter guy told him like, Hey, we're going to storm this noodle factory, like come. And so they
*  stormed the noodle factory and all my aunts around in there and were like throwing out noodles into
*  wheelbarrows and everybody was running. Uh, then the Nazis came back and took it back over and like
*  shot a bunch of people and everything. And, and, uh, grandpa, cause he had already come from where
*  he came from was paranoid. So he buried all the noodles out in the garden. And then my two aunts
*  got stuck in that factory overnight with all the Nazi guards or whatever. And then the, the Nazi
*  guards went all from house to house to find everybody that had had noodles and, you know,
*  punish them, but they didn't find my grandpa's. Fortunately they searched his house, but not the
*  garden. And then, uh, so they had noodles and somehow it must've been in the same factory,
*  but olive oil. And they just lived off of that for the whole, all the whole war years.
*  My aunts ended up getting out of the, they hid behind boxes and crates overnight and stuff. And
*  the resistance stormed again in the morning and they got away and stuff. But anyway, chaos. So
*  when they moved to America, I will say the most patriotic family ever loved it. It's like paradise.
*  I mean, that's a, that's a lot to go through. Um, what lessons do you, do you draw from that on
*  perseverance? Look, I'm one, I'm just one generation away from all that suffering.
*  Like my aunts and uncles and dad and stuff were the kids of these people. And somehow I don't have
*  that. Like what happened to all that trauma? Like I, it's like somehow my grandparents bore it. And
*  then they were able to build a family, but not just a family that, but a happy family. Like I knew all
*  my aunts and uncles and I didn't know them. They died before me, but, um, they were, it was so much
*  joy. The family reunions were the best thing ever at the Jonas's and they, uh, um, and it's just like,
*  how in one generation did you go from that to that? And, and it must've been a great sacrifice
*  of some sort to not pass that much resentment or like, what did they do to, to break that chain in
*  one generation? Do you think it works the other way? Like where their ability to escape genocide,
*  to escape, uh, Nazi occupation gave them a gratitude for life? Oh, it's not a trauma in the
*  sense like you're forever bearing it. It, it, the flip side of that is just gratitude to be alive
*  when you know so many people did not survive. Yeah, it must be because the only footage I've
*  saw of my grandma was like, they were all the kids and stuff and they were cooking up a rabbit
*  that they were raising or whatever. And they, uh, uh, but a joyful woman, you could see it in her
*  and she must've been so, she must've understood how fortunate she was and been so grateful for
*  it and so thankful for every one of those 11 kids she had. So I recognize it again in my, in my dad,
*  because my dad went through a really slow kind of painful decline in his health and he had diabetes,
*  ended up losing one leg and so he lost his job. He had to watch his mom or my mom go to school.
*  He had long, all he wanted to do was be a provider and be like a family man. I bet the best time in
*  his life was when his kids ran to him and gave him a hug, but then all of a sudden he found himself
*  in a position where he couldn't work and he had to watch his wife go to school, which was really
*  hard for her and, and become the breadwinner for the family. And he just felt like a failure
*  and I watched him go through that after all these years of letting that foot heal.
*  We went out first day and we were splitting firewood with the splitter and he was just so
*  good to be back out Jordan. And he crushed his foot in the log splitter and you're like, no.
*  And so then they just amputated it. We've got both legs amputated and then his health continued to
*  decline. He lost his movement in his hands. So he was like incapacitated to a degree and in a lot
*  of pain. I would hear him at night in pain all the time. And I delayed a trip back to Russia and just
*  stayed with my dad for those last six months. And it was so interesting having had lost everything.
*  I've watched him wrestle with it through the years, but then he found his joy and his purpose
*  just in being almost, I mean, a vegetable, I'd have to help him pee, roll him onto the cot,
*  take him to dialysis. But we would laugh. He would hear him at night crying or in pain like,
*  and then in the morning he'd have encouraging words to say. And I was like, wow, that's how
*  you face loss and suffering. And he must have gotten that somehow from his parents. And then
*  I find myself on this show and I had a thought, why is this easy to me in a way? Why is this thing
*  that's, and I was like, and it just felt like this gift that had kind of handed down
*  and now it would be my duty to hand down, you know, like, but it's kind of an interesting
*  and be the beacon of that represent that kind of perseverance in the,
*  in the simpler way that something like survival in the wilderness shows.
*  Yeah. It's just saying it, it, it, it rhymes.
*  It rhymes. And it's so simple. Like the lessons are simple. And so we can take them and apply them.
*  So that's on the survivor side. What about on the people committing the atrocities? What do you make
*  of the Ottomans, what they did to Armenians or the Nazis, what they did to the Jews, the Slavs,
*  and basically everyone? What do you, why do you think people do evil in this world?
*  It's interesting that it's really easy, right? It's really easy. You can almost see it,
*  sense it in yourself to justify, to justify a little bit of evil or see yourself cheer a little
*  bit when the enemy gets knocked back in some way. It's really in a way, it's just perfectly
*  naturalist for us to feed that hate and feed that tribalism in group, out group. We're on this team.
*  And I think that can happen.
*  I think it just happens slowly, like one justification at a time, one step at a time,
*  you, you hear something and it makes, it makes you think then that you are in the right to perform
*  some kind of, you know, you're justified and create, you know, break a couple eggs to make
*  an omelet type thing. And then, but all of a sudden that takes you down this whole train
*  to where pretty soon you're justifying what's completely wrong. And then you're justifying
*  what's completely unjustifiable.
*  It's just gradual.
*  Yeah.
*  It's just a gradual process of a little bit at a time.
*  I think that's why, like for me, like having a path of faith is like, works as like a mooring
*  because it can help me shine that light on myself. You know, it's like something else,
*  because if you're just looking at yourself and looking within yourself for,
*  for your compass in life, it's really easy to get that thing out of whack, but you kind of need
*  perspective from which you can step out of yourself and look into yourself and judge
*  yourself accordingly. Am I walking in line with that ideal? You know, and then, and I think without
*  that check, your subject, you know, it's easy to ignore the fact that you might be able to
*  commit those things, but we live in a pretty easy, comfortable society. Like what if, you know,
*  what if we pictured yourself in the position of my grandparents and then all of a sudden you got
*  the upper hand in some kind of a fight? What are you going to do? You know, you could,
*  you'd definitely picture becoming evil in that situation.
*  I think one thing faith in God can do is humble you before these kinds of complexities of the
*  world. And humility is a way to avoid the slippery slope towards evil, I think.
*  Humility that you don't know who the good guys and the bad guys are. And you defer that to sort
*  of bigger powers to try to understand that. I think there's a kind of, I mean, a lot of the
*  atrocities were committed by people who are very sure of themselves being good. It is sad that
*  religion is at times used as a way to kind of just, as yet another tool for justification.
*  Exactly, yeah.
*  Which is a sad application of religion.
*  It really is. It's so inherent and so natural in us to justify ourselves. It's really, I mean,
*  I think it's almost, I mean, just understanding history, read history, it blows my mind that,
*  and I'm super thankful that somehow, and this has been missed you so much, but somehow this ideology
*  arose that love your enemies, forgive those that persecute you. And just on down the line,
*  that something like that rose in the world into a position where we all kind of accept those ideals,
*  I think is really remarkable and worth appreciating. That said, a lot of that gets wrapped up in what
*  you're talking, you know, what is so natural just becomes another instrument for tribalism or another
*  justification for wrong. And so I, even myself, am self-conscious sometimes talking about matters
*  of faith because I know when I'm talking about it, I'm talking about something else other than,
*  you know, there's everybody within what someone else might think of when they hear me talking
*  about it. So it's interesting. Yeah, I've been listening to Jordan Peterson talk about this. He
*  has a way of articulating things, which are sometimes hard to understand in the moment,
*  but when I like read it carefully afterwards, it starts to make more sense. I've heard him talk
*  about religion and God as a kind of base layer, like a metaphorical substrate from which morality
*  of our sense of what is right and wrong comes from and just our conceptions of what is beautiful in
*  life. All these kinds of higher things that are like fuzzy to understand that their religion helps
*  create the substrate for which we as a species, like as a civilization can come up with these
*  notions and without it, you are lost at sea. I guess for him, morality requires that substrate.
*  Like you said, it's kind of fuzzy. So I've only been able to get clear vision of it when I
*  live it. It's not something you profess or anything like that. It's something that you
*  take seriously and apply in your life. And when you live it, then there's some clarity there,
*  but that it has to be kind of defined. And that's where you come in with the
*  religion and the stories, because if you leave it completely undefined,
*  I don't really know where you go from there. Actually, isn't it funny to speak to that? I
*  did mushrooms. Have you ever done those before? I've done them a couple of times, but one time
*  didn't do that many, the other time more. And I had a really profound experience in helping couch
*  all this in a proper context for myself. So when I did it, I remember I was sitting on a swing and
*  I could see my everything was so blissful, except I could see my black hands on these chains,
*  like on the swing, but everything else was blissful and kind of amorphous. And I could see the outline
*  of my kids and I could just feel the love for them. And I was just like, man, I just feel the
*  love. It's so wonderful. But then at times I would try to picture them and I couldn't quite picture
*  the kids, but I could feel the love. And then I started asking all the deepest existential questions
*  I could, and it felt like I was just one answer, another answer, another answer. Everything was
*  being answered. And I felt like I was communing with God, whatever you want to say. But I was
*  very aware of the fact that that communing was just peeling back the tiniest corner of the infinite
*  and it just dumped me with every answer I felt like I could have. And it kind of blew me away.
*  So then I asked it, well, if you're the infinite, why did you reveal to me yourself? Why did you use
*  the story of Jesus to reveal yourself? And then that infinite amorphous thing had to somehow take
*  form for us to be able to relate to it. It had to have some kind of a form. But whenever you
*  create a form out of something, you're boxing it in and subjugating it to boundaries and stuff like
*  that. And then that subject to pain and subject to the brokenness and all that. And I was like,
*  oh, wow. But when I had that thought, then all of a sudden I could relate my dark hands on the
*  chains to the rest of the experience. And then all of a sudden I could picture my children
*  as the children rather than this amorphous feeling of love. It was like, oh, there's
*  Elana and Altai and Ziya. But then they were bounded. And then once they're bounded,
*  you're subject to the death and to the misunderstanding and to all that. I picture the
*  amoeba or the cell. And then when it dies, it turns into an unformed thing. So we need some kind of
*  form to relate to. So instead of always just talking about God completely and tangibly,
*  it kind of gave me a way to relate to it. And I was like, oh, wow. That was really powerful to me
*  in putting it in a context that was applicable. But ultimately, God is the thing that's formless,
*  that is unbounded. But we humans need, I mean, that's the purpose of stories. They resonate with
*  something in us. But when you need the sort of the bounded nature, the constraints of those stories,
*  otherwise we wouldn't be able to like- Can't relate to it.
*  Can't relate to it. And then when you look at the stories literally, or you just look at them just
*  as they are, it seems silly. It's too simplistic.
*  Right, right. And then that was always, you know, a lot of my family and loved ones and friends have
*  completely left the faith. And I totally, in a way, I get it. Like, I understand. But I
*  also really see the baby that's being thrown out with the bathwater. And I want
*  to cherish that in a way, I guess.
*  And it's interesting that you say that the way to know what's right and wrong is you have to live
*  it. Sometimes it's probably very difficult to articulate. But in the living of it, do you
*  realize it? Yeah, I'm glad you say that because I've found a lot of comfort in that because I feel
*  somewhat inarticulate a lot of the times and unable to articulate my thoughts, especially on
*  these matters. And then you just think, I just have to, but I can live it. I can try to live it.
*  You know, and then what I also am struck with right away is I can't because you can't love
*  everybody. You can't love your enemies and you can't. But as placing that in front of you,
*  as the ideal is so important to put like a check on your human instincts, on your tribalism, on your,
*  I mean, you can very quickly, like we're talking about with evil, it can really quickly take its
*  place in your life. You almost won't observe it happening. And so I so much appreciate all the
*  me striving. And that's where, I grew up in a Christian family, so I had these cliches
*  that I didn't really understand, like a relationship with God. Like, what does that mean?
*  But then I realized when I struggled with trying, with taking, I actually did try to take it seriously
*  and struggle with what does it mean to live out a life of love in the world.
*  But that's like a wrestling match because it's not that simple. It doesn't sound, it sounds good,
*  but it's really hard to do. And then you realize you can't do it perfectly. But in that struggle,
*  in that wrestling match is where I actually sense that relationship. And then it's, and that's where
*  it kind of gains life and how that really, and I'm sure that relates to what Jordan Peterson is,
*  you know, getting at in his metaphor. In the striving of the ideal,
*  in the striving towards the ideal, you discover the, how to be a better person.
*  One thing I noticed really tangibly on alone was that because I had so many people that were close
*  to me kind of just leave it all together, I was like, I could do that. I actually understand why
*  they do or I could not. You know, I do have a choice. And so I had to choose at that point to
*  maintain that ideal. And because I could add enough time on a lone one, nice thing is you
*  don't have any distractions. You have all the time in the world to go into your head.
*  And I could play those paths out in my life and not only in my life, but I feel like societally
*  and generationally, like I throw it all away and everybody start from square one, or we can try to
*  redeem what's valuable in this and wrestle with it. And so I just, I chose that path.
*  Well, I do think it's a kind of wrestling match because I'm, you mentioned Gulag Archipelago.
*  I'm very much a believer that we all have the capacity for good and evil.
*  Mm hmm. And striving for the ideal to be a good human being is not a trivial one. You have to find
*  the right tools for yourself to be able to be the candle, as you mentioned before. And then for that,
*  religion and faith can help. I'm sure there's other ways, but I think it's grounded in
*  understanding that each human is able to be a really bad person and a really good person.
*  And that's like a choice. It's a deliberate choice. And it's a choice that's taken every moment
*  and builds up over time. And the hard part about it is you don't know.
*  You don't always have the clarity using reason to understand what is good and what is right and what
*  is wrong. You have to kind of live it with humility and constantly struggle. Because then, yeah,
*  you have to, you might wake up in a society where you're committing genocides
*  and you think you're the good guys. And I think you have to have the courage to realize you're not.
*  It's not always obvious. It isn't, man. And only history has the clarity to show who were the good
*  guys and who were the bad guys. Right. You gotta wrestle with it. It's like that quote, you know,
*  the line between good and evil goes through the heart of every man and we push it this way and
*  that. And our job is to work on that within ourselves. Yeah, that's the part. That's what I
*  like. Sort of the full quote talks about the fact that it moves. It moves from the line moves moment
*  by moment, day by day. We have the freedom to move that line. So it's like, it's very deliberate
*  thing. It's not like you're born this way and that's it. Yeah, I agree. And especially in,
*  you know, in conditions that are like war and peace. In the case of the camps, you know,
*  absurd levels of injustice in the face of all that, when everything is taken away from you,
*  you still have the choice to be, to be the candle, like the grandmas. By the way, the grandmas
*  in like all parts of the world are like the strongest.
*  I don't know what it is. I don't know. They have this like wisdom that comes from patience and
*  have seen it all. They've seen all the bullshit of the people that come and gone,
*  all the abuses of power, all of this. I don't know what it is. And they just keep going.
*  Right, right. Yeah, that's so true. What do you think of,
*  as we've gotten a bit philosophical, what do you think of Werner Herzog's style of narration?
*  I kind of wish he narrated my life. Yeah, it's amazing to listen to.
*  Because that documentary is actually in Russian. I think he took a longer series, yeah, and then
*  put narration over it. And that narration can transform like a story.
*  Yeah, he does an incredible job with it. I will say, have you seen the full version? Have you
*  watched the four part full version? You should. It's in Russian, and so you'll get the fullness
*  of that. And he had to fit it into a two hour format. And so I think what you lose in those
*  extra couple hours is worth watching. I think you'll like it. Yeah, they always go pretty dark.
*  He has a very dark sense about nature that is violence and it's murder.
*  I think that's important to recognize because it's really easy, especially with what I do and what I
*  talk about. And I see so much of the value in nature. Gosh, I also see a beautiful moose and
*  a calf running around. And then next week I see the calf rip the shreds by wolves and you're just
*  like, oh. And it's not as Russoian as we'd like to think. Things must die for things to live,
*  like you said. And that's just played out all the time and it's indifferent to you.
*  Doesn't care if you live or die and doesn't care how you die or how much pain you go through.
*  It's pretty brutal. So it's interesting that he taps into that. And I think it's valuable because
*  it's easy to idealize in a way. Yeah, the indifference is,
*  I don't know what to make of it. There isn't an indifference. It's a bit scary. It's a bit lonely.
*  You're just a cog in the machine of nature. That doesn't really care for you.
*  Totally. I think that's something I sat with a lot on that show, another part of the depth of
*  your psychology you delve into. And that's when I thought I understand that deeply,
*  but I could also choose to believe that for some reason it matters. And then I could live like it
*  matters and then I could see the trajectories. And that was another fork in the road of my path,
*  I guess. What do you think about the connection to the animals? In that movie, it's with the dogs
*  and with you, it's the other domesticated, the reindeer. What do you think about that
*  human animal connection? In the context of that indifference,
*  interesting that we assign so much value and love and appreciation for these animals. And in some
*  degree we get that back. I think now you just said the reindeer. I think of the one they gave me
*  because he was long and tall, so they named him Dleenie. And I just remember Dleenie and just
*  watching him eat the leaves and go with me through the woods and trust him to take me through rivers
*  and stuff. And it really is special. It's really enriching to have that relationship with an animal.
*  And I think it also puts you in a proper context. One thing I noticed about the natives who live
*  with those animals all the time is they relate to life and death a little more naturally. We feel
*  really removed from it, particularly in urban settings. And I think when you interact with
*  animals and you have to confront the life and the death of them and the responsibility of
*  a symbiotic relationship you have, I think it opens a little bit of awareness to your place in the
*  puzzle and puts you in it rather than above it. Have you been able to accept your own death?
*  I wonder. You wonder when it actually comes, what you're going to think. But I did have,
*  you know, I did have my dad to watch confronted in as positive a manner as you could. And I,
*  and that's a big advantage. And so I, I think when the time comes that I will be ready, but I think
*  but I think that's easy to say when the time feels far off. You know, it'll be interesting
*  if you got a cancer diagnosis tomorrow and stage four. It's like, be heavy. Did you ever confront
*  death while in survival situations? I mean, when you're, I mean, you're in,
*  I did have a time, I had a time where I thought I might, I was going to die. I had a lot of
*  situations that could have gone either way and a lot of injuries, broken ribs and this and that,
*  but the one that, that I was able to be conscious through a slowly evolving experience that I
*  thought I might die in was at one point we were siphoning gas out of a barrel and it was almost
*  to the bottom. And I was like, so that's sucking really hard to get the gas out.
*  And then I didn't, I didn't get the siphon going. So I like waited. And then while I was sitting
*  there, Europe put the, a new canister on top and put the hose in and I was, didn't see. And so then
*  I went to get another siphon and I went like sucked as hard as I couldn't just instantly,
*  like a bunch of gas filled my mouth and I couldn't like spit it out. I had to go like that. And I
*  just full mouthful of gas that I just drank and I was just like, Oh, like what is that going to do?
*  And, and he and my friend were going to go on this fishing trip. And so was I, and I was just like,
*  Oh, I might just stay. And I was in this little Russian village and, and they're like, all right,
*  well, you're, it was like, man, I had a buddy that died doing that with diesel a couple of years ago,
*  you know, and I was, Oh man. And so anyway, I made my way to the hospital and by then, you know,
*  you're really out of it because, and then, and it was, they put me in this little dark room.
*  It almost sounds like unrealistic, but it is actually how it happened. They put me in a little,
*  a little room with a toilet and they gave me a cold, you know, galvanized bucket. And then like
*  they just had a cold water faucet and they're just like, just chug water and puke into the toilet and
*  just flush your system as much as you can. But they only had a cold water faucet. So I was just
*  sitting there like chug, chug, chug until like you puke and chug until you're puking them in the
*  dark. And I, and I was like, started to shiver cause I was so cold, but I said to like, still like,
*  get this thing up to me and chug until I puked. I was picturing, I remember reading, you know,
*  about the Japanese torture where they would put a hose in somebody and then make them drink water
*  until they puke. Anyway, the, and I, and I just felt so, the only way I can express it, I felt so
*  possessed, like demon possessed. Like I was just permeated with gas. I could feel it was coming out
*  of my pores and I wanted to like rip it out of me and I couldn't, I'd like puke into the toilet and
*  then couldn't see, but I was wondering if it was like rainbuck. And then, and then I just remember
*  like, I could tell I was going out pretty soon and, and I remember looking at my hands up close,
*  I could see them a little bit and I was like, oh, that's how dad's hands looked. You know,
*  they were alive, alive and then interesting. Is it, are my hands going to look like that in
*  a few minutes or whatever? And so then I wrote down like to my family, what I thought, you know,
*  like, I love you all, like feel at peace, blah, blah, blah. And then I passed out and I woke up,
*  but I didn't think, I actually thought I, when I went to pass out, I thought it was, there was a
*  coin toss for me. So I really felt like I was confronting the end there.
*  What are the harshest conditions to survive in on earth?
*  Well, there are places that are just purely uninhabitable, but I think as far as places that
*  you have a chance.
*  You have a chance. That's a good way to put it.
*  Maybe Greenland. I think of Greenland because I think of, you know, those Vikings that settled
*  there were rugged, capable dudes and they didn't make it. But there are Inuit that, that, you know,
*  natives that live up there, but that's a hard life, you know, and the population's never grown
*  very big because they're, you're scraping by up there and you picture and the, and the Vikings
*  that did land there, you know, they just weren't able to quite adapt. And the fact that they all
*  died out is just a symbol to that must be a pretty difficult place to live.
*  What would you say that's, that's primarily because just the food sources are limited.
*  Food sources are limited, but the fact that some people can live there means it is possible.
*  They figured out ways to catch seals and do things to survive, but it's by no means
*  easier to be taken for granted or obvious. I think it's a harsh, probably a harsh place to
*  try to live.
*  Yeah. It's fascinating, not just humans, but to watch how animals have figured out how to survive
*  watching like a documentary on polar bears. Like they just figure out a way and they get,
*  and they've been doing it for generations and they, they figure out a way they travel
*  like hundreds of miles to like, to, to the, to the water to get fat. And they travel a hundred miles
*  to like, for whatever other purpose, because it, because they want to stay on the ice. I don't know,
*  but it's like, there's, there's a process and they figure it out against the long odds.
*  And some of them don't make it.
*  It's incredible. It's what a, what tough things, man. You just think every little,
*  every animal you see up in the mountains, when I'm up in the woods, is that thing just surviving
*  through the winter, winter scraping by. It's tough, tough existence.
*  What do you think it would take to break you? Let's say mentally. Like if you're in a survival
*  situation.
*  I mean, I think it would have mentally, it would have to be,
*  well, I, we thought we talked about that earlier, I guess the thing that I've confronted that,
*  that I thought I knew was that if I knew I was the last person on earth, I wouldn't do it.
*  But maybe you're right. Maybe I would think I wasn't, but I think, you know, I can't imagine,
*  I can't imagine we're so blessed in the time we live, like, but I can't imagine what it's like
*  to lose your kids, something like that. It was an experience that I've had in my life.
*  Something like that. It was an experience that was so common for humanity for so much of history.
*  Would I be able to endure that? I would have at least a legacy to look back on of people who did,
*  but God forbid I ever have to delve that deep. You know what I mean? I could see that breaking
*  somebody.
*  And I mean, in your own family history, there's people who have survived that.
*  Right.
*  Maybe that would give you hope.
*  I think that's what I would have to somehow hold on to.
*  But in a survival situation, there's very few things that...
*  I don't know what it would be. So, on Alone, I knew if I wasn't gonna,
*  ultimately it is a game show. So it's like, ultimately, I wasn't gonna kill myself out there.
*  So if I hadn't been able to procure food and I was starving to death, it's like, okay, I'm
*  gonna go home. But if you put yourself in that situation, but it's not a game show,
*  and having been there to some degree, I will say I wasn't even close. I don't even know.
*  It hadn't pushed my mental limit at all yet, I would say, on the scale.
*  But that's not to say there isn't one. I know there is one. But I have a hard time.
*  I know I've dealt with enough pain and enough discomfort in life that I know I can deal with
*  that. I think it gets difficult when you start to... When there's a way out and you start to
*  wonder if you shouldn't take the way out as far as like... If there's no way out, I don't know.
*  Oh, that's interesting. I mean, that is a real difficult battle when there's an exit.
*  When it's easy to quit.
*  Right. How long have I been doing this?
*  Yeah. That's the thing that gets louder and louder, the harder things get.
*  It's not insignificant. If you think you're doing permanent damage to your body,
*  you would be smart to quit. You should just not do that when it's not necessary. Because
*  health is all you have in some regards. I don't blame anyone. Then they quit because of that
*  reason. It's like, good. But if you're in a situation and you don't have the option to quit,
*  is knowing that you're doing permanent, that's not going to break. That won't break me. You just
*  have to get through it. I'm not sure what my mental limit would be outside of the family suffering in
*  the way that I described earlier. When it's just you, it's you alone. There's the limit.
*  You don't know what the limit is. I don't know. Injuries, like physical stuff, is annoying though.
*  Isn't it weird how... I mean, I can have a good life, happy life, and then you have a bad back,
*  or you have a headache. It's amazing how much that can overwhelm your experience.
*  Then again, that was something I saw in Dad that was like, interesting. How can you find joy
*  in that when you're just steeped in that all the time? People I'm sure are listening,
*  there's a lot of people that do. Talk about the cross to bear and the hero journey to be good for
*  you for trying to find your way through that. There was a lady in Russia,
*  Tanya, and she had had cancer and recovered, but always had a pounding headache. She was really
*  joyful and really fun to be around. I just like, man, you just have to have a really bad headache
*  for today to know how much that throws a wrench in your existence. All that to say, if you're not
*  right now suffering with blindness or a bad back, just count your blessings because it's so easy to
*  have. It's amazing how complex we are, how well our bodies work, and when they go out of whack,
*  it can be very overwhelming, and they all will at some point. That's an interesting thing to think
*  ahead on, how you're going to confront it when it does. It keeps you humble, like you said.
*  It's inspiring that people figure out a way. With migraines, that's a hard one though.
*  If you have headaches.
*  It's so hard.
*  Oh man, because those can be really painful.
*  It's overwhelming.
*  Dizzying and all of this. That's inspiring that you found that.
*  There's not nothing in that. You can find somehow, you can tap into purpose even in that pain. I
*  guess I would just speak from my dad's experience. I saw somebody do it and I benefited from it.
*  So thanks to him for seeing the higher calling there.
*  You wrote a note on your blog in 2012. You spent five weeks-ish in the forest alone.
*  I just thought it was interesting because this is in contrast to on the show alone.
*  You were really alone. You're not talking to anybody and you realize that.
*  You're right. I remember at one point after several weeks had passed, I wandered into a
*  particularly beautiful part of the woods and exclaimed out loud, wow. It struck me that it
*  was the first time I had heard my own voice in several weeks with no one to talk to.
*  Did your thoughts go into something like deep place?
*  Yeah, I'd say my mental life was really active.
*  When you're that long alone, I'll tell you what you won't have is any skeletons in your closet
*  that are still in your closet. You will be forced to confront every person. It's one thing if you've
*  cheated on your wife or something, but you'll be confronted with the random dude you didn't say
*  thank you to and the issue that you didn't resolve. All this stuff that was long gone,
*  will come up and then you'll work through it and you'll think how you should make it right.
*  I had a lot of those thoughts while I was out there. It was so interesting to see what you
*  would just brush over and then confront it because in our modern world when you're always distracted,
*  you're just never ever going to know until you take the time to be alone for a considerable amount
*  of time. Spend time hanging out with the skeletons.
*  Yeah, exactly. I recommend it.
*  So you said you guide people. What are your favorite places to go to?
*  Well, if I tell them, then is everybody going to go there?
*  I like how you actually have a YouTube video or your Instagram post where you give them
*  a recommendation of the best fishing hole in the world and you give detailed instructions
*  on how to get there, but it's like a journey of life. It's like a Lord of the Rings type of
*  journey. Right, right. No, I love the, there's a region that I definitely love in the States.
*  It's special to me. I grew up there. Stuff like that. Idaho, Wyoming, Montana. Those are
*  really cool places to me. I like the small town vibes they're still maintaining and stuff there.
*  A mix of mountains and forests. But you know another really awesome place
*  that blew my mind was New Zealand. That South Island of New Zealand was pretty incredible.
*  As far as just stunning stuff to see, it was pretty high up there on the list. But there's
*  all these places have such kind of unique things about Canada became like where they did alone.
*  It's not typically what you'd say because it's fairly flat and cliffy and stuff, but it really
*  became beautiful to me because I could tap into the richness of the land or the fishing hole thing.
*  It's like that's a special little spot. Something like that. And you see the beauty and then you
*  start to see the beauty in the smaller scale. Oh, look at that little meadow with that. It's
*  got an orange and a pink and a blue flower right next to each other. That's super cool. There's
*  a million things like that. Have you been back there yet? Back to where the alone show was?
*  No, we're going back this summer. I'm going to guide a trip up there, take a bunch of people.
*  I'm really looking forward to being able to enjoy it without the pressure.
*  What advice would you give to people in terms of how to be in nature? So like a hikes to take or
*  journeys to take out of nature where it could take you to that place where the busyness and
*  the madness of the world can dissipate and you can be with it? How long does it take for you,
*  for people usually to just like... Yeah, I think you need a few days probably to tap into it,
*  but maybe you need to work your way there. It's awesome to go out on a hike, go see some beautiful
*  little waterfall or go see some old tree or whatever it is. But I think just doing is it.
*  Everybody thinks about doing it. You just really do do it. Go out and then plan to go overnight.
*  Don't be so afraid of all the potentialities that you delay it inevitably. It's actually one of the
*  things that I've enjoyed the most about guiding people is giving them the tools so that now they
*  have this ability into the future. You can go out and feel like, I'm going to pick this spot on the
*  map and go there. And that's a tool in your toolkit of life that is I think really valuable
*  because I think everybody should spend some time in nature. I think it's been pretty proven.
*  Yeah, I mean camping is great and solo. I've gotten a chance to do it solo. It's pretty cool.
*  Yeah, that's cool you did. Yeah, it's cool. And I recorded stuff too that helped.
*  Oh good. So you sit there and you record the thoughts.
*  Actually for having to record the thoughts, I had to like, it forced me to really think through
*  what I was feeling to convert the feelings into words, which is not a trivial thing because
*  it's mostly just feeling. You feel a certain kind of way.
*  That's interesting. You know, I felt like the way I met my wife was like, you know, we met at this
*  wedding and then I went to Russia basically and we kept in touch via email for that year. And
*  a similar thing. It was really interesting to have to be so thoughtful and purposeful about what
*  you're saying and things. I think it's probably a healthy, good thing to do.
*  What gives you hope about this whole thing we have going on? The future of human civilization.
*  If we talked about gratitude earlier, like look at what we have now. That could give you hope.
*  Look at what the world we're in. We live in such an amazing time with, you know,
*  buildings and roads and airplanes.
*  Buildings and roads and food security. I lived with the natives and I thought to myself a lot,
*  I wonder if not everybody would choose this way of life because it is, there's something really
*  rich about just that small group, your direct relationship to your needs, all that. But with
*  the food security and modern medicine, the things that we now have that we take for granted, but
*  that I wouldn't choose that life if we didn't have those things. Otherwise you're going to
*  watch your family starve to death or things like that. So we have so much now, which should lead
*  us to be hopeful while we try to improve because there's definitely a lot of things wrong.
*  But I guess there's a lot of room for improvement and I do feel like we're sort of
*  watching it walking on a knife's edge, but I guess that's the way it is.
*  As the tools we build become more powerful.
*  Yeah, exactly. The knife's edge is getting sharper and sharper. I'll argue with my brother about
*  that sometimes. He takes the more positive view and I'm like, I mean, it's great. We've done great,
*  but man, more and more people with nuclear weapons and more. It's just going to take one
*  mistake with the more power. I think there's something about the sharpness of the knife's edge
*  that gets humanity to really focus and step up and not screw it up. There is,
*  just like you said with the cold, going out into the extreme cold, it wakes you up.
*  I think the same thing with nuclear weapons is just wakes up humanity.
*  Everybody was half asleep.
*  And then we keep building more and more powerful things to make sure we stay awake.
*  Yeah, exactly. Stay awake, see what we've done, be thankful for it, but then improve it. And then,
*  of course, I appreciated your little post the other week when you said you wanted some kids.
*  That's a very direct way to relate to the future and to have hope for the future.
*  I can't wait. And hopefully I'll also get a chance to go out in the wilderness with you at some point.
*  I would love it.
*  That'd be fun.
*  Open invite. Let's make it happen. I got some really cool spots of it. Have in mind to take you.
*  Awesome. Let's go. Thank you for talking today, brother. Thank you for everything you stand for.
*  Thanks, man.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm going to go ahead and get started.
*  I'm not partisan.
*  I make up my mind one issue at a time.
*  I try to approach everyone and every idea with empathy and with an open mind.
*  I have and will continue to have many long-form conversations with people both on the left and the right.
*  Now, onto the much more important point.
*  The attempted assassination of Donald Trump should serve as a reminder that history can turn on a single moment.
*  World War I started with the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand.
*  And just like that, one moment in history, on June 18th, 1914, led to the death of 20 million people, half of whom were civilians.
*  If one of the bullets on July 13th had a slightly different trajectory, where Donald Trump would end up dying in that small town in Pennsylvania,
*  history would write a new dramatic chapter, the contents of which all the so-called experts and pundits would not be able to predict.
*  It very well could have led to a civil war.
*  Because the true depth of the division in the country is unknown, we only see the surface turmoil on social media and so on.
*  And it is events like the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand where we, as a human species, get to find out what the truth is of where people really stand.
*  The task then is to try and make our society maximally resilient and robust as such to stabilizing events.
*  The way to do that, I think, is to properly identify the threat, the enemy.
*  It's not the left or the right that are the quote enemy.
*  Extreme division itself is the enemy.
*  Some division is productive.
*  It's how we develop good ideas and policies.
*  But too much leads to the spread of resentment and hate that can boil over into destruction on a global scale.
*  So we must absolutely avoid the slide into extreme division.
*  There are many ways to do this, and perhaps it's a discussion for another time.
*  But at the very basic level, let's continuously try to turn down the temperature of the partisan bickering and more often celebrate our obvious common humanity.
*  Now, let me also comment on conspiracy theories.
*  I've been hearing a lot of those recently.
*  I think they play an important role in society.
*  They ask questions that serve as a check on power and corruption of centralized institutions.
*  The way to answer the questions raised by conspiracy theories is not by dismissing them with arrogance and feigned ignorance, but with transparency and accountability.
*  In this particular case, the obvious question that needs an honest answer is why did the Secret Service fail so terribly in protecting the former president?
*  The story we're supposed to believe is that a 20-year-old untrained loner was able to outsmart the Secret Service by finding the optimal location on a roof for a shot on Trump from 130 yards away,
*  even though the Secret Service snipers spotted him on the roof 20 minutes before the shooting and did nothing about it.
*  This looks really shady to everyone.
*  Why does it take so long to get to a full accounting of the truth of what happened?
*  And why is the reporting of the truth concealed by corporate government speak?
*  Cut the bullshit. What happened? Who fucked up and why?
*  That's what we need to know. That's the beginning of transparency.
*  And yes, the director of the US Secret Service should probably step down or be fired by the president.
*  And not as part of some political circus that I'm sure is coming, but as a step towards uniting an increasingly divided and cynical nation.
*  Conspiracy theories are not noise, even when they're false.
*  They are a signal that some shady, corrupt, secret bullshit is being done by those trying to hold on to power.
*  Not always, but often.
*  Transparency is the answer here, not secrecy.
*  If we don't do these things, we leave ourselves vulnerable to singular moments that turn the tides of history.
*  Empires do fall.
*  Civil wars do break out and tear apart the fabric of societies.
*  This is a great nation, the most successful collective human experiment in the history of Earth.
*  And letting ourselves become extremely divided risks destroying all of that.
*  So please ignore the political pundits, the political grifters, clickbait media, outrage fueling politicians on the right and the left who try to divide us.
*  We're not so divided.
*  We're in this together.
*  As I've said many times before, I love you all.
*  This is a long comment.
*  I'm hoping not to do comments this long in the future and hoping to do many more.
*  So I'll leave it here for today.
*  But I'll try to answer questions and make comments on every episode.
*  If you would like to submit questions, like I mentioned, including audio and video form, go to lexfreeman.com slash AMA.
*  And now let me leave you with some words from Ralph Waldo Emerson.
*  Adopt the pace of nature.
*  Her secret is patience.
*  Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
