---
Date Generated: October 31, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 12499s
Video Keywords: ['Rick Spence', 'alex friedman', 'lex ai', 'lex debate', 'lex freedman', 'lex fridman', 'lex friedman', 'lex interview', 'lex lecture', 'lex mit', 'lex podcast', 'lex transcript']
Video Views: 149646
Video Rating: None
Video Description: Rick Spence is a historian specializing in the history of intelligence agencies, espionage, secret societies, conspiracies, the occult, and military history.
Thank you for listening ❤ Check out our sponsors: https://lexfridman.com/sponsors/ep451-sb
See below for timestamps, transcript, and to give feedback, submit questions, contact Lex, etc.

*Transcript:*
https://lexfridman.com/rick-spence-transcript

*CONTACT LEX:*
*Feedback* - give feedback to Lex: https://lexfridman.com/survey
*AMA* - submit questions, videos or call-in: https://lexfridman.com/ama
*Hiring* - join our team: https://lexfridman.com/hiring
*Other* - other ways to get in touch: https://lexfridman.com/contact

*EPISODE LINKS:*
Rick's Website: https://www.uidaho.edu/class/history/faculty-staff/richard-spence
Rick's Courses: https://bit.ly/40dIZbw

*SPONSORS:*
To support this podcast, check out our sponsors & get discounts:
*AG1:* All-in-one daily nutrition drinks.
Go to https://lexfridman.com/s/ag1-ep451-sb
*NetSuite:* Business management software.
Go to https://lexfridman.com/s/netsuite-ep451-sb
*BetterHelp:* Online therapy and counseling.
Go to https://lexfridman.com/s/betterhelp-ep451-sb
*MasterClass:* Online classes from world-class experts.
Go to https://lexfridman.com/s/masterclass-ep451-sb
*Shopify:* Sell stuff online.
Go to https://lexfridman.com/s/shopify-ep451-sb

*OUTLINE:*
0:00 - Introduction
0:37 - KGB and CIA
14:54 - Okhrana, Cheka, NKVD
30:26 - CIA spies vs KGB spies
37:02 - Assassinations and mind control
43:56 - Jeffrey Epstein
50:48 - Bohemian Grove
1:02:42 - Occultism
1:13:53 - Nazi party and Thule society
1:54:11 - Protocols of the Elders of Zion
2:27:16 - Charles Manson
2:54:03 - Zodiac Killer
3:04:57 - Illuminati
3:12:21 - Secret societies

*PODCAST LINKS:*
- Podcast Website: https://lexfridman.com/podcast
- Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/2lwqZIr
- Spotify: https://spoti.fi/2nEwCF8
- RSS: https://lexfridman.com/feed/podcast/
- Podcast Playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLrAXtmErZgOdP_8GztsuKi9nrraNbKKp4
- Clips Channel: https://www.youtube.com/lexclips

*SOCIAL LINKS:*
- X: https://x.com/lexfridman
- Instagram: https://instagram.com/lexfridman
- TikTok: https://tiktok.com/@lexfridman
- LinkedIn: https://linkedin.com/in/lexfridman
- Facebook: https://facebook.com/lexfridman
- Patreon: https://patreon.com/lexfridman
- Telegram: https://t.me/lexfridman
- Reddit: https://reddit.com/r/lexfridman
---

# Rick Spence CIA, KGB, Illuminati, Secret Societies, Cults & Conspiracies  Lex Fridman Podcast #451
**Lex Fridman:** [October 30, 2024](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=abd5hguWKz0)
*  Most people, most of the time, are polite, cooperative, and kind.
*  Until they're not.
*  The following is a conversation with Rick Spence, a historian specializing in the history
*  of intelligence agencies, espionage, secret societies, conspiracies, the occult, and military
*  history.
*  This is the Lex Friedman Podcast.
*  To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description.
*  And now, dear friends, here's Rick Spence.
*  You have written and lectured about serial killers, secret societies, cults, and intelligence
*  agencies.
*  So we can basically begin at any of these fascinating topics.
*  But let's begin with intelligence agencies.
*  Which has been the most powerful intelligence agency in history?
*  The most powerful intelligence agency in history.
*  I mean, it's an interesting question.
*  I'd say probably in terms of historical longevity and consistency of performance, that the Russian
*  intelligence services, notice I didn't say the KGB specifically, but the Russian intelligence
*  Going back to the Czarist period, are consistently pretty good.
*  Not infallible.
*  None of them are.
*  Of course, there's a common Western way of looking at anything Russian.
*  Very often, I think it's still the case, Russians are viewed in one or two ways.
*  Either they are bumbling idiots, or they are diabolically clever.
*  No sort of middle ground.
*  You can find both of those examples in this.
*  So what I mean by that is that if you're looking at the modern SVR or FSB, which are just two
*  different organizations that used to be part of the one big KGB, or the KGB or its predecessors,
*  the Cheka, you're really going back to the late 19th century and the Imperial Russian
*  security service, generally known as the Okrona or Okronka.
*  It's really the Department of Police, the special corps of gendarmes.
*  Their primary job was protecting the imperial regime and protecting it against imperial
*  or other interior enemies, revolutionaries for the most part.
*  And they got very, very good at that.
*  Co-opting people within those movements, infiltrating and recruiting informers,
*  agent provocateurs.
*  In fact, they excelled at the agent provocateur.
*  Person you place inside an organization costs trouble.
*  Usually maneuver them into a position of leadership, and they provoke actions that can then allow you
*  to crack down on them.
*  That is, many sort of lure or bring the target organization into any legal or open status
*  that it can be more effectively suppressed.
*  They were very good at that.
*  So good that by the early 20th century, in the years preceding the Russian revolution in 1917,
*  they had effectively infiltrated every radical party, Bolsheviks, Mensheviks, SRs, great and small,
*  and placed people in positions of influence and leadership.
*  To the point that arguably, that is, you can debate this, but I think in the whole,
*  they could largely dictate what those parties did.
*  Nothing was discussed at any central committee meeting of any revolutionary group
*  that the Akrona wasn't immediately aware of.
*  And they often had people in positions to influence what those decisions were.
*  Of course, that raises an interesting question, is that if they were that good and they had
*  infiltrated and effectively controlled most of the opposition, then how did the regime get
*  overthrown by revolutionaries?
*  The answer to that is that it wasn't overthrown by revolutionaries.
*  It was overthrown by politicians.
*  That would then take us into a detour into Russian history.
*  But I'll just leave it with this.
*  If you look at 1917 and you look closely, this is one of the things I'd always tell my students,
*  is that there are two Russian revolutions in 1917.
*  There's the first one in March or February, depending on your calendar, that overthrows Nicholas II.
*  Revolutionaries are really not involved with that.
*  Bolsheviks are nowhere to be seen.
*  Trotsky and Lenin are nowhere to be seen.
*  They have nothing to do with that.
*  That has to do effectively with a political conspiracy within the Russian parliament,
*  the Duma, to unseat an emperor they thought was bungling the war and was essentially a
*  loser to begin with.
*  And it was a coup d'état, a parliamentary coup d'état.
*  The temporary or provisional government that that revolution put in power was the one overthrown
*  by Lenin eight months later.
*  And that government was essentially one dominated by moderate socialists.
*  It was a government that very quickly sort of turned to the left.
*  The guy we associate with that is Alexander Kerensky.
*  Alexander Kerensky was a Russian socialist, a politician.
*  He was the quasi-dictator of that regime.
*  He's the person, not the czar, who's overthrown by Lenin.
*  So the revolutionaries, they did not prove to be the fatal threat to the czarist regime.
*  It was the czarist political system itself that did that.
*  What then transpired was that the okrona and its method and many of its agents then immediately
*  segued over into the new Soviet security service.
*  So one of the first things that Lenin did in December of 1917, within a month of seizing
*  power, since the hold on power was tenuous at best, was that, well, you're going to need
*  some kind of organization to infiltrate and suppress those pesky counterrevolutionaries
*  and foreign imperialists and all of the other enemies that we have.
*  And so the extraordinary commission to combat counterrevolution and sabotage that Chaka
*  was formed.
*  You put a veteran Bolshevik, Felix Dzerzhinsky, at the head of that, someone you could politically
*  rely upon.
*  But Dzerzhinsky built his organization essentially out of the okrona.
*  There were all of these informers sitting around with nothing to do, and they were employed.
*  In the early 20s, the kind of rank and file of the Chaka might have been 80 to 90 percent
*  former imperial officials.
*  Those were gradually decreased over time.
*  So why were they doing it?
*  Well, they were professionals.
*  They also needed to eat, and things were somewhat precarious.
*  So if your job is to be an agent provocateur, or if your job is to infiltrate targeted organizations
*  and lead them astray, you do that for whoever pays you.
*  That's part of the professionalism which goes in.
*  And under the Soviets, the Soviet intelligence services are also very good at that.
*  They're very good at infiltrating people into opposing organizations.
*  And I guess the one example I would give to demonstrate that are the Cambridge Five, the
*  British traders from the Soviet standpoint, heroes, who were recruited, most notably Kim
*  Philby, Guy Burgess, Donald McClain, Anthony Blunt.
*  There may have been well more than five, but that wasn't bad out of just Cambridge.
*  And then placing those people in high positions, the ultimate goal, of course, is to get your
*  people into positions of leadership and influence in the opposing intelligence service.
*  And so they did.
*  Of course, it all fell apart, and they ended up in, you know, Philby ended up living the
*  last part of his life in exile in Moscow, but they got their money's worth out of him.
*  And you can also find this in KGB infiltration, the CIA, the FBI, the Aldrich Ames, Hanson
*  cases.
*  Of course, we were infiltrating by we.
*  I mean, the Americans in the West managed to infiltrate our moles as well.
*  But if it came down, you know, someone could dispute this, but I think if you were going
*  to come down to a kind of like a who had the most moles Super Bowl, probably the Soviets
*  would come somewhat ahead of that.
*  So the scale of the infiltration, the number of people and the skill of it, is there a
*  case to be made that the Akrana and the Chaka orchestrated both the components of the Russian
*  Revolution as you describe them?
*  Well, there's an interesting question for me.
*  I mean, there are all kinds of questions about this.
*  I mean, one of the questions is whether or not Lenin was an Akrana agent.
*  OK, I've just said heresy.
*  Some people will do that quite often because I am a heretic and proud of it.
*  Great.
*  Why?
*  Why would you possibly say that Lenin could have been an Akrana agent?
*  Well, let's look what he managed to do.
*  So you had, coming into the 20th century, a single, nominally a single Marxist movement,
*  the Russian Social Democratic Labor Party.
*  And Bolsheviks and Mensheviks, majority-ites and minority-ites, are merely factions of
*  that party.
*  And they always agreed that they were all Marxists and we all believe in dialectical
*  materialism and the rise of social…
*  We're all socialist, comrade.
*  The difference was the tactical means by which one would attain this.
*  And what Lenin wanted was a militant small-scale vanguard party.
*  He wanted a revolution.
*  He wanted to seize power, seize control of the state, and once you have the state, then
*  you induce socialism from above.
*  Because the majority of the people, the so-called Mensheviks, the minority-ites, who are, oddly
*  enough, the vast majority of the party…
*  That's one of the first things.
*  How do you lose that argument?
*  How does the minority get to grab the name majority-ites?
*  But Lenin did that.
*  So what Lenin wanted was a conspiratorial party of committed revolutionaries that would
*  plot and scheme and undermine and eventually seize control of the state and induce socialism
*  from above.
*  There were other Russian Marxists who thought that that sounded vaguely totalitarian and
*  not really democratic and not even terribly socialist.
*  And they opposed that, ineffectively from the beginning.
*  Outmaneuvered every step of the way.
*  The Mensheviks are a case study in failure of a political organization.
*  That too will be heresy to some people, but look, they lost.
*  So what Lenin managed to do, starting around 1903, continuing under this, is he managed
*  to divide, to take what had been a single Marxist party and split it into angry, contending
*  factions.
*  Because he and his Bolsheviks were on one side, advocating a much more militant conspiratorial
*  policy.
*  The discombobulated Mensheviks were over on the other.
*  And in between were a lot of people who really didn't know where they stood on this.
*  Sometimes they kind of agree that he seems to be making sense today.
*  No, no, I don't think he's making sense on that day.
*  But he managed to completely disunify this organization.
*  Who could possibly have seen benefit in that?
*  The Ograna.
*  Now, whether or not they put him up to it, whether or not in some way they helped move
*  him into a position of leadership, or encouraged it, or encouraged it through people around
*  him, whether he was a witting or unwitting agent of the Tsar's secret police, he certainly
*  accomplished exactly what it was that they had wanted.
*  And I find that suspicious.
*  It's one of those things that it's so convenient in a way is that I'm not necessarily sure
*  that was an accident.
*  There's also this whole question to me as to what was going on within the Ograna itself.
*  Now, this is one of these questions when I come to later about how intelligence agencies
*  interact or serve the governments to which they are theoretically subordinate.
*  They do tend to acquire a great deal of influence and power.
*  After all, their main job is to collect information.
*  And that information could be about all kinds of things, including people within the government
*  structure itself.
*  And they also know how to leverage that information in a way to get people to do what you want
*  them to do.
*  So an argument can be made, again, an argument, not a fact, merely an opinion, which is mostly
*  what history is made out of, opinions, is that at some point between about 1900 and
*  1917, people within the Ograna were playing their own game.
*  And that game took them in a direction which meant that continued loyalty to the emperor,
*  specifically to Nicholas II, was no longer part of that.
*  To me, in a way, it seems almost during the events of 1917 that, one, you had an organization
*  that was very effective at what it did that suddenly just becomes ineffective.
*  It doesn't really disappear.
*  These things don't go away because it will reappear as the O'Chucka basically fairly
*  quickly.
*  But it raises the question to me as to what degree there were people within the organization
*  who allowed events to take the course they wished.
*  I always wonder how much deliberate planning there is within an organization like Ograna,
*  or if there's kind of a distributed intelligence that happens.
*  Well, one of the key elements in any kind of intelligence organization or operation
*  is compartmentalization, need to know.
*  So rarely do you have an occasion where everybody, everybody in an executive position, are all
*  brought into a big corporate meeting and we discuss all of the secret operations that
*  are going on.
*  No, no, you never do that.
*  Only a very limited number of people should know about that.
*  If you have a person who is a case officer, who is controlling agents, he's the only
*  one who should know who these people are.
*  Possibly his immediate superiors, but in no way do you want that to be common knowledge.
*  So information within the organization itself is compartmentalized.
*  So you don't need everybody to be in on it.
*  You don't even need necessarily the people who are nominally at the top.
*  The real boss of the Ograna was the Imperial Ministry of the Interior.
*  The Minister of the Interior, in fact.
*  But the Minister of the Interior had no real effective control over this at all.
*  To the point was that at one point early on they actually organized the assassination
*  of their own boss.
*  They have their agents among the revolutionaries kill the Minister of the Interior.
*  Because he'll just be replaced by another one.
*  He's an Imperial bureaucrat.
*  He's not really part of their organization.
*  You know, it's like a director of an intelligence agency appointed by the president.
*  Maybe he's part of the organization.
*  Maybe he isn't.
*  Maybe he is not one of us.
*  So you've got different levels, different compartments within it.
*  And who's actually running the show, if anyone is?
*  I don't know.
*  That's never supposed to be apparent.
*  Well, that's a fascinating question.
*  And you can see this with NKVD.
*  It's obviously an extremely powerful organization that starts to eat itself.
*  Where everybody's pointing fingers internally also as a way to gain more power.
*  So the question is in organizations like that that are so compartmentalized,
*  where's the power?
*  Where's the center of power?
*  Because you would think given that much power,
*  some individual or group of individuals will start accumulating that power.
*  But it seems like that's not always a trivial thing.
*  Because if you get too powerful, the snake eats that person.
*  Well, if we go back again to the founder of Soviet secret police,
*  Felix Dzerzhinsky.
*  Dzerzhinsky dies in 1926.
*  Heels over after giving a heated speech to a party meeting.
*  Now, the common view, what you usually read, which was key for the time,
*  is that clearly Stalin had him whacked because anytime someone died,
*  it was almost always that.
*  And I think a lot of times he did.
*  But in some cases, Stalin's probably getting blamed for things that he didn't actually do.
*  Dzerzhinsky wasn't even opposed to Stalin.
*  So it's not clear why he would be.
*  But this was that Stalin died.
*  Obviously, he was poisoned.
*  Something happened.
*  It was an unnatural death.
*  Somebody goes in for an operation.
*  It gets a little too much anesthesia.
*  Stalin killed them.
*  Somebody tips over in a canoe in upstate New York.
*  Stalin killed them.
*  There's actually a case about that.
*  So that itself can be kind of useful, where every time someone dies,
*  they think you killed them.
*  That's kind of an interesting method of intimidation in that regard.
*  But the suspicion is nonetheless there.
*  Dzerzhinsky had been...
*  He was the grand inquisitor.
*  He was seemingly firmly in control of the organization.
*  Of course, maybe he wasn't.
*  Maybe he was.
*  My guess would be is that if Dzerzhinsky's death was not natural causes,
*  that he was probably eliminated by someone within his own organization.
*  And then you look at the people who take over.
*  His immediate successor is Vyacheslav Menzhinsky,
*  who's really not really a secret policeman, more a kind of intellectual dilettante.
*  But if you look behind him, you'll notice the fellow is Henrik Yagoda.
*  And Yagoda will really sort of manage things from behind the scenes
*  until Menzhinsky dies in 1934.
*  And then Yagoda will hold on until he's a victim of the purges,
*  I think, in 1937 or 1938.
*  Yagoda is ambitious, murderous.
*  And if I was going to point the finger to anybody who possibly had Dzerzhinsky whacked,
*  it would be him.
*  And for the purposes simply of advancement.
*  That's the...
*  You know, the person to look out at any kind of corporate organization is
*  your immediate subordinate, the person who could move into your job,
*  because more than likely, that's exactly what they're planning to do.
*  Yeah, just one step away from the very top.
*  Somebody there will probably accumulate the most power.
*  You mentioned that the various Russian intelligence agencies were good at
*  creating agent provocateurs infiltrating the halls of power.
*  What does it take to do that?
*  Well, there's an interesting little acronym called MICE.
*  M-I-C-E.
*  And it's generally used.
*  And it's just the way in which you would acquire...
*  How do you get people to work for you?
*  Well, M stands for money.
*  You pay them.
*  People are greedy.
*  They want money.
*  You know, if you look at Aldrich Ames, he had a very, very expensive wife
*  with expensive tastes.
*  So he wanted money.
*  I is for ideology.
*  So during particularly in the 1920s and the 1930s, the Soviets were very effective
*  in exploiting communists, you know, people who wanted to serve the great cause.
*  Even though that's initially not really what they wanted to do, because the idea
*  was that if you recruit agents from among, let's say, American communists,
*  you compromise the party.
*  Because exactly what your enemies are going to say is that all communists
*  are Soviet spies.
*  They're all traitors in some way.
*  So you would really want to keep those two things separate.
*  But ideology was just so convenient.
*  And those people would just work for you so well.
*  You could get them to do anything, betray their grandmother.
*  They would go ahead and do that for their greater good.
*  So ideology can be a motivation.
*  And that can be someone who is a devoted Marxist-Leninist.
*  It can also be someone who's a disgruntled communist, because there's
*  no anti-communist like an ex-communist.
*  OK?
*  Those who lose the faith can become very, very useful.
*  For instance, if you look in the case of American intelligence, the people who
*  essentially temporarily destroyed much of the KGB organization in the US post
*  World War II were people like Whitaker Chambers, Louis Budens, Elizabeth Bentley.
*  All of those people had been Communist Party members.
*  They had all been part of the Red Faithful.
*  They all, for one reason or another, became disillusioned and turned
*  rat or patriot, whichever case you may want to put in that regard.
*  What does the C in the E stand for?
*  The C is for coercion.
*  That's where you have to persuade someone to work for you.
*  You have to pressure them.
*  Usually you blackmail them.
*  You know, they could be they have a gambling habit.
*  You know, in the old days, it was very often because they were gay.
*  OK?
*  Gets them in a situation where they can be compromised, and you can get them
*  to do your bidding.
*  Those people usually have a certain amount of control.
*  Here's an interesting example of how the O'Kranna tended to handle this.
*  I think it's still largely used.
*  You'd round up a bunch of revolutionaries on some charge or another,
*  distributing revolutionary literature, running an illegal printing press.
*  You bring a guy into the room and you say, OK, you're going to work for us.
*  He, of course, would refuse to do so.
*  They go, well, if you refuse, we'll keep the rest of your comrades in jail
*  for a while, you know, maybe beat them with a rubber truncheon or so.
*  And then we're just going to let you go.
*  We're just going to put you back out on the street.
*  And if you don't work for us, we will spread the rumor through our agents
*  already in your organization that you are.
*  And then what will your comrades do?
*  How long are you going to live?
*  So you see you have no choice.
*  You're ours and you're going to cooperate with us.
*  And the way that that effectiveness would be ensured is that you have multiple
*  agents within the same organization who don't know who each other are.
*  That's very important.
*  And they'll all be filing reports.
*  So let's say you have three agents inside the central committee of the SR party
*  and there's a committee meeting and you're going to look at the reports
*  that file, they all better agree with each other, right?
*  If one person doesn't report what the other two do, then perhaps they're not
*  entirely doing their job and they can be liquidated at any time.
*  All you do is drop the dime on them.
*  And this was done periodically.
*  In fact, in some cases, you would betray your own agents just to completely
*  discombobulate to the organization.
*  This happened in one particular case around 1908, the fellow who was the head
*  of the chief revolutionary terrorist organization, which wasn't Bolshevik,
*  but the so-called socialist revolutionaries.
*  They actually the biggest revolutionary party, the SRs, who are even actually
*  Marxists, more anarchists.
*  But they went all in for the propaganda of the deed.
*  They really like blowing people up and carried out quite a campaign of terrorism.
*  The fellow who was the head of that terrorist organization was a fellow by the name
*  of Yevno Azef.
*  And Yevno Azef was, guess what?
*  An Okhrana agent.
*  Everything he did, every assassination that he planned, he did in consultation
*  with his control.
*  So he kind of run out his string.
*  There was increasing suspicion of him.
*  He was also asking for a lot more money.
*  So the Okhrana itself arranged to have him write it out.
*  And what did that do?
*  Well, what do you do in your party when you find out the chief of your terrorist
*  brigade was a secret police agent?
*  It's consternation and mistrust.
*  Nobody in the party would ever trust him.
*  You couldn't tell who you were sitting around.
*  I know that a fellow I wrote a biography on, Boris Sevenkov, who was a Russian
*  revolutionary and the second in command within the terrorist organization.
*  By the way, the guy that wanted Azef's job so bad he could taste it.
*  Well, on the one level, he expressed absolute horror that his boss was a
*  police agent.
*  And well, he should, because Sevenkov was a police agent too.
*  See, they already had the number two waiting in the wings to take over.
*  But he was legitimately shot.
*  He didn't really suspect that.
*  So it's a way of manipulating this.
*  And then finally, we come to the E.
*  That, I think, is the most important.
*  Ego.
*  Sometimes people spy or betray because of the egotistical satisfaction that they
*  receive.
*  The sheer kind of Machiavellian joy in deceit.
*  An example of that would be Kim Philby, one of the Cambridge Five.
*  Now, Philby was a communist, and he would argue that he always saw himself as
*  serving the communist cause.
*  But he also made this statement, I think it's in the preface to his
*  autobiography, and he says, one never looks twice at the offer of service in
*  elite force.
*  And he's talking about his recruitment by the NKVD in the 1930s.
*  And he was absolutely chuffed by that.
*  The mere fact that they would want him, what he considered to be a first rate
*  organization would want him, satisfied his ego.
*  And if I was to take a guess as to whether it was ideological motivation,
*  whether it was the romance of communism or whether it was the appeal of ego that
*  was the most important in his career of treason, I'd go with ego.
*  And I think that figures into a lot.
*  Someone doesn't get the promotions that they wanted.
*  Again, if you look at something like Aldrich Ames' career in particular,
*  you've got these kind of...
*  His career in the CIA was hit or miss.
*  He didn't get the postings or promotions that he wanted, his evaluation.
*  He never felt that he got credit for doing that.
*  And that's the type of thing that tends to stick in someone's craw.
*  And can lead for egotistical reasons and added incentive to betray.
*  Yeah, that there is a boost to the ego when you can deceive,
*  sort of not play by the rules of the world and just play with powerful people
*  like they're your pawns.
*  You're the only one that knows this.
*  You're the only one that knows that the person who is sitting across from you,
*  to which you have sworn your loyalty, you are simultaneously betraying.
*  What a rush that must be for some people.
*  I wonder how many people are susceptible to this.
*  I would like to believe that people have...
*  A lot of people haven't the integrity to at least withstand the MI,
*  the money and the ideology, the pull of that and the ego.
*  It can also be a combination of the two.
*  I mean, you can create a recipe of these things,
*  certain amount of money, ego, and the little push of coercion.
*  But if you don't, we'll rat you out.
*  You'll be exposed.
*  What are some differences to you as we look at the history of the 20th century
*  between the Russian intelligence and the American intelligence, the CIA?
*  If you look at both the Okhrana and the KGB,
*  one of the things that you find consistent is that a single organization
*  handled foreign intelligence that is spying upon hostile governments
*  and also internal security.
*  So that's all part of it.
*  Whereas if you look at the US models that evolves, you eventually have the FBI,
*  Wender Hoover, who insists that he's going to be the counterintelligence force.
*  Okay, if there are commie spies running around America,
*  it's the FBI who's supposed to ferret them out.
*  The CIA is not supposed to be involved in that.
*  And the Charter, the basic agreement in 1947, did not give the CIA any...
*  It's often said they were barred from spying on Americans, which isn't quite true.
*  You can always find a way to do that.
*  What they don't have is they don't have any police or judicial powers.
*  They can't run around in the country carrying guns to use on people.
*  They can't arrest you. They can't interrogate you.
*  They can't jail you.
*  They have no police or judicial powers.
*  Now, that means they have to get that from someone else.
*  That doesn't mean that other agencies can't be brought in or local police officials,
*  cornered or whatever you need, you can eventually acquire.
*  But they can't do that directly.
*  So you've got this division between foreign intelligence
*  and domestic counterintelligence, often split between hostile organizations.
*  The relationship between the FBI and the CIA, I think it's fair to say, is not chummy.
*  Never has been.
*  There's always been a certain amount of rivalry and contention between the two.
*  And it's not to say that something like that didn't exist between the domestic
*  counterintelligence and foreign intelligence components of the KGB.
*  But there would be less of that to a degree because there was a single organization.
*  They're all answerable to the same people.
*  So that gives you a certain greater amount, I think, of leeway and power
*  because you're controlling both of those ends.
*  I remember somebody telling me once that, and he was a retired KGB officer.
*  There you go, retired.
*  One of the things that he found amusing was that in his role, one of the things that he
*  could be is that he could be anywhere at any time in any dress, which meant that he could
*  be in or out of uniform and any place at any time.
*  He was authorized to do that.
*  So more freedom, more power.
*  I think one of the things that you would often have the view is that the Russians are simply
*  naturally meaner.
*  There's less respect for human rights.
*  There's a greater tendency to abuse power that one might have.
*  I mean, frankly, they're all pretty good at that.
*  They're probably, it is fair to say that there is probably some degree of cultural differences
*  that it not necessarily for institutional reasons, but cultural reasons.
*  There could well be things that Americans might balk at doing more than you would find
*  on the Russian or Soviet side of the equations.
*  The other aspect of that is that Russian history is long and contentious and bloody.
*  One of the things it certainly teaches is you never trust foreigners.
*  Every foreign government, anywhere, any country on your border is a real or potential enemy.
*  They will all at some point have given the chance, invade you.
*  Therefore, they must always be treated with great suspicion.
*  It goes back to something that I think the British observed was that countries don't
*  have friends.
*  They have interests, and those interests can change over time.
*  Well, the CIA is probably equally suspicious of all other nations.
*  But it's your job.
*  You're supposed to be suspicious.
*  Your job is not to be trusting.
*  The basic job of an intelligence agency is to safeguard your secrets and steal the other
*  guys and then hide those away.
*  Are there laws, either intelligence agencies, that they're not willing to break?
*  Is it basically lawless operation to where you can break any law as long as it accomplishes
*  the task?
*  Well, I think John LaCarrée gave his pen name.
*  He was talking about his early recruitment into British intelligence.
*  One of the things he remember being told up front was if you do this, you have to be willing
*  to lie and you have to be willing to kill.
*  Now, those are things that in ordinary human interactions are bad things.
*  Generally, we don't like it when people lie to us.
*  We expect that people will act honestly towards us, whether that's being a businessman you're
*  involved with, your employers.
*  We're often disappointed in that because people do lie all the time for a variety of
*  reasons, but honesty is generally considered to be it.
*  But in a realm where deception is a rule, dishonesty is a virtue.
*  To be good at that, to be able to lie convincingly is good.
*  It's one of the things you need to do.
*  And killing also is generally frowned upon.
*  Put people in prison for that.
*  They're otherwise executed.
*  But in certain circumstances, killing is one of those things that you need to be able to do.
*  So what he felt he was being told in that case is that once you enter this realm,
*  the same sort of moral rules that apply in general British society do not apply.
*  And if you're squeamish about it, you won't fit in.
*  You have to be able to do those things.
*  I wonder how often those intelligence agencies in the 20th century, and of course,
*  the natural question extending it to the 21st century, how often they go to the assassination?
*  How often they go to the kill part of that versus just the espionage?
*  Let's take an example from American intelligence, from the CIA, 1950s, 1960s into the 1970s.
*  MKUltra. That is a secret program which was involved with what is generally categorized as
*  mind control, which really means messing with people's heads.
*  And what was the goal of that?
*  Well, there seemed to have been lots of goals, but there was an FBI memo that was, I recently
*  acquired, quite legally, by the way, it's declassified.
*  But it's from 1949.
*  So this is only two years after the CIA came into existence.
*  And it's an FBI memo because the FBI, of course, very curious what the CIA is up to.
*  And the FBI are not part of this meeting, but they have someone in.
*  They're sort of spying on what's going on.
*  So there was a meeting which was held in a private apartment in New York.
*  So it's essentially never really happened because it's in somebody's house.
*  And there are a couple of guys there from the CIA.
*  One of them is Cleve Baxter.
*  Cleve Baxter is the great godfather of the lie detector.
*  Pretty much everything that we know or think we know about lie detectors today,
*  you owe to Cleve Baxter.
*  He's also the same guy that thought that probably the FBI was going to be the
*  He's also the same guy that thought that plants could feel, but which somehow was a derivative of his work on lie detectors.
*  So these guys are there and they're giving a talk to some military and other personnel.
*  And there are certain parts of the document which are, of course, redacted.
*  But you can figure out what it is that they're talking about.
*  And they're talking about hypnotic suggestion and all the wonderful things you can potentially do
*  with hypnotic suggestion.
*  And two of the things they note is that one of the things we could potentially do is erase
*  memories from people's minds and implant false memories.
*  That would be really keen to do that.
*  Just imagine how that would be done.
*  So here to me is the interesting point.
*  They're talking about this in 1949.
*  MKUltra does not come along until really 1953, although there are all sorts of artichoke.
*  And others.
*  Everything is sort of leading up to that.
*  It's simply an elaboration of programs that are already there.
*  I don't think that it ultimately matters whether you can
*  implant memories or erase memories.
*  To me, the important part is they thought they could and they were going to try to do it.
*  And that eventually is what you find out in the efforts made during the 1950s and 60s
*  through MKUltra, MKSurge, MKNaomi, and all the others that came out.
*  That's one of the things they're working for.
*  And among the few MKUltra era documents that survived, there's that whole question is that
*  can you get someone to put a gun to someone's head and pull the trigger and then remember it later?
*  Yeah.
*  You could, interestingly enough.
*  So non-direct violence.
*  Controlling people's minds at scale and experimenting with different kinds of ways of doing that.
*  Well, one person put it that the basic argument there or the basic thing you're after was to
*  understand the architecture of the human mind.
*  How it worked, how it put together, and then how you could take those pieces apart
*  and assemble them in different ways.
*  So this comes, this is where hypnosis comes in, which is a,
*  was then still is, fairly spooky thing.
*  Nobody's ever explained to me exactly what it is.
*  The idea was that could you, you think of the whole possibilities in this case,
*  could you create an alternate personality
*  and use that alternate personality in an agent role?
*  But then be able to turn it on and off.
*  So subsequently the person, which that personality inhabited was
*  captured and interrogated, tortured, you know, had their fingernails torn out.
*  They would have no memory of it.
*  They couldn't give any kind of secret away because it was embedded in some part of their brain
*  where there was a completely different person.
*  I mean, you can just imagine the, the possibility that
*  the possibilities that you can dream up.
*  And again, it's not, I think the question is to whether you,
*  that is possible or whether it was done.
*  Well, I suspect that both of those are true, but that you would try to do it.
*  Then imagine the mischief that comes out of that.
*  And one of the big complaints from a legal standpoint about MK,
*  alter and the rest is that you were having medical experiments,
*  essentially being carried out on people without their knowledge and against their will.
*  Which is, you know, a no, no.
*  Yeah. The fact that you're willing to do medical experiments says something about
*  what you're willing to do.
*  And I'm sure that same spirit, innovative spirit, uh, persist to this day.
*  And, uh, maybe less so, I hope less so in the United States,
*  but probably in other intelligence agencies in the world.
*  Well, one thing that was learned and the reason why most MK ultra and similar records were destroyed
*  on order in the early seventies, around the time the CIA became under a certain amount of scrutiny.
*  Now the mid seventies were not a good time for the agency because you had the church
*  committee breathing down their neck. You had all of these assassins, you know,
*  people were asking lots of questions. And so you need to, you need to dump this stuff
*  because there's all kinds of it because you were committing crimes.
*  Against American citizens. So let's, let's eradicate it.
*  And the important lesson to be learned is that never do this type of thing again,
*  where at least in any way in which the agencies direct fingerprints are placed on it,
*  you can pay people, you can subsidize research, you can set up venture capital firms,
*  you got plenty of money and you can funnel that money into the hands of people who will carry out
*  this research privately. So if something goes wrong, you have perfect deniability.
*  On the topic of mice on the topic of money, ideology, coercion, and ego,
*  let me ask you about a conspiracy theory. So there is a conspiracy theory that the CIA is behind
*  Jeffrey Epstein at a high level. If you can just talk about that, is that something that's at all
*  even possible that you have? Basically, this will be for coercion. You get a bunch of powerful people
*  to be sexually mischievous, and then you collect evidence on them so that you can then have leverage
*  on them. Well, let's look at what Epstein was doing. He was a, he was a businessman who then
*  also developed a very lucrative sideline and being a high level procurer,
*  basically in supplying young girls. And he also filmed much of that activity.
*  I think his partner in this, Ghislaine, and I hope I'm pronouncing her name correctly.
*  I think it's Ghislaine.
*  Ghislaine? Well, I've heard it both ways. Ghislaine or Ghislaine, whichever it may be.
*  I think her argument at one point was that, well, we did this to protect ourselves.
*  But this type of thing has been done before. There's nothing new about this,
*  getting influential people in compromising situations and filming them.
*  I could give you another historical example of that. In late 1920, actually early 1930s,
*  just pre-Nazi Berlin, there was a very prominent sort of would-be psychic and occultist by the name
*  of Erich Jan Harnassen. He had a private yacht. I think it was called the Seven Sins. And he
*  hosted parties. He also had a whole club called the Palace of the Occult, which hosted parties
*  where things went on and there were cameras everywhere. He filmed important people, guys
*  like the brown shirt chief of Berlin in various states of undress and sexual congress.
*  And he did that for the purposes of blackmail. So in Epstein's case, he is a procurer of young
*  girls to wealthy men, largely. And many of those events were recorded.
*  Now, even if it wasn't his intention to use them for blackmail, think of what someone else could do
*  it because people know about this. So you can raise a question. Epstein is just kind of a
*  greedy pervert. But through his greedy perversion, he's now collecting information that could be
*  useful. Who could that be useful to? Who would like dirt on Prince Andrew? Think of all the
*  people who were there. There were important people who went to Lolita Island. So if it isn't
*  Epstein directly, he might have been being, I'm not trying to let him off the hook because I have
*  anything for him. He was either running his own blackmail business or someone was using him as a
*  front for that. I think we're kidding ourselves. We tried to pretend that's not what was going on.
*  So you think even American intelligence agencies would be willing to swoop in
*  and take advantage of a situation like that? Well, you know, American politicians could
*  ultimately end up in a position to oversee things like intelligence budgets.
*  One of them might even become director. You never know. You can never tell what some crazy president
*  might do. It could be very high. One of the guys who understood the person was J. Edgar Hoover.
*  J. Edgar Hoover spent a long time collecting dossiers and politicians. How do you think he'd
*  remain director of the FBI as long as he did because he systematically collected dirt on people?
*  So there is a history of this type of thing. And again, he could argue that's partly for
*  his protection to keep his job, to protect the sanctity and security of the Bureau.
*  You can find a million different ways to justify that. It's really dark.
*  Well, there is that side to human nature. Let's put it that way. Whether it's the CIA or the
*  Akrana, maybe that's what the president of the United States sees when they show up to office,
*  is all the stuff they have on him or her. And say that there's an internal mechanism of power that
*  you don't want to mess with. And so you will listen. Whether that internal mechanism of power
*  is the military industrial complex or whatever, the bureaucracy of government.
*  Connect with the deep state.
*  The deep state.
*  Trench to bureaucratic. Well, it's been said, and I think it's generally true,
*  that bureaucratic creatures are like any other creatures. It basically exists to perpetuate
*  itself and to grow. I mean, nobody wants to go out of business. And then of course,
*  you get all of these things like pizza gate and accusations of one form or another.
*  But here's an interesting thing to consider. Okay. And I want to argue that I'm not saying
*  that pizza gate in any way was real or QAnon. But where do they get these ideas from?
*  So let's ask ourselves, do pedophiles exist? Yeah. Do organized pedophile organizations exist?
*  Yeah, they share information, pictures. They're out there on the dark web. They cooperate.
*  So does child trafficking exist? Yeah, it does. So in other words, whether or not specific
*  conspiracy theories about this or that group of organized pedophile cultists is real. All
*  the ingredients for that to be real are there. Pedophiles exist. Organized pedophilia exists.
*  Child and human trafficking exists. At some point, at some time, someone will put all of those
*  together. In fact, certainly, they already have. We'll jump around a little bit, but
*  your work is so fascinating and it covers so many topics. So let's see if we jump into the present
*  with the Bohemian Grove and the Bilderberg group. Bilderbergers. So the elites,
*  as I think you've referred to them. So this gathering of the elites.
*  Can you just talk about them? What is this? Well, first thing I have to point out is that
*  Bohemian Grove is a place, not an organization. It's where the Bohemian Club meets. It's that
*  2,700 acre old growth Redwoods near north of San Francisco. The Bohemian Club began
*  back in the 1870s. Its initial members were mostly journalists. In fact, supposedly,
*  the name itself comes from, it was a term for an itinerant journalist who moved from
*  paper to paper. It was called the Bohemian. Although I think there may be other reasons why
*  that particular term was chosen as well. But I think the original five members, there were
*  three journalists, there was a merchant, and there was a vintner guy who owned a vineyard,
*  California. How surprising. None of them terribly wealthy, but they formed an exclusive men's club.
*  Was and still is. Nothing terribly unusual about that at the time. But it became fashionable. And
*  as it became fashionable, more wealthy people wanted to become part of it. And the thing about
*  getting rich guys to join your club is what do rich guys have money? And of course, it's one of those
*  rich guys that bought Bohemian Grove where now you build your old boy summer camp, which is what it
*  is. They got cabins with goofy names. They go there. They perform skits. They dress up in costumes.
*  True, some of those skits look like pagan human sacrifices, but it's just a skit.
*  What's really going on there? So on the one hand, you can argue, look, it's a rich guys club.
*  They like to get out there. The whole motto of the place is weaving spiders come not here.
*  So we're never going to talk about business. We just want to get out into the woods,
*  put on some robes, burn a couple of effigies in front of the owl, have a good time,
*  probably get drunk a lot. What's with the robes? Why do they do weird creepy shit? Why do they put
*  on a mask and the robe and do the plays and the owl and then sacrificing, I don't know.
*  Why do you have a giant owl? I mean, why do you do that?
*  But what is that in human nature? Because I don't think rich people are different than
*  not rich people. What is it about wealth and power that brings that out of people?
*  Well, part of it is the ritual aspect of it. And yeah, that clearly is a ritual. Rituals are
*  pretty simple. Rituals are just a series of actions performed in a precise sequence to produce an
*  effect. That describes a lot of things. It describes plays, symphonies, every movie you've
*  ever seen. A movie is a ritual. It is a series of actions carried out in a precise sequence to
*  produce an effect, but then added soundtrack to cue you to what emotions you're supposed to be
*  feeling. It's a great idea. So the rich people should just go to a movie or maybe just go to a
*  Taylor Swift concert. Like, why do you have to put- Well-
*  Why the owl?
*  Part of it is to create this kind of sense, I suppose, of group solidarity. You're all going
*  to appear. Also, a way of transcending yourself in a way. When you put on the robe,
*  it's like putting on a uniform. You are in some way a different or more important person.
*  It's a ritual. The key ritual at Bahamian Grove is a thing called the cremation of care.
*  That's what it's supposed to be. We're going to put all of our- We're rich, important people.
*  We have to make all of these critical decisions. Life is so hard. So we're going to go out here in
*  the woods and we're going to kick back and we're all going to gather around the lake.
*  And then we're going to carry- It's wicker. It's not a real person.
*  And how would you know? And then we're going to- And this is the cremation of our care. But
*  it's a ritual which is meant to produce a sense of solidarity and relief among those people who
*  are there. The question that comes down with the rituals is how seriously do you take them?
*  How important is this to the people who carry them out?
*  The interesting answer to that is that for some people, it's just boring. I mean, there are
*  probably people standing around the owl who think this is ridiculous and can't wait for it to get
*  over with. There are other people who are kind of excited about it and get caught up into it.
*  But other people can take it very seriously. It's all a matter of the intention that you have
*  about what the ritual means. And I don't mean to suggest by that that there's anything necessarily
*  sinister about what's going on. But it is clearly a ritual carried out for some kind of
*  group reinforcing purpose. And you're absolutely right. You don't have to do it that way.
*  I've gone to summer camps and we never carried out mock sacrifices in front of an owl.
*  All right. Yeah, we did all those other things. We didn't even have any robes either. So it goes
*  beyond merely a rich guy summer camp, although that's an aspect of it. But it also, I think,
*  often obscures that focusing on Bohemian Grove at the getaway of the club ignores that the club
*  is around all the time. That's what's at the center of this. It is the club and its members.
*  So despite all the talk about no weaving spiders coming around here, what are the other features
*  of the summer meeting are things called lakeside talks. And this often people are invited to go
*  there. And one of the people who was invited, I think around 1968, was Richard Nixon, who was
*  making his political comeback. And he was invited to give a talk where very important people are
*  listening. And Nixon, in his memoirs, realized what was going on. He was being auditioned as to
*  whether or not he was going to be right. He recognized that that was really the beginning
*  of his second presidential campaign. He was being vetted.
*  So one of the main theories, call it a conspiracy theory or not, about the Bohemian club and the
*  gatherings is that people of wealth and influence gather together. And whether or not it's part of
*  the agenda or not, inevitably you're going to talk about things of interest. But to me, the mere fact
*  that you invite people in, political leaders, to give lakeside talks means that there are weaving
*  spiders which are going on. And it is a perfect private venue to vet people for political office.
*  I mean, yeah, where else are you going to do it if you're interested in vetting,
*  if you're interested in powerful people selecting?
*  Well, see, here's the question. Are these guys actually picking who's going to be president?
*  Is that the decision which is being made? Or are they just deciding what horses they're going to
*  back? I think the latter is the simpler version of it, but it doesn't mean it's the other way around.
*  But these are the kinds of, I mean, Nixon was, there was the whole 1960 thing.
*  So he's the new Nixon. Remember this? And this is where the new Nixon apparently made a good
*  impression on the right people because he did indeed get the Republican nomination
*  and he did indeed become president.
*  Well, there could also be a much more innocent explanation of really its powerful people
*  getting together and having conversations and through that conversation influencing each other's
*  view of the world and just having a legitimate discussion of policies.
*  Why wouldn't they? I mean, why would you assume that people are not going to do that?
*  It's the owl thing with the robes.
*  Why the owl and why the robes?
*  Which is why it becomes really compelling when guys like Alex Jones, forgive me, but I've not
*  watched his documentary. I probably should at some point about the Bohemian Grove where he claims
*  that there is a Satanist human sacrifice of, I think, children. And I think that's quite a
*  popular conspiracy theory or is lost popularity. It kind of like transformed itself into the QAnon
*  set of conspiracy theories. But I mean, can you speak to that conspiracy?
*  Let's put it this way. The general public rich people are inherently suspicious.
*  Let's put it that way. First of all, they've got all that money and exactly how did one obtain it?
*  And I do not of necessity adhere to the view that behind every great fortune there is a great crime,
*  but there often are. There are ways in which it's acquired. But I think it's…
*  One of the things I think that can happen is particularly when people acquire a huge amount
*  of money. And I won't name any names, but let's say there are people who perhaps in the tech sphere
*  who coming from no particular background of wealth suddenly find themselves with $600 billion.
*  $600 billion. Well, this is the question you would have to ask yourself. Why me?
*  Because you're one of the rare tiny group of human beings who will ever have that kind of wealth
*  in your hands. Even if you are a convinced atheist, I think at some point you have to
*  begin to suspect that the cosmic muffin, providence, whatever it is, put this money in your hands to do
*  what? Achieve great things. Just think of all the stuff. So you're going to start a foundation and
*  you're going to start backing all the things that you like. I think there's an element of ego that
*  comes in with it as well. And again, it may not be so much what the rich person with a huge amount
*  of money at their disposal and a lot of fuzzy ideas about what to do with it can be influenced
*  by others. It's always that question as to who's actually manipulating these events.
*  What's going on in that regard? And in some way they can be a very useful sucker. Find somebody
*  with a lot of money and get them to finance the things that you want them to do.
*  The Bohemian club is, I don't think in and of itself inherently evil or sinister,
*  but it means that there are lots of different people in it who have different agendas. It goes
*  back to what I said about how somebody feels about the cremation of care ritual. This is either just
*  a waste of time. It's just some sort of silly thing that we're doing, or it is something of great
*  importance, perhaps even mystical or religious importance, because that's ostensibly what it's
*  pretending to be. Because always this question is to what degree you begin to play and the play
*  becomes serious. That tends to happen a lot. You've studied a lot of cults and occultism.
*  What do you think is the power of that mystical experience?
*  Well, what is broadly referred to, well, we're getting to what's occultism? What's the occult?
*  Occult is the hidden. That's all it really means. Specifically hidden from sight.
*  And the basis of it is the idea that what is hidden? Well, what is hidden from us is most of
*  the world, most of reality. So the basic concept within occultism, basic concept within most
*  religions, which are approved forms of occultism, is that the world, the physical world that we are
*  aware of is only a very small part of a much larger reality. And that what the methods and practices
*  of occultism arguably do is to allow someone to either enter into this larger reality or to
*  access that larger reality for purposes to be exploited here. The most interesting statement
*  about, and a key element of this becomes the thing called magic. Now we all know magic,
*  you know, it's a guy standing on stage performing a trick. But the interesting thing about a stage
*  magician is that a stage magician is, we know when we're watching this that it's a trick.
*  Yet we can't really figure out if he does it well how that trick is being accomplished because it
*  seems to defy physical laws. And that's what's fascinating about it. So even though you know
*  it's a trick, if you can't figure it out, it has this kind of power of fascination, but it's
*  mimicking something. Stage magic is mimicking real magic. So it's real magic. Well, let's go back to
*  Aleister Crowley because he always has to come. I knew he was going to come up at some point in this
*  earlier than that because he always does. All roads lead to Aleister Crowley.
*  Aleister Crowley, and I've said this enough so I should be able to get it right, but I'm paraphrasing
*  here. He goes, magic, which of course he's spelled with a K, or C-K, is the art and science of causing
*  change to occur in conformity with will. So in a way that's sort of mind over matter,
*  but it's the idea that one can through will, through intention,
*  bend reality to make something happen. Somebody once put it this way, it's tipping the luck plane.
*  So you know, you got some kind of a level plane. What you're trying to do is just tip it just a
*  little bit so the marble rolls over one side or another. Now that presupposes a lot of things,
*  is there a luck plane? I don't know, but it's a good sort of idea to have. But
*  don't become overly bothered trying to figure out whether you actually can bend reality.
*  Become bothered by the fact that there are people who believe that they can and will go to great
*  efforts to do so, and will often believe they have succeeded. So, I'm going to go back to the
*  success story. So, it's this effort to make things occur in a particular way, maybe just to sort of
*  nudge reality in one little way or another. And that's where things like rituals come in.
*  Rituals are a way of focusing will and intention. We're all there, we're all thinking about the same
*  thing. And you have to imagine just how, the pervasiveness of what could be called that kind
*  of magical thinking every day is everywhere. So, let me give you an example. Have you ever attended
*  high school football pep rally? Think of what's going on there. Okay, your team is going to battle
*  the other team. You've now assembled everyone in the gymnasium. You've got people who are dancing
*  around in animal totem costumes. And what are you chanting? Everyone is supposed to chant that
*  the other team dies, that you'll be horribly defeated and that our team will be victorious.
*  That is a magic ritual. The idea is, it comes into this idea that's very popularly about
*  visualizing things. Visualizing, manifesting, I love this term, you need to manifest your success.
*  Well, that's just magic. That is trying to cause change in conformity with will. So,
*  these things can happen without you even consciously aware of what's going on. And you don't need to be
*  because if you're all a part of the mob, which is there in the gymnasium, and you get into this,
*  and you get worked up, and a cultist would argue what you're doing is you're creating a huge amount
*  of energy. All these people are putting energy into something and that energy goes somewhere.
*  And maybe you can, maybe, just maybe, you actually can slightly increase the chances of your team's
*  victory. Of course, your opponents are having their own ritual at the same time. So, whoever has the
*  bigger mojo will apparently win on the team. So, that's a, I would say, trivial example of that,
*  but a clear one. I do believe that there's incredible power in groups of humans getting
*  together and morphing reality. I think that's probably one of the things that made human
*  civilization what it is. Groups of people being able to believe a thing and bring that belief into
*  reality. Yes, that's, you're exactly right. Bring to conceive of something and then through intention,
*  will, to manifest that into this realm. And, of course, that power of the collective mind
*  can be leveraged by charismatic leaders to do all kinds of stuff, where you get cults that do,
*  you know, horrible things or anything. There might be a cult that does good things. I don't know.
*  It depends. We don't call those cults. Exactly. Without endorsing this entirely,
*  an interesting, one of the questions, what's the difference between a cult and a religion?
*  And it has been said that in the case of a cult, there's always someone at the top
*  who knows what's going on. Generally, who knows it's a scam. In a religion, that person is dead.
*  So, see, I've just managed to insult every single religion. But it's an interesting way of thinking
*  about it because I think there is some degree of accuracy in that statement. Do you think,
*  actually, the interesting psychological question is, in cults, do you think the person at the top
*  always knows that it's a scam? Do you think there's something about the human mind where you gradually
*  begin to believe your own bullshit? Yes. That's, that again is part of magic, I think,
*  is believing your own bullshit. It doesn't necessarily mean that the head of the cult
*  realized, but there's someone, maybe the second, you know, always sort of looking in the lieutenant,
*  someone probably has an idea about what's going on.
*  The other thing that seems to be a kind of dead giveaway for what we would call a cult is what's
*  called excessive reverence for the leader. People just believe everything these people say.
*  I give you an example. The first time I ever encountered anything like that was in,
*  um, was in Santa Barbara, California in the 1970s. I was going to grad school
*  and there was a particular cult locally, which I think was Brotherhood of the Sun.
*  And it was the same. So there was some guy who was, you know, among the other things,
*  followers were convinced to hand over all their money and personal belongings to
*  him. I believe he used part of that money to buy a yacht with.
*  Anyway, a lot of it went to him. And then of course, working for free upon different cult
*  owned business enterprises, of which there were several, and there was a person I knew who became
*  a devoted follower of this. And it was all I could think of at one point was ask them,
*  what the hell is the matter with you? I mean, have you lost your mind? Why would you,
*  what is it that this person can possibly be providing it that you essentially are going
*  to become a slave to them, which was, which is what they were doing. And I actually give that
*  credit in a way of sort of sparking my whole interest in things like secret societies.
*  And here again, as a disclaimer, I am not now nor I've ever, ever been the member of any
*  fraternal organization, secret society or cult that I know of. And that's what interests me
*  about them because I'm just always trying to figure out why people do these things. Like I
*  said, why the robes and the owl? Why? Why do you do that? And it's trying to figure it out. I mean,
*  I couldn't even hack the boy scouts. Okay. That was too much of it. Because to me, you join an
*  organization and the first thing that comes along is there's somebody, there are rules and someone
*  is telling you what to do. Okay. I don't like people telling me what to do. Spent much of my
*  life trying to avoid that as much as possible and join a cult. There's going to be someone telling
*  you what to do. Join the Bohemian club and there's going to be someone telling you what to do.
*  Obviously a lot of people really get something out of that. It becomes, in some ways it's sort
*  of necessary for them to function, but I do not understand it. And my study of it is a personal
*  era to try to understand why people do that. And there are so many reasons. Primary of which I
*  would say is the desire in the human heart to belong. Yes. And the dark forms that it takes
*  throughout human history, recent human history is something I'd love to talk to you a bit about.
*  If we can go back to the beginning of the 20th century, on the German side, you've
*  described how secret societies like the Thule society laid the foundation for Nazi ideology.
*  Can you, through that lens, from that perspective, describe the rise of the Nazi party?
*  Well, I guess we could start with what on earth is the Thule society?
*  So the Thule society was a small German occult society. That is, they studied metaphysics,
*  another fancy word for occultism, that appeared in Munich around 1917, 1918.
*  The key figure behind it was a German esotericist by the name of Rudolf von
*  Seboldendorf. Okay, not his real name. His real name was Adam Rudolf Glauer. He was adopted by
*  a German nobleman and got the name von Seboldendorf. And I like to say that name.
*  So I have this real thing about vague, mysterious characters that show up and do things
*  and trying to figure out who these people are. So we're working with the years prior to the First
*  World War. So the decade or so prior to World War I, he spends a lot of time in the Ottoman Empire.
*  Turkey. There was none in the Ottoman Empire, which was a fairly tumultuous place
*  because in 1908 and 1909, there was the Young Turk Revolution. And you had a kind of military
*  coup which effectively overthrew the Ottoman Sultan and installed a military junta, which would go on
*  during the First World War to make its greatest achievement in the Armenian Genocide. Eventually,
*  he created a genocidal military regime, which would lead the country into disastrous First World
*  War, which would destroy the Ottoman Empire, out of which modern Turkey emerges, yada, yada, yada.
*  And by the way, we should take a tiny tangent here, which is that you refer to the intelligence
*  agencies as being exceptionally successful. And here in the case of the Young Turks being
*  also very successful in doing the genocide, meaning they've
*  achieved the greatest impact, even though the impact on the scale of good to evil tends towards
*  evil. It's one of those things that often comes out of revolutionary situations. Revolutions always,
*  always seek to make things better, don't they? We're going to take a bad old regime.
*  And the Sultan was bad. I think it's fair to say Abdul Hamid II wasn't called the Red Sultan
*  because of his favorite color type of thing. And the ideas that they were going to improve,
*  they were now going to, the Ottoman Empire was a multinational empire. They were going to try to
*  equalize and bring in the different groups. And none of that happened. It became worse.
*  In the same way that you could argue that the goal of Russian revolutionaries was to get rid
*  of the bad old incompetent medieval czarist regime and to bring in a new great shining future.
*  And it became even more authoritarian. And the crimes of the imperial Russian regime pale the
*  significance of what would follow in the same way that the crimes of Abdul Hamid pale to when you
*  get to the Young Turks. But that wasn't necessarily the intention. But von Zapotendorff is a German
*  businessman who's working in this period. And the whole point here is that the Ottoman Empire in
*  this period is a hotbed of political intrigue. And all kinds of interesting things about it.
*  The Young Turk revolution is essentially a military coup, but it is plotted in Masonic lodges.
*  Okay. I know technically Masonic lodges are never supposed to be involved in politics, but they are.
*  Or the lodge meeting breaks up and then you plot the revolution. So same group of people,
*  but it's not technically. But yes, and there's the Macedonia Resorcia Lodge in Tessaloniki was
*  ground zero for plotting this military coup that was supposed to improve the empire.
*  Zapotendorff is in one way or another mixed up in all of this, or at least he's an observer.
*  Plus he's initiated into the Masonic lodges.
*  And interestingly enough, the fellow who initiates him into one of these Eastern lodges is a Jewish
*  merchant by the name of Ter-Mudi. And who's also a Kabbalist. And also Zapotendorff is very,
*  very interested in the occult. He's initiated into Eastern Masonic lodges in a period when those same
*  lodges are being used as a center for political intrigue. He also apparently is involved in gun
*  running, which in revolutionary periods is, you know, there's a lot of money to be made off of that.
*  So he's connected to various dark businesses in a tumultuous time with connections to
*  politicized Freemasonry and the occult.
*  Now, in the course of the First World War, he returns to Germany. He just shows up.
*  And it would be my operative suspicion or theory that Zapotendorff was working for someone. I don't
*  think he just pops up in Munich on his own accord. Why does he leave the Ottoman Empire and return
*  to that place? Who's behind him? Well, maybe no one. But maybe someone, because he does seem to
*  have money at his disposal. And he comes into Munich and he basically takes over this small
*  sort of occult study group. Now, the interesting thing is that the Tuli society is really just
*  a branch of another existing what's called an Areosophist order. A thing called the German
*  order or the Germanen order, which is centered in Berlin. But for some reason, he doesn't want
*  his group to be connected by name with the Germanen order. So Tuli society, Tuli in this case, is a
*  reference to supposedly a mythical Arctic homeland of the Aryan race. Apparently, they're all snow
*  people who wander out of the snow at some point. It's kind of like a frozen Atlantis.
*  So I mentioned these people, the Areosophists, who, which is, you have to practice saying that. So
*  what are they? Well, they're a kind of racist Germanic offshoot of theosophy.
*  And I know I'm explaining one thing to explain something, but there's no other way to do this.
*  So theosophy was 19th century, very popular and widely modeled occult belief that was founded by
*  a Russian woman by the name of Helena Blavatsky. She was a medium psychic. She supposedly got
*  channelings from the ascended masters. The basic story there, there are all of the ascended masters,
*  which are mystical beings that may or may not have once been human. They live inside the Himalayas
*  or they float among them on a cloud and they guide the spiritual evolution of humanity.
*  What Blavatsky did was to take Western esotericism and blend it with Hindu and Buddhist
*  esotericism, which became very, very sexy in the West. Still is, you know, Buddhism attracts a lot
*  of people because, well, it's Buddhism. It's different, see? So, you know, the mahatmas,
*  the ascended masters were sending her messages, despite the fact that she was later proven pretty
*  much to be a fraud and writing the letters herself. Nevertheless, people still went along with this
*  doctrine and it's been widely modified and copied since then. So an idea in theosophy was that human
*  spiritual evolution was tied to physical evolution. So in the case of Blavatsky,
*  Blavatsky never said that Aryans, white people, anything out this were superior. She talked about
*  the different root races, but it's just her version of it is just total gobbledygook that seems to
*  include everyone in it. I defy you to make much sense out of it. But in the early 20th century,
*  there were different sort of, you know, one of the things that became fashionable, you know,
*  not terribly popular. These are small movements with the idea that, well, you know, Germany is
*  a new upcoming country. And part of this, I think, was really trying to define who the Germans were
*  because, remember, the German Empire, Germany as a political state doesn't come into existence until
*  1871. Prior to that, Germany was a geographic expression, a vaguen, which described a large
*  area in central Europe where a lot of people who, you know, wore leather shorts
*  or something like that and spoke similar German dialects were nominally Germans,
*  but they might be Prussians or Bavarians or, you know, they came in all sorts of varieties
*  and relations. There was no German identity. Something very similar happened in Italy in
*  the same period. I mean, you know, there weren't Italians. There were Sardinians, there were Romans,
*  and there were Sicilians. Umbrians spoke, again, dialects of a similar language, but had never
*  lived, you know, not since the Roman Empire under a single state and really didn't think of themselves
*  as the same. So you have to create this artificial thing. You have to create Germans. There is now a
*  Germany with an emperor, and so we're all going to be Germans. Well, exactly what is that?
*  Much of it is an artificial creation. You know, you have to decide upon some sort of standard
*  dialect. Okay, we'll decide what that is. You know, often dialect that only a few people actually
*  speak, and then they will be drilled into children's heads through state schooling programs.
*  So, I think this is the kind of milieu that it comes out of. People were trying to figure out
*  what on earth Germans actually were and the need for some sort of common identity.
*  And, you know, that leads to everything like Wagnerian opera. Richard Wagner wanted to create
*  a German mythical music, so he went back and stripped mind old German myths and cobbled them
*  together into a lot of people standing on stage singing. And that was his purpose. He was
*  a nationalist. He was in many ways a kind of racialist nationalist, and this was his idea
*  of trying to create, out of bits and pieces of the past, a newfangled form of German identity.
*  So, on the more mystical end of this, you had the idea that, well, Germany must have been created
*  for some special purpose because the Germans must be very special people, and we must have some sort
*  of particular destiny. And then out of this, you know, the direction this is heading, well,
*  we're all part of some sort of master race with some sort of ties to some sort of great civilization
*  in the past. Call it Thule, call it whatever you want to be. They basically just invent things
*  and try to attach those to the past. And so,
*  Ariosophy was the Arianized version of Theosophy. And what this did was to take the idea that
*  spiritual and physical evolution had led to the most advanced form of human beings,
*  which were the Arians, and the most advanced group of them were, of course, the Germans.
*  And this attracted, and people like, keep in mind again, this was not a mass movement.
*  This was very much a fringe movement. Most people weren't aware of it and weren't particularly
*  interested in it, but it had an appeal for those who already had a kind of esoteric bent in some
*  form or another. And this is where things like the Germanen Order, the German Order, and their
*  other groups, it was only one of many sort of grew out of. And what it was that the Thule society,
*  as a branch, the Thule Gesellschaft was supposed to do, was to study this. It was an esoteric study
*  group. And so, people would get together and they'd talk about things, probably make more stuff up,
*  and all sort of work around this idea of German Arians as the most advanced type of human beings,
*  and all the wonderful things that the future would hold. And the fact that this was in the
*  midst of a war in which Germany was again fighting as they saw it for its existence
*  heightened those kinds of tensions as well. So, my suspicion again
*  is that Seibotendorf, in terms of who was behind him, that he was essentially called back to Germany
*  to work either for the Prussian political police or for some aspect of German intelligence or
*  security to try to mobilize occultism or esotericism for the war effort. Because again,
*  this is 1918. The war has gone on way too long. Within a few months, Germany will collapse,
*  and it will collapse simply from the psychological exhaustion of the population.
*  So, this is almost like to help the war effort with a kind of propaganda,
*  a narrative that can strengthen the will of the German people.
*  Well, it strengthens the will of some people. You have to try to appeal to different aspects of this.
*  But the mystical aspect is one of those things that can be, can have a very powerful influence.
*  The idea is that we can come up with some kind of mystical nationalism. Maybe that's one to put it,
*  a kind of mystical nationalism that can be exploited for the workers. At this point,
*  you're kind of grasping at straws. This is a whole period when the Germans are marshaling the last
*  of their forces to launch a series of offensives on the Western front, the peace offensive,
*  which will initially be successful, but will ultimately fail and lead to a collapse in morale.
*  But among the leadership of Germany, it was a recognition that national morale was flagging.
*  One of the other things that was kind of raising its head was what had happened nearby,
*  the Russian Revolution, which had now brought the idea of another solution to all of this,
*  the idea of revolutionary Marxism. Here we need to remind ourselves as to where Marxism comes from,
*  not Russia, Germany. Where was the largest Marxist party? In Germany.
*  Marx probably expected the revolution to begin in Germany.
*  Where else?
*  I mean, the Soviet Union is not very industrialized. Germany is. And so that's where it would probably…
*  Russia, five percent of the population is industrial workers. In Germany,
*  40 percent of the population is in touch. So if any place was made for Marxism, it was Germany.
*  I think that's why it caught on in East Germany so well because it had kind of come home.
*  It was a local belief. It wasn't something imported by the Russians. It was a German invention.
*  One of the things you can see in this is the Tully Society was particularly involved
*  in sort of anti-Marxist or anti-Bolshevik agitation. They saw themselves, the Bolton
*  Sorcerers saw them as this whole movement. It was a counter to this. It was a kind of counter
*  Marxist movement.
*  Can we sort of try to break that apart in a nuanced way? So it was a nationalist movement.
*  The occult was part of the picture. Occult racial theories. So there's a racial component,
*  like the Aryan race. So it's not just the nation of Germany. And you take that and contrast it with
*  Marxism. Did they also formulate that in racial terms? Did they formulate that in national versus
*  global terms? How do they see this?
*  Marxism formulates everything by class. People are categorized by class. You're either part of
*  the proletariat or part of the bourgeoisie. You're either part of the proletariat or just
*  some sort of scum, really. You just be swept into the dustbin of history. Only workers count.
*  That was what would take someone who was a nationalist would sort of drive them crazy
*  because their ideas were trying to create a German people. We're trying to create a common
*  German identity. But what the Marxists are doing is they're dividing Germans against each other by
*  class. German workers hate the German bourgeoisie. German proletariat is opposed to German
*  capitalist. We're all trying to fight this war together. So that was why Marxism, particularly
*  in the form of Bolsheism, was seen as unpatriotic and, of course, was opposed to the war as a whole.
*  The idea that parenting Lenin was that the war was an imperialist war. The only thing that was
*  good that was going to come out of it is that the imperialist war through all of the crises it was
*  creating would eventually lead to a class war. That would be good because that would reconcile
*  all of these things. But think of the two very different versions of this. The Bolshevist version
*  or let's just call it the Marxist version of Germany was going to be a class society in which
*  we're going to have to have some kind of civil upheaval which will have Germans fighting Germans.
*  Whereas the kind of mystical nationalism, the almost kind of religious nationalism that
*  Zobotendorf and the Thule Society had hitched its wagon to held that Germans are all part of a single
*  racial family and that's what must be the most important thing. And that these can be different
*  ways of trying to influence people. It comes down to a matter of political influence.
*  So in a sense, I think that what Zobotendorf and the Thule Society was trying to do,
*  at least within Munich, was to use this idea of mystical nationalism as a potential rallying
*  point for some part of the population to oppose these other forces, to keep people fighting.
*  The war is lost though by the, in November, you know, the Kaiser abdicates and essentially
*  the socialists do take over in Germany. Things come very, very close to following the Russian
*  model. And you even get the Russian version or take on the Bolsheviks, which are the Spartacists,
*  who try and fail to seize power early on. But you do essentially end up with a socialist Germany.
*  And that then leaves in the aftermath of the war, the Thule Society is sort of the
*  the odd man out, although they're still very closely connected to the army.
*  Here's one of the things that I find interesting. When you get into 1919,
*  who is it that's paying Zobotendorf's bills? It's the army.
*  The one thing the German army is absolutely determined to do is to preserve its social
*  position and power. And they're perfectly willing to dump the Kaiser to do that.
*  As sort of this deal, which is made in November of 1918, Kaiser's abdication,
*  the proclamation of a German Republic, which, you know, you just had this guy declare it.
*  It wasn't really planned. There's the Ebert-Groner pact. Groner is the chief of staff,
*  general staff at this point. Friedrich Ebert is the chief socialist politician, basically,
*  and they make an agreement. And the agreement basically is that the army will support Ebert's
*  government if Ebert supports the army. And particularly that means the continuation of
*  the officer corps and the general staff in one form or another. So a deal is made.
*  And that, of course, is what will eventually help defeat the Spartacist uprising.
*  Now, was the army doing the similar kinds of things that we've talked about with the
*  intelligence agencies? This kind of same kind of trying to control the direction of power?
*  The German intelligence landscape in the First World War is obscure in many ways. There are
*  lots of things that are going on. Germany has a military intelligence service called
*  Abteilung or Section 3B. That's just plain military intelligence. They're constantly trying to
*  collect military information before the war about the weaponry and plans of the enemies and then
*  about what the operational plans were during the war. It doesn't really go much beyond that,
*  though. The German Foreign Office runs a kind of political intelligence service.
*  And that's the one which is much more involved in things like subsidizing subversion
*  in Russia, which is one of the things that the Germans sign on to fairly early.
*  A little diversion here. In 1915, there is a Russian revolutionary who's lived much of his
*  life in Germany who goes by the code name of Parvis. And he essentially comes to the Germans
*  in Constantinople, interestingly enough, in Turkey. He's hanging around there the same
*  time as the Bötendorf is there, which I find curious. So Parvis or Alexander Hellpand,
*  to give his actual name, comes in and he goes, look, there's a lot of revolutionaries in Russia
*  and there's a lot of mistrust with the regime. We think that the war will increase the contradictions
*  in Russian society. And if you give me a lot of marks, I can finance this revolutionary activity
*  and through subversion, I can take Russia out of the war.
*  Well, the Germans are facing a two front war. That sounds great. We'll use money in order to...
*  But notice what they're doing. The German general staff, a very conservative organization, not a
*  bunch of revolutionaries, are going to finance revolution in an opposing country. They are going
*  to finance revolutionary subversion to take Russia out of the war, which basically works.
*  So that gives you another idea as to what the German military is willing to do. They're not
*  revolutionaries, but they'll pay revolutionaries to subvert another regime. Now you've got the
*  problem is that the revolutionary regime that your money helped bring to power is now threatening
*  to extend into your country. So the whole question for the army and for others in Germany in 1919
*  is how to keep Germany from going Bolshevik, from in a sense being hoist by your own petard.
*  So the Thule society, I don't think is a huge part of this program, but it is a part of it.
*  And it's all an effort to try to keep control. And that's where the army is financing them.
*  That's even where the army at some point then supplies them with its own propagandists.
*  So the Thule society begins to create under Subbotendorf's leadership,
*  what he called the Rings of Thule. And these are satellite organizations.
*  That aren't the society as though, but they're kind of controlled and inspired by it.
*  And one of those is thing called the German Workers Party.
*  And the German Workers Party again is local. It's not large. It's not terribly influential,
*  but what does it aspire to be? It aspires to be a party that will bring German workers away
*  from the seductive influence of the Bolsheviks and into a more patriotic position, a patriotic.
*  And the way that I describe this is that it's not an anti-communist organization.
*  It's a counter-communist organization. So you don't create something which completely opposes it.
*  You create something which mimics it, which is ultimately what the German Workers Party will
*  become is the National Socialist German Workers Party, known as that term socialist.
*  And that is, in my view, what Nazism is from the beginning. It is a counter-communist movement.
*  And by the way, for people who don't know, the National Socialist German Workers Party is
*  also known as the Nazi Party. So how did this evolution happen from those that complicated
*  a little interplay? We should also say that a guy named Adolf Hitler is in the army at this time.
*  Yes. Well, he's going to come into this because remember he said the army was going to supply
*  its own propagandists to help the German Workers Party and the Thule Society do their work.
*  The propagandist they supply them with is a man who the army trains, sends to classes
*  to learn the art of public speaking and propaganda, and that fellow is Corporal Adolf Hitler.
*  So how does Adolf Hitler connect with the German Workers Party?
*  Well, he'd been in the army during the war, the only regular job that he'd ever had.
*  He kind of liked it. So you often get the view that at the end of the war he joined
*  millions of other German soldiers who didn't have jobs. No, no, he stays in the army.
*  He stays in the army until 1921. He's on the army payroll at the very time in which he's
*  held to set this up. What appears to have happened is this. Seibotendorf had organized the Thule
*  Society. That had tried to oppose – there's actually a brief period of time in which the
*  communists actually take over Munich, the Bavarian Soviet Republic, which doesn't last very long,
*  and eventually the army and volunteers put this down. While that's going on, by the way,
*  Hitler is actually sitting in the barracks in Munich wearing a red armband
*  because he is technically part of the soldiers who have got over to the Bavarian Soviet Republic.
*  He seems to have had flexible interests in this case. So once order is restored, so to speak,
*  the army comes in and decide that, well, one of the things we need, we need to have people who can
*  lecture soldiers on patriotic topics. And so there is a particular captain by the name of
*  Karl Mayer who sort of spots Hitler. He later describes him as like a stray dog looking for
*  a master. Hitler has a knack for public speaking. Other soldiers will listen to him.
*  Some people can do that. Some people can't. Mayer decides that he's a good candidate for
*  further training. So yes, they bring him in. They turn him into a what's called a wehman,
*  a kind of liaison man. He's an army propagandist.
*  And then you've got this little outfit called the German Workers' Party.
*  And essentially what happens is that Hitler is sent in to take over leadership of that,
*  which is what happens. He shows up, he attends a meeting. There are like 50 people there.
*  By the way, the topic of the first meeting he's at is how and why capitalism should be abolished,
*  okay, which is not what you might well expect. And because remember, the German Workers' Party
*  is trying to cast itself as a counter-Bolshevism. So it's not saying that capitalism is great,
*  which is important. Now, capitalism is evil. We agree upon that. We just agree it has to be
*  destroyed from a nationalist point of view, as opposed from some sort of strange internationalist
*  point of view. So Hitler is essentially, as I see it, sent in by the army as their trained man to
*  assume leadership within this small party and to use it for the army's patriotic propaganda campaign.
*  And is this season doing so even to the name change to the National Socialist or German
*  Workers' Party? I mean, really, what sounds more red than that?
*  So the interesting thing here is from where did anti-Semitism seep into this whole thing?
*  It seems like the way they try to formulate counter-Marxism is by saying the problem with
*  capitalism and the problem with Marxism is that it's really Judeo-capitalism and
*  Judeo-Bolshevism. From where did that ideology seep in?
*  Well, that's a huge topic. Where does anti-Semitism come from? Let's start with that term itself,
*  a term which I really grew increasingly to dislike because it doesn't actually say what it means.
*  Anti-Semitism is anti-Jewism. That's all it is. I'm not sure whether there has ever existed a
*  person who hated Jews, Arabs, and Maltese equally. Okay, that's kind of hard to imagine. I don't know,
*  but that's technically what that would mean because, let's face it, most Semites are Arabs.
*  So if you're an anti-Semite, then you don't seem to distinguish Jews from Arabs. It makes no sense.
*  The origin of the term is invented by, guess what, an anti-Semite. A guy in the 1870s,
*  a German journalist by the name of Wilhelm Marr, who is, wouldn't you know it, part Jewish himself,
*  and who decides that he really needed a better term than Judenhaus, Jew-hate, which was the term,
*  because that just sounds so inelegant, doesn't it? Okay, what do you want to call yourself,
*  a Jew-hater or an anti-Semite? See, anti-Semitism, it's got that ism part at the end of it,
*  which means it's a system of belief. Anything that has an ism must somehow be scientific and
*  important. It's all part of the 19th century obsession with trying to bring science into
*  something and one the other. So we're going to get rid of Jew-hate, and we're going to turn it
*  into anti-Semitism. And we're only going to be talking about Jews, but we'll never actually say
*  that. And somehow, the invention of a Jew-hater to disguise the fact that he's a Jew-hater,
*  even though he's partly Jewish, by inventing the term anti-Semitism worked,
*  because everybody has bought it and repeated it ever since.
*  So, I don't know, maybe just because anti-Jewism would just be, is it too direct in some way?
*  Do we have difficulty confronting actually what it is that we're talking about?
*  I do wish terms were a little bit more direct and self-explanatory, yeah.
*  Jew-hate is a better term.
*  Well, the question then comes, what exactly do you hate about Jews?
*  And a lot of this has to do with, if you go back prior to the 19th century, if Jews were hated,
*  they were hated for religious reasons. In Christian Europe, they were hated because
*  they weren't Christians. And they existed as the only kind of significant religious minority.
*  But other than that, they tended to live separately. They had little economic influence.
*  Jews tended to live in shtetls in the East, ghettos elsewhere. They were, some were involved
*  in banking and business, but they sort of remained segregated from much of society.
*  That changes when you get to the 19th century and with what's called Jewish emancipation. And that
*  means that between about 1800 and 1850, most European countries dropped the various legal
*  or social restrictions against Jews. They are assimilated into the general society.
*  So ideally, you stop being a German Jew and you become a Jewish German.
*  Those are two very different important concepts.
*  And what that does, of course, is that it opens up the professions business world elsewhere. So Jews
*  move who had been largely within those realms to begin with. They already had a good deal with
*  experience in banking and business. And they move into those areas and professions and become quite
*  visible. And that's what then creates the Jewish community.
*  That's what then creates anti-Semitism. Because in some way that is seen as part of the
*  changes that have taken place. And there are a lot of things going on here. Part of it has to do
*  with the kind of wrenching social and economic changes that took place with industrialization.
*  So one of the things to keep in mind is that in the process of industrialization,
*  just like today, whole classes of people were made extinct economically. Craftsmen, for instance.
*  So when factories came along and began to produce things with machines, all the craftspeople who had
*  made those things previously are now unemployed or go to work as wage labor in factories. So there
*  are winners and losers in industrialization. And what people saw in Germany and elsewhere is that
*  among this new sort of rising capitalist elite, among these new professions, among the bureaucrats
*  that are coming out of these burgeoning states, there were visibly a fair number of Jews.
*  So in some way, the rise of Jews in the minds of many people were connected to all of the other
*  bad things that were going on. The world was changing in a way we don't like.
*  And seemingly, the Jews are prospering while I am not. And that was true in Germany and elsewhere.
*  Jews became highly visible in the professions. They became very visible in banking. They became
*  visible in legal profession. They became visible in the medical profession. And those are people
*  that a lot of people would come in contact with. Bankers, lawyers, and doctors. They were not the
*  majority there, but vastly overrepresented in terms of the general population, and especially
*  within the cities. So in that sense, the roots of antisemitism to me is that Jews in Germany and
*  elsewhere, and not just in Germany by enemies, France, Britain, everywhere else, became identified
*  with the bad changes that were taking place. But you also found that Jews were not only prominent
*  among capitalists, they were also prominent in the socialist movement as well. So one of the things
*  you could look around, if we return to Germany in 1919 in the aftermath of World War I, and you look
*  around in Bavaria or elsewhere, you tend to find that there are a lot of Jews in visible positions
*  on the German left. Rosen Luxemburg is but one example of that. Oigan Levine, some of them came
*  in from Russia. When the Soviets sent a representative to Germany in this period,
*  it's Karl Radek, a Jew. So it wasn't difficult to exploit that, to argue that
*  just as the ranks of capitalism was full of Jews, the ranks of Bolshevism or of the revolutionary
*  left were full of Jews, because you could easily go around and distinguish a great many of them.
*  They don't have to be the majority. They just have to be numerous, prominent, invisible,
*  which they were. So this provided you a – in the case of the propaganda of the German army,
*  the type of stuff that Hitler was spewed out, they could put all the anti-capitalist rhetoric
*  in there wanted to. The army was never going to overthrow capitalism, and the capitalists knew
*  they weren't going to do it. So go ahead. Talk shit about us. We don't really care. That's not
*  going to – because we know that the army would prevent that from happening.
*  The way to then undermine the real enemy, it was a scene, the revolutionary left was to point out
*  the Jewish influence there. I mean, look at Russia. Well, Lenin's up. Trotsky, there he is. Look,
*  there's a Jew. There's one. Radek is a Jew. It wasn't hard to find him in that regard.
*  LENIN You gave a lecture on the protocols of the elders of Zion. It's widely considered to be the
*  most influential work of anti-Semitism ever, perhaps. Can you describe this text?
*  COLEMAN Well, the protocols of the alerted elders of Zion
*  is probably one of the most troublesome and destructive works of literature that has ever
*  emerged. And yet, its origins remain obscure. So you get a whole variety of stories about
*  where it came from. So the one story that is often is that it was the work of the Okhrana,
*  the Russian secret police, and in particular, it was all crafted in 1904 and 1905.
*  In Paris, there's a whole description of Pyotr Rachkovsky, who was supposedly the chief of the
*  Okhrana at the time, was the man behind it. Another fellow by the name of Matvey Golovinsky
*  was the drafter of it. And that they had this document written by a French political writer
*  from some decades back called Dialogue in Hell Between Machiavelli and Montesquieu,
*  which they were then adapting. Usually it's argued that they plagiarized it into the protocols.
*  None of that is really true. I mean, the first part about it is that at the time this supposedly
*  took place, Rachkovsky wasn't working for the Okhrana. He'd been fired and he wasn't in Paris.
*  And the whole situation which is described couldn't have taken place
*  because the people who did it weren't there. It's a story.
*  But it provides a kind of explanation for it. So the protocols emerge. So they always have to
*  go back. This is one of the things that I have found always useful in research is go back to the
*  beginning. Find the first place this is mentioned or the first version or the first iteration.
*  Where does it start? So you go back to St. Petersburg, Russia, around 1903. There is a small
*  right-wing anti-Semitic newspaper published there called Znamya, Banner.
*  And it publishes in a kind of serial form a work that doesn't credit with any original author.
*  And this is the first version of the protocols of the learned elders of Zion. But what it's
*  actually describing is a Judeo-Masonic plot to rule the world. Those two terms are always combined
*  together. And I think in the earlier version, there's far more mentions of Freemasons than there
*  are Jews. And it's, you know, the publisher of Znamya is closely connected to a thing called the
*  Union of Russian People, the Union of Russian Men, which was ostensibly existed to defend the
*  empire against subversion, and particularly against what it thought was Jewish subversion,
*  when they also argued that the prominence of Jews in revolutionary movements somehow
*  proved that this was in some way a Jewish revolution. But again, this is not a mainstream
*  newspaper. It's not appealing to a mainstream population. Very few people saw it. But this is
*  where it appears. Now keep in mind, that's two or three years before it's usually said to have been
*  written. Or the other version is that there's this crazy priest by the name of Sergey Neles,
*  and he wrote it, or actually appended it as an appendix to his work in 1905. Now it was around
*  before that. So Neles didn't create it. It wasn't drafted in Paris in 1904, 1905. It was serialized
*  in an obscure right-wing Russian newspaper in 1903. And by the way, we should say that these
*  are 24 protocols. Well, it varies. It varies. That are, I guess, supposed to be like meeting notes
*  about the supposed cabal where the Jews and Freemasons are planning together a world
*  domination. But it's like meeting notes, right? Protocol, which are Russian term basically for
*  notes of a meeting. Well, it's notes of a meeting. These are the goofiest things I've ever seen.
*  Because what you've got here, it's not notes. No one takes notes from a meeting that way.
*  What you've got is like the exposition of a Bond villain. It's all of this, boy,
*  oh, then we're going to do this. And then the last thing you want to do is lay out your,
*  if you've got a plan for world domination, my suggestion would be don't write it down.
*  So, it's not notes of a meeting. Again, it's another narrative or story that's being told.
*  It bears no resemblance to the dialogue in hell between Machiavelli and Montesquieu.
*  But what it is, the best thing, it's not particularly readable in some ways.
*  There was an Italian writer named Cesare Michalis who wrote a book translated in English called
*  The Non-Existent Manuscript. And what it is, is that he takes the different versions, starting
*  with the 1902, 1903 versions and looks through the other ones, and he tries to, in the process,
*  to reconstruct what he thinks the original might have been. But the other thing he does, which was
*  fascinating to me, is that he takes this whole sort of initial text and in bold type, he indicates
*  the paragraphs, but more often sentences or phrases that appear to be identical from the
*  Jolie work. And they're just scattered throughout it. There's no particular rhyme or reason to it.
*  You don't plagiarize that way. I mean, who does that? Sentence here, sentence there.
*  Which has led to a peculiar theory of mine, which of course I will have to expound upon,
*  which is that I think that the original author of The Protocols was the same Maurice Jolie.
*  I think what someone stumbled across was a work which he wrote and never published
*  and which he just drew. It's exactly what someone would do working from your own kind of material.
*  Because I've written things and then taken what I've written and then sort of repackaged that
*  into something else. Sentence here, sentence there.
*  Yeah. And the same sort of thing comes out. Only sort of bits and pieces of it remain.
*  So why would Jolie have done that? Jolie was, we're talking about a man whose career basically
*  spanned the 1850s to 1870s. He's an obscure figure. I'm not even totally sure he existed.
*  But it's one of those things you go looking for him.
*  I love that you're a scholar of people that just kind of emerge out of the darkness.
*  They just come from nowhere.
*  There's the O'Krana there also. And we should also say this was, I guess, the original would be
*  written, I mean, what's the language of the original? Russian?
*  Russian. But my hunch is that that's adopted from a French version. First of all,
*  they're constantly harping on Freemasons, which wasn't nearly as a big idea.
*  If you go back to France in the 1890s, there's some big scandals. Well, there's the Dreyfus
*  scandal. We got that. All right. Where you've got a Jewish officer on trial for being a traitor.
*  All right. So that was probably, so you bring in the whole Jewish element, Jews is disloyal,
*  Dreyfus case, 1894. Earlier, you had the Panama scandal, which was this huge investment scandal
*  when the Panama Canal Company in Paris collapsed. And again, many of the major players in that work,
*  Jewish financiers. And then you've got the taxel hoax.
*  So the taxel hoax was the work of this guy. His real name was, I think,
*  Jogam Pagé. He was kind of a French journalist. He started out writing porn. So when he wrote
*  things like Sex Lives of the Popes and the erotic Bible and various things of that kind,
*  he was a Catholic, broke with the Catholic Church, wrote bad stuff about the Popes,
*  and apparently became a Freemason for a while. And then supposedly recanted his evil ways,
*  went back to the church, and then under the name Leo Taxel began writing these whole series of
*  articles, basically arguing that there was a Masonic, Satanic conspiracy run by the way,
*  by an American, Albert Pike. And this also included child sacrifice. It's got Pizzagate
*  and it is well by a high priestess, Diana Vaughn. And so there's like child sacrifice,
*  you know, weird, Robie Bohemian Grove stuff. And the Freemasons are devil worshippers going back
*  to the Knights Templars. And so there's a thing called the Devil in the 19th century and the
*  Secrets of Freemasonry. And this became a bestseller in France. So France is just obsessed with all of
*  these kinds of conspiracies. So evil, Satanic Freemasons, evil Jewish financiers, Dreyfus.
*  This, this is the brew where all of this comes. So want to figure out how Freemasons and Jews
*  get connected together? France is the place where this happens. Now, Taxel or Jogand Pagé
*  eventually pulls another interesting thing in this. Around 1897, critics argue that he's making this
*  stuff up and demand that he present Diana Vaughn, supposed Satanic high priestess, toddler killer.
*  And he says, oh, we're going to have a press conference. She'll appear and say all of this
*  stuff as she returns to the church and, you know, possibly becomes a nun. And so people show up,
*  you know, high figures in the Catholic Church shows up and he does. No Diana Vaughn and Jogand
*  Pagé goes, it's all a hoax. I made it up. You're all a bunch of idiots for believing it. Okay. You,
*  you members of the church, especially just, just the gullible morons you are. And that's it. He
*  confesses it to this day. However, you will find people who will insist that it's actually true
*  because they desperately want it to be true. But this is, I think the milieu that I like that word,
*  apparently that this comes out of. And this is, this is this whole kind of unhealthy mix.
*  So France to me is the only place that in the decade preceding it, that something like this would
*  be concocted. So it was either created by some sort of unknown person there, but I still think
*  that even though he dies in like 1879, that in, in, in Maurice Jolie's troubled career,
*  he went from being an opponent of French Emperor Napoleon the Third, which is what his, which is
*  what the whole dialogues was written against. And then he was for a time, a close political ally
*  of a French politician by the name of Adolphe Cremieux. So Adolphe Cremieux, well, what's he
*  got going for him? Well, he was kind of a radical politician. He was an opponent of Napoleon the
*  Third. He was a Freemason. Oh, and he was Jewish. In fact, at one point, I think he was actually the
*  head both of the Scottish right in France and an important figure in the Alliance
*  Israélite, the Jewish organization in France. So he was publicly very prominently Jewish and Masonic.
*  So someone else who would have linked them together. Jolie, as he did with Vagelie, everyone,
*  this is a guy whose life largely consisted of dual threats and fistfights. So he gets, he gets angry
*  at Cremieux. And it's exactly the type of thing that he might write to vent his spleen about it.
*  But he died, probably a suicide. That's kind of difficult to tell.
*  In obscurity, his son seems to have inherited most of his literary works.
*  And his son then worked for, became a journalist, worked for newspapers in France in the 1890s,
*  but was also associated with some people on the fringes of the Ocrana or the Russian press
*  in France. So one of the little things that had happened by this time is that France
*  and Russia had become allies, even though their political systems are completely incompatible.
*  And so the Russians were using money to subsidize French newspapers that were
*  championing the alliance between the two, Russian meddling. They're just paying to have the right
*  kind of newspapers come out. So there's this whole connection between the kind of
*  Russian journalistic world and the French journalistic world and all of these scandals
*  which are going on and Jolie's son. And then 10 years down the road, this thing pops up in a
*  newspaper in St. Petersburg. That's where I think the origins lay.
*  RG Why do you think it took off? Why do you think it grabbed a large number of people's imaginations
*  and even after it was shown to be not actually what it's supposed to be, people still believe it's
*  real?
*  It doesn't take off immediately. It never receives any kind of wide. Nobody much reads the first
*  edition of it. When it's re-edited, there are something like 18 or 19 different versions
*  it goes through. People leave this protocol out or leave another one. As time goes on,
*  there's more and more emphasis on Jews and less and less on Freemasons. And the whole thing could
*  have begun as an anti-Masonic tract. You could leave Jews out of it entirely and just turn it
*  into a Masonic plot to rule the world. But let's just throw them in as well since the two things
*  are already being combined elsewhere. It doesn't become a big deal until really after the First
*  World War because the initial versions of it are all in Russian. And let's face it, while that's
*  widely read in Russia, it's not much read anywhere else. It's a different alphabet. Nobody can even
*  see what it means. So it has no particular influence outside of Russia. But then you get to 1919
*  and you get all these different versions of it. So suddenly you get two English versions in the
*  US, another English version in Britain, a German edition, a French edition, a Dutch edition.
*  Everybody is coming up with these things. So it's not until in the immediate aftermath of
*  the First World War that this metastasizes and it begins to show up in all of these different
*  foreign editions. And I think that it just has to do with the changes that have taken place
*  during the war. One of the things that people began looking for was that, why was there a war?
*  And we've just had this whole disastrous war and the world has been turned upside down.
*  So there has to be some kind of explanation for that. I don't know. And one of the things
*  this offered to see, there's this evil plan. There's this evil plan that has been put into motion.
*  And this could possibly explain what's taking place.
*  The reason why the protocols were, I think, widely bought then and why they still are in many ways,
*  is the same reason that the taxel hoax I was talking about was. Because it told a story
*  that people wanted to believe. So in France in the 1890s, there was widespread suspicion
*  of Freemasons. It was seen as a somewhat sinister, secretive organization, certainly secretive.
*  And there was also the same sort of generalized prejudices about Jews.
*  Clanish, distinct, too much influence, all of the things that went on. So it was sort of easy to
*  combine those two things together. And even though taxel admits it was a hoax,
*  there were those who argued that this is just too accurate. It describes things too completely
*  to be a hoax. And then you get the same arguments. In fact, I've heard the same arguments with the
*  same arguments with the protocol. I don't even buy this as an example of plagiarism,
*  because you can't actually prove what's being plagiarized in any sense. To me,
*  the protocols are a prime example of what I call a turd on a plate.
*  These things crop up. I have to explain that. What is a turd on a plate? Well, a turd on a
*  plate is a turd on a plate. Suppose you come in and there's a plate sitting on the table
*  and there's a turd on it. Now, the first thing you're going to want is, is that a turd? Is it
*  a human turd? Where did it come from? Why would someone poop on a plate? There are all these
*  questions that come to mind. It makes no sense. But that's what you come, it's just there.
*  All right. I don't know where it came from. I don't know why, but there's a turd on a plate.
*  And that's what the protocols are. They're just there. But the reality is, just like with a turd
*  on a plate, you take a picture of that in modern day and it becomes a meme, becomes viral, and
*  becomes a joke on all social media. And now it's viewed by tens of millions of people or whatever.
*  It becomes popular. So wherever the turd came from, it did captivate the imagination.
*  It did speak to something.
*  Because it seemed to provide an explanation.
*  Can you just speak to Jew hatred? Is it just an accident of history?
*  Why was it the Jews versus the Freemasons? Is it the collective mind searching for small group
*  to blame for the pains of civilization? And then Jews just happened to be the thing that was
*  selected at that moment in history? It goes all the way back to the Greeks. Let's blame them.
*  So one of the first occasions you find the idea that Jews are a distinct,
*  mean-spirited, nasty people goes back to a Greco-Egyptian historian named Manetho.
*  This is around, I think, 300 BC. Early. Can't even rope the Romans into this one.
*  So Manetho is trying to write a history of the dynasties of Egypt. I think his history
*  of dynasties of Egypt still is one of the basic works in this. But he tells this whole story,
*  which essentially describes the first blood libels that the Jews, to celebrate their
*  various religious holidays, would capture Greeks and fatten them up in the basement and then
*  slaughter them and eat them or drain their blood or do something. It's just the earlier version
*  of that kind. Also, I think it repeats the Egyptian version of the Exodus out of Egypt,
*  which is quite different than the biblical version. In this case, they stole all the stuff out of the
*  Egyptian's houses and ran off into the desert. The Jews stole all the stuff and ran off?
*  Yeah, Hebrews. Hebrews robbed the Egyptians. They were taken in. We took them in and sheltered them,
*  gave them jobs, and then they stole all the jewelry and ran away. We didn't even chase them.
*  We were glad to see them gone. So it's a different narrative on that story.
*  But it essentially portrays the Jews as being hostile. They don't like other people.
*  They're contemptuous of other people's religions, the rest of it. And see, the Greeks tended to think
*  of themselves as being extremely cosmopolitan. Now, the Greeks run across people worshiping other
*  gods. They go, oh, those are just our gods under different names. Everything was sort of
*  adjusted into their landscape. So you end up with that kind of hostility, which was there at the time.
*  And that was probably influenced also by some of these earlier rebellions that had taken place
*  in Egypt. During the Roman period, you not only have the Judean rebellion in
*  70 AD, but you have a couple of other uprisings in North Africa. And they're very bloody affairs.
*  And in some cases, Jews begin massacring other people around them. They start killing the Greeks.
*  The Greeks start killing them. So there was a fair amount of, from that periodonic, a certain
*  amount of bad blood, of mutual contempt between Greeks or between Hellenes, between the people
*  who became Hellenized, as the Romans would be, and the Jews. And the Romans also seem to have
*  developed much of that idea. They considered Judea as being a horrible place to have to govern,
*  inhabited by a stubborn, obnoxious people. Not well-liked. So that's really where you see the
*  earliest version of that. And the reasons for it would be
*  complicated. What you could say is that going back to Meneatho and to the Roman period,
*  Jews, Judeans frequently experienced difficulties, conflicts with other people living around them.
*  And part of that probably had to do with the diaspora, which was the movement. Well,
*  you get the idea. The Romans came and kicked everybody out, which they didn't. Jews had been
*  leaving Judea since it was a poor, limited area and moving to areas like North Africa, Egypt,
*  Cyrenaica, all the way into Southern France. They moved widely around the Roman Empire.
*  So that sense of both distinctness and hostility existed since ancient times.
*  So it wasn't just the attitude of the church towards Jews was mixed by...
*  Well, one of the ideas, of course, is that at the end of time, just before the second coming,
*  one of the signs, how are we going to know that Jesus is going to return and the world is going
*  to end? Well, the Jews will all convert. There will be a mass conversion. They'll sort of see
*  the light. Now, so there have to be Jews around to do that, or we won't... It's like a canary in a
*  coal mine. You have to have them there to tip it off. So that was one of the arguments as to why,
*  within the church, as to why Jews would not be forcibly converted.
*  Beyond the fact that it's just kind of bad policy to forcibly convert people because you
*  don't know whether it's sincere, but they need to be preserved as a kind of artifact
*  which will then redeem itself at the end of time. It's not something which is encouraged.
*  It predates Christianity. And then Christianity, of course, in its own way, just sort of
*  plagiarizes the whole Jewish thing, doesn't it? I mean, I hesitate to use that term, but that's
*  what you do. It's just like, well, we're the Jews now. Okay, you used to have a unique relationship
*  with God, but now it's been passed over to us. And so, you know, thanks for the Bible.
*  You know, I can remember that. And my mom's side, I was periodically exposed to Sunday school.
*  And pretty much the Old Testament was always presented as if somehow it was the history of,
*  like a better term, Europeans in some way. It was sort of a Christian history. It was all
*  the prequel to that. And there'd be some sort of, you know, the first term Hebrew was always used,
*  never Jews. So, you know, the ancient Hebrews, and somehow the Hebrews just sort of became
*  the Christians. And I don't know, the Jews just got, they didn't get a memo or something.
*  So it's basically like Christianity, the prequel is the Old Testament.
*  Yeah. But they just sort of took takeover. Okay. We have the special dispensation. Now,
*  thank you very much. You're an artifact. So it's interesting. So this whole narrative
*  of that, I would say is that was kind of like a viral meme
*  started, as you described, in 300 BC. It just carried on various forms and morphed itself
*  and arrived after the Industrial Revolution into it in a new form to the 19th and 20th century.
*  And then somehow captivated everybody's imagination.
*  I think that modern antisemitism is very much a creation of the modern world and the Industrial
*  Revolution. It's largely a creation of Jewish emancipation. It's the nasty flip side of that.
*  Okay. All of the restrictions are thrown off, but now also you become the focus of much more
*  attention than what you had before. Prior to that, you had the kind of ghettoization,
*  which worked both ways. I mean, there were
*  rabbis who praised the ghetto as a protection of Jews against the outside world because inside,
*  we can live our life as we wish and we're unmolested.
*  Whereas if we were, the great fear is that if we were sort of absorbed into this larger world,
*  we'll lose our identity. That sort of question comes up in the 18th century and things like the
*  Haskell movement in Germany, because the German Jews were always at the sort of cutting edge of
*  assimilation and modernity. Moses Mendelssohn was an example of that, arguing that we just need to
*  become Germans. As much as possible, synagogues should look like Lutheran churches.
*  Things should be given in good German. We need to become Jewish Germans. We don't want to become
*  a kind of group of people who are part in that way. That has created great tensions.
*  It has created great tensions ever since. You know, one of the essential points that seems to me in
*  anti-Semitism, anti-Jewism, is that all the Jews are in this together. Isn't that one of the things?
*  Okay, they're always talking about as if they're a collective. Jews this, Jews that, as if it's a
*  single undifferentiated mass of people who all move and speak in the same way.
*  The same way. From my personal experience, not being Jewish,
*  it's incredibly diverse. In many ways, really, one of the things that anti-Semitism proposes
*  is a continuity or a singularity of Jewish identity that never existed.
*  Just like you said, in one hand, there's a good story. In the other hand, there's the truth.
*  And oftentimes, the good story wins out. And there's something about the idea that there's
*  a cabal of people, whatever they are. In this case, our discussion is Jews seeking world domination,
*  controlling everybody. It's somehow a compelling story. It gives us a direction of a people's to
*  fight, of a people's to hate on which we project our pain because life is difficult.
*  Life for many, for most, is full of suffering. And so we channel that suffering into hatred
*  towards the other. Maybe if you can just zoom out, what do you, from this particular discussion,
*  learn about human nature that we pick the other in this kind of way? And
*  we divide each other up in groups and then construct stories and like constructing those
*  stories and they become really viral and sexy to us. And then we channel the hatred. We use
*  those stories to channel our hatred towards the other.
*  Well, Jews aren't the only recipient of that. I mean, anytime you hear people talking about
*  Jews this or that, white people this or that, black people this or that, Asians this or that,
*  Asians this or that, where they're an undifferentiated mass who apparently all
*  share something in common, well, nobody's really thinking. And the other thing you'll find is that
*  people who will express those views when pressed will argue that, oh, well, if they actually know
*  anybody from those groups, those are okay. It's like Nazis. They go, this isn't okay,
*  Jew. They're all right. They will always be constantly making exceptions in one form.
*  What they actually met an actual human being and they seem to be fairly normal, well,
*  they were okay. So what it was that they hated weren't actual people for the most part. It was
*  just this kind of gollywog vision that they had of them. You're not even talking about real people.
*  I don't know. What does that tell you about human nature? Well,
*  okay, in 70 odd years, what have I learned about my fellow creatures?
*  One, I don't actually understand them any better than I ever did. In fact, less so.
*  Okay. I would say this. When I was 17, I thought I had the world much more figured out than I do now.
*  Completely deluded. But it seemed to make much more sense than I could categorize things.
*  Basic take upon human beings, most people, most of the time, are polite, cooperative,
*  and kind until they're not. And the exact tipping point and moment in which they go from one to the
*  other is unpredictable. God, that's brilliantly put. Speaking of the tipping point, you gave a
*  series of lectures on murderers, crimes in the 20th century. One of the crimes they described
*  is the Manson family murders. And that combines a lot of the elements of what we've been talking
*  about and a lot of the elements of the human nature that you just described. So can you just
*  tell the story at a high level as you understand it? The Manson family. Well, you begin with Charles
*  Manson, who's the key element in this. And Charles Manson, for most of his life, up until the time
*  that he's around 33, is an unexceptional petty criminal. In and out of prison,
*  reformed school from an early age, not really associated with violent crimes. He did stuff like
*  steal cars, write bad checks, became an unsuccessful pimp and drug dealer.
*  So around 1967, he gets out of his latest stint in federal lockup in Terminal Island,
*  there in Los Angeles, California. By that time, he's learned how to play the guitar,
*  has ambitions to become a musician, and also has proclaimed himself a Scientologist.
*  Not that he ever seems to have practiced, but that's what he would claim that he was.
*  Kind of self-educated himself in prison to a certain degree. And so when he gets out of prison
*  in 67, he was a model prisoner. He behaved himself, you know, and seemed, you can sort
*  of imagine his life is going in a completely different direction. And here again, I'm going
*  to say something kind of good about Charles Manson, which is that he actually was a decent singer.
*  If you really sort of listen to some of the stuff he did, he, you know, he's not a great singer, but
*  he could have, you know, other people got recording contracts with less talent than he had,
*  and he could play guitar. The Beach Boys actually do record one of his songs without him.
*  How would you evaluate Hitler's painting on compared to Charles Manson's?
*  Well, you're supposed to say it's terrible. Okay. Okay. It looks average to me.
*  Yeah, it's landscape.
*  I mean, if you didn't know it was Hitler, would it, would it, would it, would you,
*  I don't know what people say about it.
*  Sorry for the distraction.
*  It's just, you know, it's just, it's an average painter. That's what it was. Something like
*  crazy genocidal maniac paintings. You don't have really have those. So Manson, he could have done
*  that. He probably could have, you know, he made certain inroads into the music industry. And if
*  he hadn't been such a weirdo, he might've gotten further with it, but his life could have taken a
*  different turn. So this is one of the questions I have. Where did a guy who became a musician
*  who becomes, who's an unexceptional career petty criminal suddenly emerge into some sort of criminal
*  mastermind, a Sven Golly, who can bend all of these people to his will and get them to go out
*  and commit murder? That's a, that's a real shift that you have. So the first thing it kind of
*  could tell you that something odd is going on is he gets out of prison in LA County
*  and he's supposed to, you know, he's on parole. You know, parolees are supposed to have a job,
*  not supposed to leave the jurisdiction of their parole. He heads straight for the Bay Area,
*  violates parole right off the bat. Two weeks later, he drifts into the parole office in the Bay Area,
*  whereupon he should have been arrested and sent back to Terminal Island. But instead,
*  they just assigned him a parole. I don't know, maybe things were easier then in some way. So he
*  gets assigned a parole officer, Michael Smith. Michael Smith is initially handling a number of
*  parolees, but after a while, once he takes on Manson, he only has one parolee he's supervising,
*  Charlie Manson, which is odd. And you also find out that Michael Smith, in addition to being a
*  parole officer, is a graduate student at the University of California studying group dynamics,
*  studying group dynamics, especially the influence of drugs on gangs in groups.
*  And he's also connected to the Hayett Ashbury Free Clinic, which is a place where the influence of,
*  because Hayett Ashbury had lots of drugs and lots of groups. So, you know, Charlie Manson never gets
*  a regular job, hangs around with young girls,
*  ex-cons, engages in criminal activity, is repeatedly arrested, but nothing ever sticks for the, you know,
*  next couple of years. So who gets that type of thing? Who gets a get out of jail free card?
*  Informants. So here is what? Again, this is speculation, but Manson, at some point,
*  after he got out of prison, is getting this treatment because he is recruited as a confidential
*  informant. For who? For who? That's the interesting question. So, probably not for any local police
*  departments. My best suspicion is probably the Federal Bureau of Narcotics, precursor to the DEA.
*  You know, federal parolee, federal parole officer, come graduate student in drugs and group dynamics,
*  and eventually with permission, he goes back down to LA. And what is he part of when he's there?
*  Well, he's on the fringes of the music industry. Not so much, you know, those the Wilsons and
*  elsewhere, which also brings him to the fringes of the film industry. So one of the things,
*  if you're sort of looking in terms of Hollywood music industry, elites in the flow of, oh, and
*  he's also dealing in drugs and girls. So an early version of the film industry, he's dealing in
*  drugs and girls. So an early version of Jeffrey Epstein.
*  Yeah. Manson attracted lots of underage runaways and
*  trained them, used them also associating with biker gangs who produced the drugs, et cetera.
*  So that's part of what he's an informant in the movement of drugs, basically within the film music
*  industries. And he's given pretty much a kind of free rein at that point. What then happens in
*  August of 1969 is that there are these murders. You know, first Sharon Tate and her friends
*  in Cielo Drive. I think everybody has probably pretty much heard that story before. And of course,
*  the question is, why Cielo Drive? Why Sharon Tate, Fricowski, and the rest of them that he has them.
*  Manson was familiar with the place. He had been there before. Members of the family had been there
*  before. So he knew where it was. It wasn't an easy place to find. I mean, the way that that house,
*  the house, the original house is no longer there, but the same sort of property in a house is built
*  there. And if you didn't know where it was, it's not some place. Let's just go for a drive in the
*  Hollywood Hills and murder people in a house. Well, that isn't the one that you would come across.
*  There are lots of connections there. Wojtek Fricowski, who was one of the people killed
*  at the Cielo Drive house, was involved in drug dealing. That's a possible connection between
*  the two. Probably a fairly likely one. Probably not unfortunate Sharon Tate at all. She was probably
*  in the wrong place at the wrong time. Her husband might have been. You never know.
*  And then the next night after the slaughter there, which by the way, Manson is not at.
*  So this is one of the interesting things about it is Charles Manson doesn't kill any of these people.
*  His crime is supposedly ordering the killings to be done.
*  He supposedly thought that the killings at the Tate house were sloppy.
*  And he was going to give everybody a crash course in how you apparently commit seemingly random
*  murders. So the next night he takes a group of people over to the LaBianca's house in a different
*  section of LA. And you've got Lena Rosemary, LaBianca. The guy's a grocer. His wife runs a dress
*  shop. Upper middle class. And they're bound to gag and hacked to death as at the Tate residence,
*  various things like piggy are written, various messages in blood, things that are supposed to
*  look like cat's paws because one of the groups trying to be framed for this was the idea was
*  the Black Panthers. So the general story that comes out in the subsequent trial is that this
*  was all a part of something called helter skelter, which Manson supposedly was an idea that that
*  sounds like a Beatles song. That's where he got it from. He thought the Beatles were talking to him
*  through their music and that there was going to be an apocalyptic race war. And this was all part
*  of a plan to set this off. So this is why the Black Panthers were trying to be implicated in this.
*  Although how it was supposed to do that is never really explained.
*  Here is what I think was really happening. What really happened and how I think it fits together.
*  Before Sharon Tate and her friends or the LaBiancas were killed,
*  there was a murder by members of the family of some of the same people involved in the later
*  killings of a musician drug manufacturer by the name of Gary Hinman. So Manson again was involved
*  in the drug trade and Hinman made them. He was a cook basically. And he brewed them up in his
*  basement, sold the drugs to Manson, who sold them to biker gangs like the Straight Satans,
*  which was one of the groups that he used and they distributed them elsewhere.
*  Well, one day the Straight Satans show up and complain that the last batch of
*  meth or whatever it was that they got from Manson had made some of their brothers very, very ill.
*  And they were quite unhappy about that. And they wanted their $2,000 back.
*  So Manson had gotten those drugs from Gary Hinman. So he is unhappy and he sends Bobby Bosaway and
*  a couple of the girls over to Hinman's place to get the money from him. As the story is related,
*  I think by Susan Atkins, Hinman denied that there was anything wrong with his drugs and refused to
*  pay up, which led to an interrogation torture session in which he was killed.
*  Yeah. And the idea was here, what are we going to do with that? Well, one of the other groups
*  that Hinman had sold drugs to were, guess what? People associated with the Black Panthers. So
*  we'll leave these things up and they will do it. So it's Bobby Bosaway who then takes Hinman's car
*  and decides to drive it up the coast, by the way, with a bloody knife with Hinman's blood
*  and hair on it and blood on the seats in the car. And then he pulls it off the road and decides
*  to sleep it off and he gets busted. So find Hinman's body, find Bosaway in Hinman's car
*  with a bloody knife with him. Yeah, he gets arrested. So Bosaway was very popular with some
*  of the girls. There's consternation in the family that Bobby has been arrested. So how can we
*  possibly get Bobby out of jail? Copycat killings. So if we go kill more people and we make it look
*  the same, then see Bobby couldn't possibly have done it. No, see, he just borrowed the car.
*  Okay, he stole the car, but the knife was already in it. He didn't have anything to do with this.
*  So that to me makes the most sense out of what followed.
*  How often do people talk about that theory? That's an interesting theory.
*  Well, it's there. It's just not the one that – Bugliosi wanted to go with Helter Skauter
*  because it was, again, it was a story that people could understand. And it was sensational and it
*  would catch on. Also another probable issue in that was that his star witness was Linda Kisabian.
*  Linda Kisabian, she was present at both the Tate and La Bianca murders. She didn't participate in
*  the killings, according to her. She sort of drives the car, but everybody else talked about
*  what had happened. Well, okay, she turns state's evidence and gets total immunity.
*  And it's largely in her testimony that all the rest of the case is based.
*  Now, if you start throwing into the equation that she proclaimed her love for Bobby Beausoleil
*  and that she, according to others, was the chief proponent of the copycat killings,
*  well, then that would get messy. Now, there's one guy that's at the center of this.
*  It's Charles Manson. He ordered all of this done to ignite a race war even though
*  how would any of that do it? Okay.
*  So that doesn't make sense. But he is nevertheless at the center of this because
*  he's the glue of the family, right?
*  He exerts a tremendous amount of psychological control over them.
*  How was he able to do that? Sorry to interrupt. Like what? Because he said he was a petty criminal.
*  It does seem he was pretty prolific in his petty crimes. He did a lot of them.
*  He had a lot of access to LSD. Okay.
*  Okay. Which he started getting at the free clinic in San Francisco. So lots of it floating around.
*  Some descriptions of the family at Spahn Ranch is that people were basically taking acid on a daily
*  basis, which by the way was also a potential problem with Linda Kasabian's testimony since
*  she also admitted to being high most of the time and also thinking she was a witch.
*  All right. So you want to put her at, okay. Where do you want to go with that?
*  See, if Manson wasn't Manson, if he hadn't acted like such a complete, if he hadn't actually acted
*  like the crazed hippie psycho goofball that Bugliosi painted him as being, then Kasabian's
*  testimony wouldn't have been as strong because you could, I mean, the first thing against her is
*  you've got an immunity for telling the story the prosecution wants. That's a little iffy,
*  and we won't even bring in the witch and the drugs and being in love with Bobby Boswell.
*  So if Manson had been dressed like you, sitting there in a suit and tie and, you know,
*  and it behaved himself and spoken normally, things might have, this isn't to say that he wasn't
*  guilty as hell. So what he supposedly did was to inspire all of these killings.
*  And I think that's probably, you know, sort of beginning with the Hinman killing.
*  He told them to go over there and get the money, one way or the other. I don't know whether it's
*  clear whether he told them if you don't get the money, kill him, but Hinman's dead. And then
*  you might also have seen the value in terms of having copycat killings as a way of throwing off
*  any other kind of blame. The other story you get is that one of the people who had lived at the
*  Cielo house for Sharon Tate was before, was a record producer by the name of Terry Melcher.
*  Melcher supposedly, as the general story goes, had welched on a deal with Manson in terms of a
*  record contract. You know, he screwed over Manson in some sort of a record deal and Manson wanted
*  to get revenge and sent them to kill everybody in the house. Which again, doesn't make much
*  of a sense. One, Manson knew that Melcher wasn't living there anymore. He probably knew where
*  Melcher was living. If he wanted to get Melcher, he could have found him. It wasn't that difficult
*  to do. It's not revenge on Terry Melcher that drew him there. He was familiar with the house. So,
*  if the idea was to simply commit random killings that would muddy the whole waters with the Hinman
*  killing, then you might pick some place you knew of. You knew the place was run out. There would
*  be someone there and you really didn't care. In the same way that the La Bianca seemed to have been.
*  Manson was familiar with that because it supposedly had been the scene of creepy crawling.
*  This is little interesting things that the family would be taught to do. Creepy crawling
*  is when you sneak into somebody's house at night. While they're there asleep or when
*  they're not there and you move things around. So, when they get up in the morning or they come home,
*  they'll suddenly notice that someone has been in their house, which will freak them out,
*  which is the whole point of that. But it doesn't seem like the murder or the creepy crawling was
*  the... well, creepy crawling may be. But it doesn't seem like the murder...
*  some of the other people you've covered like the Zodiac Killer, the murder is the goal.
*  Maybe there's some psychopathic kind of artistry to the murder that the Zodiac Killer had and the
*  messaging behind that. But it seems like with the... at least the way you're describing it with the
*  Charles Manson family, the murder was just... they just had a basic disregard for human life and the
*  murder was a consequence of operating in the drug underworld. So, Manson set up a kind of base,
*  I think, called the Spahn Movie Ranch, which was an old movie ranch out on the northwest edge of LA.
*  And they just kind of camped out there. He used the girls, in particular Squeaky Fromme, to
*  get the owner or operator, I think George Spahn, to let them hang out there. And basically,
*  she slept with him and he was perfectly happy to let them hang out. They also had a place out in
*  the desert that they had. They dealt in credit card fraud, stolen cars. It was kind of a chop shop
*  that they ran out of the place. So, he had a fairly good little criminal gig going,
*  which with the protection he had probably would have... The one thing they couldn't cover him on
*  was murder. So, you think there was... if he was an informer, you think there was still a connection
*  between DEA, FBI, CIA, whatever with him throughout this until he came into murder?
*  The real question is there is a book written on this by Tom O'Neill called Chaos. I'm not
*  necessarily saying it's the easiest thing to get through. There's a lot of material there.
*  I don't think O'Neill necessarily knows what to make of some of the stuff he came up with,
*  but he does a very good job of sort of demolishing the whole boogaloozy narrative.
*  And one of the people he mentions is a name that I had run into elsewhere.
*  And so, I really paid attention to it when I saw it again. And the name is Reeve Whitson.
*  Reeve Whitson shows up on the fringes even though he has no judicial function. He sort of hangs
*  around boogaloozy in the prosecution. He's some sort of advice. He's just kind of there.
*  In the same way that he was one of these guys, you know, he grew his hair kind of long, wore
*  bell bottoms, hung around the music community and elsewhere in Hollywood, but no one could tell you
*  exactly what he did. I know what he did later, but a decade later, he shows up as a CIA officer in
*  Central America. Hmm. So, Reeve Whitson, later in his career at least, is CIA. What was he
*  in 1969? What is he doing in this? The other thing about it is he appears to have been the person
*  who called, there's a whole question of when the bodies at Cielo Drive are
*  discovered. So, the general story is that Sharon Tate's housekeeper shows up around 830 in the
*  morning, finds the bloody scene and goes screaming next door. But there was another fellow who knew,
*  I think the owner of the house is a photographer, last name may be Hatami. He gets a call earlier
*  in the morning saying that there had been murders there. And the person, he recalls calling him,
*  Reeve Whitson. So, someone had been at the house before the bodies were discovered and they had
*  not called the police. So, I don't know what's going on there, but it's a curious kind of situation.
*  And Manson in a lot of ways just kind of self-immolates himself. I mean, his behavior
*  at the trial is bizarre, it's threatening, it's disruptive. He's got his girls out on the street
*  carving Xs in their forehead, carrying knives. One of the attorneys, initially his attorney, Ron Hughes,
*  becomes Van Houten's attorney and he figures out that the three girls supposedly on Charlie's
*  insistence are going to confess. And they confess that it was all their idea and Charlie had nothing
*  to do with it. Hughes doesn't like this because his defense for her is that she was under his influence
*  and therefore not responsible for her own actions. He was having psychic control, so that's why he
*  refuses to go along with it. There's a break in the trial, he goes camping up in the mountains
*  with some friends, disappears during a rainstorm and then some months later his decomposed remains
*  are found. Now, rumors, always the rumors. What would history be without rumors? Hell, that,
*  ah, see, members of the family, they were pissed off at Ron Hughes because he
*  messed up Charlie's idea to get him off and so they killed him.
*  Oh, maybe they did, maybe he drowned. That's absolutely impossible to say.
*  You got that kind of story. There's a guy named Juan Flynn who was an employee at the spawn ranch,
*  didn't like Manson, held Manson responsible for the murder of his boss. He would testify that Manson
*  told him that he had ordered all the killings and that Manson also admitted that he had killed 35
*  people. Maybe he did, on the other hand, Juan Flynn didn't like him and he had no, other than
*  his word, had no real proof of what he was saying. So, please understand me in this case, is that
*  unlike some people who argue that Charles Manson got a raw deal, I don't think that's the case.
*  I think that he influenced tremendous influence over the people there through drugs, through
*  sex was another frequent component in it. He had a real whammy over a lot of these people's minds.
*  I'm not sure how, that still kind of puzzles me. He was a scrawny guy and he wasn't physically
*  intimidating. Even a lot of women wouldn't be physically intimidated by him, but he
*  nevertheless had this real psychological power. If you look around him, the male
*  followers he had were fairly big guys. He could get people to do what he wanted.
*  Again, to me, the simplest explanation for this is that it began with the Hinman killing
*  and probably on Manson's instigation, the others were copycat killings to throw off
*  what was going on. If I was a cop, that's what I would focus on because that seems to make the
*  most sense. It's still as fascinating that he's able to have that much psychological control over
*  those people without having a very clear ideology. So, it's a cult. Yes. The great focus on Charlie
*  the leader, the excessive devotion. But there's not an ideology behind that,
*  something like Scientology or some kind of religious or some kind of, I don't know,
*  utopian ideology, nothing like this. No, I think that Manson, again, was essentially a criminal.
*  He had a sociopathic mindset and he hit upon a pretty good deal.
*  Yes, but how do people convince anybody of anything? With a cult, usually you have either
*  an ideology or you have maybe personal religion, like you said, sex and drugs.
*  But underneath that, can you really keep people with sex and drugs? You have to convince them
*  that you love them in some deep sense. There's a commune of love.
*  You have a lot of people there in the cult. They have some sort of what we like to call
*  dysfunctional families. A lot of the females in particular seem to have come from more or less
*  middle class families, but those are full of dysfunction. Their parents didn't love them.
*  They were semi runaways and now they had this whole family. A lot of the younger women had children,
*  you know, some of them by Manson, some of them by the others. They sort of bonded together.
*  And again, we return to that pull towards belonging that gets us humans into trouble.
*  So it does seem that there were a few crimes around this time. So the Zodiac Killer.
*  The Zodiac Killer. Well, California,
*  I'm from. I remember this period vividly. By the way, the Tate LaBianca killings occurred on my
*  birthday the year I graduated from high school. So I remember this. Happy birthday. A term which
*  has been used for that, there's a writer by the name of Todd Wood who's joined, I wish I'd come
*  up with this, Killer-Fornia, which is sort of a chronicle of the serial killers and disappearances
*  in the late 60s and 70s. So you've got the Zodiac, you've got other ones. I mean,
*  I hate to say it. I'm not trying to be flippant about it, but I mean, young female hitchhikers
*  were disappearing at an alarming rate in Northern California. Their bodies that have never been
*  attributed, some think that they're the Zodiac's victims, but it was a dangerous time.
*  Edmund Kemper, the co-ed killer was another one. There were a lot of
*  creepy psychopaths running around. I don't know if it was something in the water or what was going
*  on, but it was a menacing in some cases. Hitchhiking, especially if you were alone
*  and female, was not something you wanted to do in much of the Golden State, certainly not up around
*  the Bay Area. So a lot of these strange killings that were going on, the Zodiac is one of those
*  things where you have these people who have theories about it. And if you don't share their
*  theory, then you're part of the problem in some form or another. So I'm not sure, for instance,
*  that the Zodiac killings were all committed by the same person. I think there might've been multiple
*  people involved. And the first killings are all of couples. It's very clear that they, I remember
*  in my examination, one of the things I was looking at specific, what else is there to say about the
*  Zodiac killings. So what I was going to look at is that there are all of these accusations that
*  there is an occult aspect to it. There was some sort of ritualistic aspect. So I looked at different
*  things, locations, victims, phases of the moon. That's always worth looking at. I didn't find much
*  correspondence in any of those. In one of the killings, I think the one at Lake Berryessa,
*  he does appear in this kind of weird hooded costume. He's got his symbol, the sort of compass
*  or aiming recticle, circle with a cross through it that can mean a variety of things. He used
*  guns and he used knives, but he certainly had to think for couples, except in the last of the
*  killings, which is of a cab driver in downtown San Francisco, who he shoots in full view of witnesses,
*  which is completely atypical.
*  And also when he was stabbing the victims, it doesn't seem like he was very good at it.
*  Or if the goal was to kill them, he wasn't very good at it because some of them survived.
*  Yeah. He's not particularly thorough about it. He seems to have had much more,
*  more of the violence seems to be directed at the females than the males.
*  So, I mean, there's a couple of questions to ask here. First of all, did people see his face?
*  There's a composite drawing of his face, which I think is based upon the Stein killing,
*  the cab driver killing, where there were people who saw him or who claimed that they saw him.
*  The other ones were all when it was fairly dark.
*  I'm not sure that anyone else got a look at his face. The one that occurred in the daylight at
*  Berryessa, he was wearing a mask. So, there's something in common initially in the targeting
*  of victims, which doesn't in the last case. Then after that, there's just the different cases of
*  where there's a pretty good case to be made of a woman who claims, I think she and her small child
*  were picked up, her car broke down, she got a flat tire, she was picked up by this guy,
*  who she got a very sort of strange vibe from, who eventually just let her go.
*  Well, that might have been the Zodiac. It might not have been.
*  You do this kind of rigorous look saying, okay, what is the actual facts that we know?
*  Reduce it to the thing that we know for sure. And in speaking about his motivation,
*  he said that he was collecting souls. Souls for the afterlife.
*  For the afterlife. That's kind of a cultie.
*  Yeah. I mean, that's what I believe. Is it the Vikings or the Romans? They believed this in battle.
*  You're essentially making sacrificial victims and they will be your ghostly servants in the afterlife.
*  Do you think he actually believed that? Who knows? I mean, here's the question.
*  Was he making that up just to be scary or is that what his actual,
*  that's what he's saying his motivation is. So let's take him at face value.
*  Rather than trying to wish that into the cornfield, that is to get rid of it,
*  let's just take it to face. So he's claiming that he's killing these people in order to acquire
*  slave servants in the afterlife. He will subsequently go on to claim many more victims.
*  I'm not sure. 44 eventually he will have before he just kind of vanishes.
*  One of the really interesting clues to me when I was looking at that case, which I didn't find
*  anybody else that tended to make much of it of, is that it all has to do with this kind of Halloween
*  card that he sends to the press in San Francisco. And it's talking about sort of rope by gun,
*  by fire, and there's this whole sort of wheel, you know, still like the zodiacs.
*  But what was this drawn from, where he got this from, is from a Tim Holt Western comic book
*  published in 1951. And you see the same thing on the cover. It's Wheel of Fortune, but with
*  grisly death on it. And all of the things that he mentioned are shown on the cover of this.
*  So whoever put together that card saw that comic book. Well, that's kind of an interesting clue.
*  So does that mean he's a comic book collector? When would he have... I mean, that is one... And
*  also before he got the idea from, he's incorporating these things from the...
*  Then there are, of course, his codes, which people have, you know, which aren't all that
*  difficult to decipher probably because they weren't meant to be. The other thing that you find often
*  with serial or psychopathic killers is they're toying with the press. I mean, this goes all the
*  way back to Jack the Ripper. They get attention. And then he just disappears.
*  Why do you think he was never caught?
*  I think they knew who to look for. There's nothing much to go on.
*  I mean, there was a guy who was long a suspect, and then eventually he tested his DNA and found
*  that it didn't match any of the things that they'd found. Again, it goes back to... I'm not even sure
*  that it's one person who's responsible for all of them. Well, there's one of the interesting
*  things you kind of bring up here. And our discussion of Manson inspires this, but there
*  does seem to be a connection, a shared inspiration between several killers here, the Zodiac, the Son
*  of Sam later, and the Monster of Florence. So is it possible there's some kind of like an underworld
*  that is connecting these people?
*  Well, you take the Zodiac and you had his claim that he's collecting souls for the afterlife.
*  There are other things that are occultish connected to that. He may have picked some
*  of the killing sites due to their physical location, to their position in a particular place.
*  If you look at the Son of Sam case, of course, David Berkowitz will on and off claim that he
*  was part of a satanic cult that was carrying out, again, these killings, mostly of couples
*  and young women, similar to the Zodiac, and that he had only committed some of them and was witnesses
*  at others. And that has really created the whole idea that, yes, there is this some kind of
*  satanic cult which engages in ritual murders. Then if you go all the way to Florence,
*  you've got murders who go on and off for a long period of time, again, focusing on couples in
*  isolated areas, which Italian prosecutors ultimately tried to connect to some kind of
*  satanic cult, although I'm not sure they ever made a particularly strong case for that.
*  But that element comes up in all three of them.
*  So you can, with a little imagination, argue that those similarities, that those things should come
*  up in each of those cases in different places, either suggest that, oddly enough, psychopathic
*  criminals are all sort of thinking the same way, or that there is some sort of higher element
*  involved in this, that there's some kind of common inspiration.
*  Here you come back to something similar we were talking before about, do pedophiles exist,
*  do pedophiles, okay, so do satanic cults exist? Well, they do. Okay, there was one in my hometown,
*  apparently quite harmless, as far as I know, never did anything to be known, but there are people who
*  robes, here we come again, robes, cut the head off a chicken, naked woman is an altar, you know,
*  you can get off on that, I suppose, if that's your thing.
*  So professed satanists exist, satanic cults exist, serial killers exist, ritual murders exist,
*  are those things necessarily connected? No, could they be connected? Yes.
*  Okay, there's nothing, don't ever tell me that something is just too crazy for people to do,
*  because that's crazy talk. All right.
*  You've studied secret societies, you've gave a lot of amazing lectures on secret societies.
*  It's fascinating to look at human history through the lens of secret societies,
*  because they've permeated all of human history. You've talked about everything from the Knights
*  Templar to Illuminati to Freemasons like we brought up, Freemasons to the
*  Freemasons like we brought up, Freemasons lasted a long time. Illuminati, as you've talked about
*  in its sort of main form lasted a short time, but it's legend.
*  Never gone away.
*  Never gone away. So maybe like Illuminati is a really interesting one. Who, what was that?
*  Well, the Illuminati that we know
*  started in 1776. In fact, you can pin it down to a day, the 1st of May, May Day, 1776, in Ingolstadt,
*  Germany, founded by a professor, Adam Weishaupt. It wasn't initially called the Illuminati,
*  because that's not really the name of the organization. It was called the Order Perfectibilists.
*  Apparently that changed. Weishaupt would say things like, never let our organization be known
*  under its real name anywhere, which leaves wondering what's its real name.
*  So Illuminati is simply the plural of Illuminatus, which means one who is illuminated,
*  one who has seen the light. So in Roman times, Christian converts were Illuminati,
*  because they had seen the light. Anyone who thinks, and there have been organizations
*  called Illuminati. The term is not trademarked, not copyrighted. Anybody who thinks they've seen
*  the light about anything is an Illuminati. So it defines nothing. The symbol of the order was an
*  owl, which interestingly enough is almost identical to the owl, which is the emblem of
*  the Bohemian club.
*  Oh boy.
*  Make of that what you will. I don't make that much out of it, because one owl looks pretty much like
*  another owl to me, but compare them. You got to kind of wonder about this. Just a little thing.
*  Maybe there's some kind of connection there. But that supposedly has to do with the connection to
*  the goddess Minerva, and the owl was sacred to her, and the order was the Minerva, the person who
*  was brought in. The number of levels changed over time. There was a higher level for the order that
*  people at the lower level didn't know about. Pretty typical for this. But the thing about
*  Weishaupt was that he was quite, he was a womanous correspondent with members with his Illuminati,
*  both during the time that it legally existed in Bavaria and later on. So Weishaupt himself lives,
*  I think, until 1830. Dies in Gotha, which was ruled by an Illuminati prince. Nothing ever happens
*  to these. No Illuminati has ever put to death or arrested in prison for any period of time.
*  What happens is that their plan, well, what was his plan? His plan was to essentially replace
*  all existing religions and governments in the world with a one world order governed
*  by the Illuminati. So to do this, you had to subvert and destroy all the existing order.
*  The purpose for this is to, we wish to make men happy and free, but first we must make them good.
*  Oh, right. So that's what the order is all about. Of course, he also said things like,
*  oh man, is there nothing that you won't believe? Okay. So the myth would be used in that.
*  Also thought women should be brought into it. He had a rather interesting view about that was
*  that we should appeal to women in part because women have a chip on their shoulder because
*  they're left out of things. So we should appeal to their vanity on that point and offer that in the
*  future, all things will be open and they will be emancipated. So we should hold out the prospect of
*  female emancipation to attract them because he argued in the short term, there's no better way
*  to influence men than through women. Get women on our side by promising them emancipation, but he
*  made sure we'll never actually deliver it to them because the future world will be a boys club.
*  So he talks about these things fairly openly. And this is where you get this idea of some sort of a
*  new world order which is to be based upon the destruction of the existing order.
*  So there are those who argue that there is a trail of descent that leads from Weishauf's
*  Illuminati to the communist manifesto and in fact, communism itself, that Marxism was simply a
*  further restating of this idea. And you can draw some sort of, I mean, the idea never entirely goes
*  away. The Bavarian government gets a hold of the order's inner texts. So the story is they're
*  delivered to them. I think that Weishauf gave them to him. I think he engineered the exposure
*  of his order because it gave him publicity. By being exposed in Bavaria, you gained great
*  renown and they continued to recruit after this. And the Bavarian government actually
*  bans the Illuminati four different times. Why? Because apparently the first three times didn't
*  work. So the fourth one does. You can notice that it's like Papel bans on Freemasonry and they just
*  go on and on and on because this clearly isn't working. And you actually highlight the difference
*  between, speaking of publicity, that there's a difference between visibility and transparency,
*  that a secret society could be visible, it could be known about, it could be quite popular,
*  but you could still have a secrecy within it. You have no idea what's going on inside. It's like a
*  black box. If I set a black box on this table, we can see that there is a black box. What's in the
*  black box? A cat? Who knows? In fact, the secrecy might be the very thing that makes it even more
*  popular. Adam Weishaupt, again, there is no more thing convincing than a concealed mystery.
*  Give people a concealed mystery in the first place. So we need to make the order mysterious
*  for that exact reason. Always hold out the possibility that special knowledge that no
*  mere mortals have other than you will have in that way. So he senses a lot of things. The use of
*  vanity and ego to recruit people, to influence both men and women, it's quite sophisticated.
*  And as you might expect from a professor of canon law trained by Jesuits. So
*  I certainly don't think that it ceased when it was banned in Bavaria because everybody
*  just scatters and goes elsewhere like Paris. And then you have the French Revolution.
*  So the idea of the Illuminati, to put it crudely, the branding is a really powerful one.
*  And so it makes sense that there's a thread connecting it to this day, that a lot of
*  organizations, a lot of secret societies can sort of adopt the branding. Anybody can call it. You
*  can go out and form a club and call it the Illuminati. And if you're effective at it,
*  I think it does attract, it's the chicken or the egg, but powerful people tend to have gigantic
*  egos and people with gigantic egos tend to like the exclusivity of secret societies.
*  And so like there's a gravitational force that pulls powerful people to these societies.
*  Exclusive, only certain. And you also notice something goes back to when we were talking
*  about much earlier when we were talking about intelligence, remember mice ego,
*  because of recruitment and control. That's a great Achilles heel in human beings,
*  the exploitation of ego. And of course, if we go back to the conversation of intelligence agencies,
*  it would be very efficient and beneficial for intelligence agencies to infiltrate the secret
*  societies, right? Because that's where the powerful people are. Yeah, or the secret societies to
*  infiltrate the intelligence agencies. Oh boy. Well, I mean, that's actually in all the lectures,
*  I kind of had a sense that intelligence agencies themselves are kind of secret societies, right?
*  Well, it comes down, I give you my definition of secret societies, but they come down to one is
*  that generally their existence isn't secret. It's what they do is secret. It's what's in the box
*  is supposedly the existence of the box. So one of the most important criterion is that they are
*  self-selecting. You just don't join. They pick you. They decide whether or not you're going to,
*  they admit you. And now oftentimes they will sort of recruit you.
*  Once you have been recruited, you have to pass tests and initiations.
*  And you also have to swear oaths of loyalty. Those are always very, very critical. So broadly
*  speaking, what the entrance into an intelligence organization does, they decide whether you get in.
*  You just don't automatically get the job. You have to pass tests, a lie detector test, for instance,
*  training tests, a whole variety of tests, and then you're sworn to secrecy.
*  You never talk about what you do, ever, or there will be dire consequences.
*  So the method is very much the same. And also this idea of creating a kind of insular group.
*  Now this, the organization is us.
*  And everyone else is outside of that. We are guardians of special knowledge.
*  So this is the type of thing that would generally happen if you question whatever any kind of
*  intelligence agency did. Well, we know things that you don't. Why? Because we're the organization
*  that knows things. We collect information. We know the secrets. We guard the secrets. Therefore,
*  if we tell you, you must believe us. I have this sense that there are very powerful secret societies
*  operating today and we don't really know or understand them. And the conspiracy theories
*  in spirit might have something to them, but are actually factually not correct.
*  So like, you know, an effective, powerful secret society or intelligence agency is not going to
*  let you know anything that it doesn't want you to know. Right? They'll probably mislead you,
*  if you can say that. So I think the question is, what's the most powerful or important secret
*  society? Probably the one you don't know about. One that doesn't advertise its existence. The one
*  which is never known anywhere under its real name. You've got things like the bohemian club.
*  You've got the builder burgers, which is another sort of, you know, formed in the 1950s.
*  Largely the creation of a guy by the name of Josef Retinger. Polish, mysterious,
*  appears at a nowhere, a schemer for years. A man expelled from Britain,
*  France and the United States at one point or another. Long active in the Mexican labor
*  movement. Retinger is a mysterious figure. In fact, I think there was even a book written
*  about him called Eminence Grease, Grey Eminence, the fellow who was the front man for the builder
*  burgers was Prince Bernhard of the Netherlands, who was at one point a Nazi and then a Dutch
*  freedom fighter. All right. Take your pick. But Retinger is the moving hand behind the whole
*  thing and I'll be damned if I can figure out who Retinger is. So the idea is that, well, you get
*  like influential people in media, business, politics and you bring them together just to talk.
*  To try to find common answers or common questions. It's all very much sort of
*  Western Anglo-European. I mean, it's all very closely sort of connected to NATO.
*  The whole concept of a kind of Atlanticist world, which is essentially the Anglo-American
*  combine combined with Western Europe. But you got a bunch of these things. I mean, the
*  council and foreign relations is very similar to that and the builder burgers and there's an
*  overlap with the Bohemian club. Then you've got the PENET circle or Le Cercle, which is more
*  military, but also linked to the so-called secret gladiola. The idea of the Soviets over around
*  Western Europe, there would be a stay behind organization called Gladiol. There'd be these
*  freedom fighters. So the question I have about that is that how many secret organizations do you need?
*  I mean, why all these separate groups, which often seem to have the same people into them?
*  Yeah, there's a, I mean, the closer I look, the more I wonder the same question we asked about
*  the Russian intelligence agencies is where's the center of power? It seems to be very hard to figure
*  out. Does the secrecy scare you? Well, I guess on one level, I'm comforted that there's somebody
*  actually making decisions. I mean, what do you want? Do you want chaos or do you want everything
*  kind of rigidly controlled? And I don't put much stock in the idea that there actually is some small
*  group of people running everything because if they were, it would operate more efficiently.
*  I do think that there are various disparate groups of people who think that they're running things or try to.
*  And that's what concerns me more than anything else. Well, I had to go back to them again,
*  because if you bring up, you go back to the Nazis, they had their whole idea about a new world order
*  and they only had 12 years to do it. Look what a mess they made. I mean, look at the damage,
*  the physical damage that can be done by an idea inspiring a relatively small group of people
*  controlling a nation based upon some sort of racial or ideological fantasy that has no real
*  basis in reality and yet guides their actions. It's this differentiation that I always make,
*  and I would try to get across to students between always be clear about what you know
*  and what you believe. You don't know many things. You know your name. You know when you were born.
*  You probably know who your father is, but that's not absolute unless you've had a DNA test and only
*  if you trust DNA tests. So you know who your mother is. You believe this man is your father.
*  Why? Because your mother told you he was. So you believe things generally because someone has told
*  you this is to be true, but you don't really know for sure. Well, because we know so little,
*  we tend to go by beliefs. So we believe in this, we believe in that. You believe that
*  your cult leader is the answer to everything. And it seems to be very, very easy to get people
*  to believe things. And then what happens is that whether or not those beliefs have any real basis
*  in reality, they begin to influence your actions. So here again, regrettably in some ways to bring
*  it back to the Nazis, what were the Nazis convinced of? They were convinced that Jews were basically
*  evil aliens. That's what it comes down to. They weren't really humans. There's some sort of evil
*  contamination which we must eradicate. And they set out to do that. And they were sure
*  that there's just a few problems that can be solved. And once you solve them, that you have
*  this beautiful utopia where everything would be just perfect. It'd be great. And we can just get
*  there. And I think it's really strong belief in a global utopia. It just never goes right.
*  It seems like impossible to know the truth.
*  For some reason, not long ago, I was listening on YouTube to old wobbly songs.
*  The Workers of the World. I don't know why. I didn't know there was a whole album of wobbly
*  songs. And there was one of them called Commonwealth of Toil. And like most of them,
*  they're sort of taken from gospel songs. And it's talking about in the future,
*  how wonderful everything will be in the Commonwealth of Toil that will be.
*  Now, these are revolutionary leftists, in this case, wobblies. But nonetheless,
*  it's like a prayer for communism. In the future, everything will be good.
*  Because the earth will be shared by the toilers from each of his abilities to each according to
*  his knee. And it's this kind of sweet little song in some way. But I'm just sort of imagining this.
*  If I was going to stage that, I'd have this choir of children singing it with a huge hammer and
*  sickle behind them. Because that's what it's combining. And you can think that the sentiments
*  that are expressed in that song, which are legitimate in some way, of all the horrors
*  that that then leads to.
*  It is fascinating about humans. A beautiful idea on paper, an innocent little idea about
*  a utopian future can lead to so much suffering and so much destruction and totally the unintended
*  consequences that you see. All of unintended consequences. And we learn from it. I mean,
*  that's why history is important. We'll learn from it. Hopefully. Do we? Slowly or slow learn.
*  I'm unconvinced of that. But perhaps it's speaking of unconvinced. What gives you hope?
*  If human beings are still here, maybe expanding out into the cosmos,
*  a thousand, five thousand, ten thousand years from now, what gives you hope about that future?
*  About even being a possible future? About it happening?
*  Most people are cooperative and kind most of the time. And
*  that's one of those things that can usually be dependent upon.
*  And usually you'll get back to what you put into it.
*  Another thing that I have like a weird fascination of watching are people who have meltdowns on
*  airplanes. Because that's just bizarre. There's some sort of psychotic break that occurs and
*  it's always going to end the same way. The cops are going to come on and drag you off the plane.
*  Now true, and you're going to inconvenience everybody there. And usually at some point,
*  they don't care about that. That's the one little sense of power that they have. So they have some
*  sort of sense of powerlessness. And if their only way of power is just to piss off everybody else on
*  that plane, they're going to go ahead and do it, even though it's going to lead nowhere for them.
*  And there's similar sometimes psychological behavior in traffic.
*  The road rage thing.
*  The road rage. Yeah, it's fascinating.
*  And I bet that most, there again, those are all people who up to some point were cooperative
*  and kind and polite. And then they snap. So those are all part of the human makeup as well.
*  But also part of the human makeup difference between humans and chimps is the ability to get
*  together, cooperate on a mass scale over an idea, create things like the Roman Empire did, laws
*  that prevent us and protect us from crazy human behavior, manifestations of a man's type of-
*  Human beings are just weird animals. It's not getting around. It's just completely peculiar.
*  I'm not sure that we're altogether natural.
*  But I think we are altogether beautiful. There is something magical about humans and I hope
*  humans stay here. Even as we get advanced robots walking around everywhere,
*  more and more intelligent robots that claim to have consciousness, that claim they love you,
*  that increasingly take over our world. I hope this magical things that makes us human
*  still persists. Well, let us hope so.
*  Rick, you're an incredible person.
*  Well, thank you. So much fascinating work and it's really an-
*  I've never had anybody ask me as many interesting questions as you have.
*  So thank you so much.
*  Or as many questions.
*  This was so fun. Thank you so much for talking today.
*  Well, thank you.
*  Thanks for listening to this conversation with Rick Spence. To support this podcast,
*  please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from John
*  F. Kennedy. The very word secrecy is repugnant in a free and open society. And we are as a people
*  inherently and historically opposed to secret societies, to secret oaths, and to secret
*  proceedings. We decided long ago that the dangers of excessive and unwarranted concealment of
*  pertinent facts far outweighed the dangers which are cited to justify it. Thank you for
*  listening and hope to see you next time.
*  you
