---
Date Generated: June 30, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 6438s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'andrew huberman', 'artificial intelligence', 'elon musk', 'joe rogan', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex friedman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex pod', 'lex podcast']
Video Views: 269670
Video Rating: None
Video Description: Andrew Huberman is a neuroscientist at Stanford and host of the Huberman Lab Podcast. Please support this podcast by checking out our sponsors:
- Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/lex to get $350 off
- LMNT: https://drinkLMNT.com/lex to get free sample pack
- AG1: https://drinkag1.com/lex to get 1 month supply of fish oil
- Shopify: https://shopify.com/lex to get $1 per month trial
- NetSuite: http://netsuite.com/lex to get free product tour
- BetterHelp: https://betterhelp.com/lex to get 10% off

TRANSCRIPT:
https://lexfridman.com/andrew-huberman-5-transcript

EPISODE LINKS:
Andrew's YouTube: https://youtube.com/AndrewHubermanLab
Andrew's Instagram: https://instagram.com/hubermanlab
Andrew's Website: https://hubermanlab.com
Andrew's X: https://x.com/hubermanlab
Andrew's book on Amazon: https://amzn.to/3RNSIQN
Andrew's book: https://hubermanlab.com/protocols-book

PODCAST INFO:
Podcast website: https://lexfridman.com/podcast
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/2lwqZIr
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/2nEwCF8
RSS: https://lexfridman.com/feed/podcast/
Full episodes playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLrAXtmErZgOdP_8GztsuKi9nrraNbKKp4
Clips playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLrAXtmErZgOeciFP3CBCIEElOJeitOr41

OUTLINE:
0:00 - Introduction
0:50 - Quitting and evolving
7:48 - How to focus and think deeply
10:21 - Cannabis drama
20:34 - Jungian shadow
31:01 - Supplements
34:04 - Nicotine
38:27 - Caffeine
40:14 - Math gaffe
57:16 - 2024 presidential elections
1:04:13 - Great white sharks
1:12:58 - Ayahuasca & psychedelics
1:27:59 - Relationships
1:35:34 - Productivity
1:44:23 - Friendship

SOCIAL:
- Twitter: https://twitter.com/lexfridman
- LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/lexfridman
- Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/lexfridman
- Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/lexfridman
- Medium: https://medium.com/@lexfridman
- Reddit: https://reddit.com/r/lexfridman
- Support on Patreon: https://www.patreon.com/lexfridman
---

# Andrew Huberman: Focus, Controversy, Politics, and Relationships | Lex Fridman Podcast #435
**Lex Fridman:** [June 27, 2024](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZIyB9e_7a4c)
*  Hardship will show you who your real friends are. That's for sure.
*  If you read the quote once more, don't eat with people you wouldn't starve with.
*  The following is a conversation with Andrew Huberman, his fifth time on the podcast.
*  He is the host of the Huberman Lab podcast and is an amazing scientist,
*  teacher, human being, and someone I'm grateful to be able to call a close friend.
*  Also, he has a book coming out next year that you should pre-order now called Protocols,
*  an operating manual for the human body.
*  This is the Lex Freedman podcast. To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description.
*  And now, dear friends, here's Andrew Huberman.
*  You think there's ever going to be a day when you walk away from podcasting?
*  Definitely. I mean, I came up within and then on the periphery of skateboard culture.
*  And for the record, I was not a great skateboarder.
*  I always have to say that because skateboarders are relentless.
*  If you call something you didn't do or whatever.
*  I mean, I could do a few things and I loved the community.
*  And I still have a lot of friends in that community.
*  Jim Thebo at Deluxe, you can look him up.
*  He's kind of the man behind the whole scene.
*  I know Tony Hawk, Danny Whale, all these guys.
*  I got to see them come up and get big and stay big in many cases.
*  Start huge companies like Danny and Colin McKay's or DC.
*  Some people have a long life and some don't.
*  But one thing I observed and learned a lot from in skateboarding
*  at the level of observing the skateboarders and then the ones that started companies.
*  And then what I also observed in science and still observe is
*  you do it for a while.
*  You do it at the highest possible level for you.
*  And then at some point you pivot and you start supporting the young talent coming in.
*  In fact, the greatest scientists, people like Richard Axel, Katherine Dulock,
*  there are many other labs in neuroscience called Dysaroth.
*  They're not just known for doing great science.
*  They're known for mentoring some of the best scientists that then go on to start their own labs.
*  And I think in podcasting, I am very fortunate I got in in a fairly early wave,
*  not the earliest wave, but thanks to your suggestion of doing a podcast, fairly early wave.
*  And I'll continue to go as long as it feels right.
*  And I feel like I'm doing good in the world and providing good.
*  But I'm already starting to scout talent.
*  My company that I started with, Rob Moore, Psycommedia.
*  There's a couple other guys in there too.
*  Mike Blaback, our photographer, Ian Mackey, Chris Ray, Martin Phobes.
*  We are a company that produces podcasts.
*  Right now, that's Huberman Lab podcast, but we're launching a new podcast, Perform, with Dr. Andy Galpin.
*  Nice.
*  And we want to do more of that kind of thing, finding a really great talent,
*  highly qualified people, credentialed people.
*  And I've got a new kind of obsession with scouring the internet,
*  looking for the young talent in science, in health, and related fields.
*  And so will there be a final episode of the HLP?
*  Yeah, I mean, bullet, bust, or cancer aside, someday they'll be the very last.
*  And thank you for your interest in science.
*  And I'll clip out.
*  Yeah, I love the idea of walking away and not be dramatic about it.
*  When it feels right, you can leave and you can come back whenever the fuck you want.
*  Right. John Stewart did this well with The Daily Show.
*  I think that was during the 2016 election when everybody wanted him to stay on.
*  He just walked away.
*  Dave Chappelle, for different reasons, walked away.
*  Disappeared, came back.
*  Gave away so much money.
*  Didn't care.
*  And then came back and was doing like stand up in the park in the middle of nowhere.
*  Genius.
*  You have Habib, who, undefeated, walks away at the very top of a sport.
*  Is he coming back?
*  No.
*  At least we don't know.
*  Yeah.
*  Right. You don't know.
*  I don't know if you know.
*  He bears everywhere our words.
*  Yeah, I think it's always a call.
*  The last few years have been tremendous growth.
*  We launched in January 2021.
*  And even this last year, 2024, has been huge growth in all sorts of ways.
*  It's been wild.
*  And we have some short form content planned.
*  30 minute shorter episodes that really distill down the critical elements.
*  We're also thinking about moving to other venues besides podcasting.
*  So there's always the thought and the discussion.
*  But when it comes to like when to hang up your cleats, you know, it's like,
*  there just comes a natural time where you can do more to mentor the next generation coming in
*  than focusing on self.
*  And so there will come a time for that.
*  And I think it's critical.
*  I mean, again, I saw this in skateboarding.
*  Danny and Colin and Danny's brother Damon started DC with Ken Block, the driver who
*  unfortunately passed away a little while ago, rally car driver.
*  And they eventually sold it, I think, to Quicksilver or something like that.
*  But they're all phenomenal talents in their respective areas.
*  But they brought in the next, you know, the next line of amazing writers, the Plan B thing,
*  you know, Paul Rodriguez.
*  For skateboarders, they know who this is.
*  Now in science, there are scientists like Feynman, for instance.
*  I don't know if anyone can name one of his mentor offspring.
*  So there are scientists who are phenomenal, like beyond world class, right?
*  Multi-generational world class who don't make good mentors.
*  I'm not saying he wasn't a good mentor, but that's not what he's known for.
*  And then there are scientists who are known for being excellent scientists and great mentors.
*  And I think there's no higher celebration to be had at the end of one's career.
*  If you can look back and be like, hey, I put some really important knowledge into the world.
*  People made use of that knowledge.
*  And guess what?
*  You spawned all these other scientific offspring or sport offspring or podcast offspring.
*  I mean, in some ways we look to Rogan and to some of the other earlier podcasts.
*  It's like they, you know, they paved the way.
*  Rhonda Patrick, first science podcast out there.
*  So, you know, it eventually the baton passes.
*  But fortunately right now everybody's active and it feels really good.
*  Yeah.
*  Well, you're talking about the healthy way to do it, but there's also
*  a different kind of way where you have something like Grisha Grigori Perlman,
*  the mathematician who refused to accept the Fields Medal.
*  So he's one of the greatest living mathematicians and he just walked away from mathematics
*  and rejected the Fields Medal.
*  What did he do after he left mathematics?
*  Life. Private. 100%.
*  I respect that.
*  He's become essentially a recluse.
*  These photos of him looking very broke, like he could use the money.
*  He turned away the money.
*  He turned away everything.
*  You know, you just have to listen to the inner voice.
*  You have to listen to yourself and make the decisions that don't make any sense
*  for the rest of the world and make sense to you.
*  Bob Dylan didn't show up to pick up his Nobel Peace Prize.
*  That's punk.
*  He probably grew in notoriety for that.
*  Maybe he just doesn't like going in Sweden,
*  but it seemed like it would be a fun trip.
*  I think they do it in a nice time of years, but hey, that's his right.
*  He earned that right.
*  I think the best artists aren't doing it for the prize.
*  They aren't doing it for the fame or the money.
*  They're doing it because they love the art.
*  That's the Rick Rubin thing.
*  You got to verb it through, download your inner thing.
*  I don't think we've talked about this, this obsession that I have about how
*  Rick has this way of being very, very still in his body.
*  Keeping his mind very active as a practice.
*  Winn spent some time with him in Italy last June.
*  We would tread water in his pool in the morning and listen to
*  history of rock and roll and 100 songs.
*  Amazing podcast, by the way.
*  It is.
*  Yeah.
*  And then he would spend a fair amount of time during the day in this
*  kind of meditative state where his mind is very active, body very still.
*  Then Carl Deisteroth, when he came on my podcast,
*  talked about how he forces himself to sit still and think in complete sentences
*  late at night after his kids go to sleep.
*  There's a state of mind, rapid eye movement sleep, where your body is completely paralyzed
*  and the mind is extremely active.
*  People credit rapid eye movement sleep with some of the more elaborate emotion filled dreams and
*  the source of many ideas.
*  There are other examples.
*  Einstein, people described him as taking walks around the Princeton campus,
*  then pausing and would ask him what was going on.
*  The idea that his mind was continuing to churn forward at a high rate.
*  This is far from controlled studies, but we're talking about some incredible minds
*  and creatives who have a practice of stilling the body while keeping the mind deliberately
*  very active, very similar to rapid eye movement sleep.
*  And then there are a lot of people who also report great ideas coming to them in the shower,
*  while running.
*  It can be the opposite as well, where the body is very active and the mind is perhaps more on
*  a default mode network, not really focusing on any one specific thing.
*  There's a bunch of physicists and mathematicians I've talked to.
*  They talk about sleep deprivation and going crazy hours through the night,
*  obsessively pursuing a thing.
*  Then the solution to the problem comes when they finally get rest.
*  We know, we just did this six episode special series on sleep with Matt Walker,
*  we know that when you deprive yourself of sleep and then you get sleep,
*  you get a rebound in rapid eye movement sleep.
*  You get a higher percentage of rapid eye movement sleep.
*  Matt talks about this in the podcast.
*  He did an episode on sleep and creativity, sleep and memory.
*  Rapid eye movement sleep comes up multiple times in that series.
*  There's also some very interesting stuff about cannabis withdrawal and rapid eye movement sleep.
*  People are coming off cannabis often will suffer from insomnia,
*  but when they finally do start sleeping, they dream like crazy.
*  Cannabis is a very controversial topic right now.
*  Oh yeah, I saw that.
*  What happened?
*  There's a bunch of drama around the episode you did on cannabis.
*  Yeah, we did an episode about cannabis, talked about the health benefits and the potential risks.
*  Right?
*  It's neither here nor there.
*  Neither here nor there.
*  It depends on the person, depends on the age, depends on genetic background, a number of other things.
*  We published that episode well over a year ago and it had no issues online, so to speak.
*  And then a clip of it was put to X where the real action occurs, as you know, your favorite box.
*  Yeah, the four ounce gloves as opposed to the 16 ounce gloves.
*  That is X versus Instagram or YouTube.
*  There was kind of an immediate dog pile from a few people in the cannabis research field.
*  The PhDs and MDs, yeah.
*  There were people on our side, there were people not on our side.
*  I mean, you know, the statement that got things riled up the most was this notion that for certain
*  individuals there's a high potential for inducing psychosis with high THC containing cannabis.
*  For certain individuals, not all.
*  That sparked some issues.
*  There was really a split.
*  You know, you see this in different fields.
*  There was one person in particular who came out swinging with language that,
*  in my opinion, is not like of the sort that you would use at a university venue,
*  especially among colleagues, but that's fine.
*  You know, we're all grownups.
*  Well, for me, from my perspective, it was strangely rude and it had an era of like elitism
*  that to me wasn't the source of the problem during COVID that led to the distrust of science
*  and the popularization of disrespecting science because so many scientists spoke with an arrogance
*  and a douchebaggery that I wish we would have a little bit less of.
*  Yeah, it's tough because most academics don't understand that people outside the university
*  system are not familiar with the inner workings of science and the culture.
*  And so you have to be very careful how you present when you're a university professor.
*  And when, yeah, so you know, he came out swinging in some, you know,
*  four-letter word type language and he was obviously upset about it.
*  So I simply said what I would say anywhere, which was, hey, look, come on the podcast, let's chat.
*  And why don't you tell me where I'm wrong and let's discuss.
*  And fortunately, he agreed.
*  Initially, he said, well, no, how can I be sure you're not going to misrepresent me?
*  And so I said, we got on a DM, then an email, then actually phone call and just said, hey,
*  listen, like you're welcome to record the whole conversation.
*  We've never done a gotcha on my podcast and let's just get to the heart of the matter.
*  I think this little controversy is perfect kindling for a really great discussion.
*  And he had some other conditions that we worked out and I felt like,
*  cool, like he's really interested.
*  Although you get a very different person on the phone than you do on Twitter.
*  I will say he's been very collegial and that conversation is on the schedule.
*  I said, we'll fly you out, we'll put you up.
*  He said, no, he wants to fly himself.
*  He really wants to make sure that there's like kind of a space between,
*  I think some of the perception of science and health podcasts in the academic community is that
*  it's all designed to sell something.
*  No, we run ads so it can be free to everyone else.
*  But I think, look, in the end, he agreed and I'm excited for the conversation.
*  It was interesting because in the wake of that little exchange,
*  there's been a bunch of press from traditional press about cannabis has now surpassed alcohol
*  in many cultures within the United States as, when I say cultures, I mean demographics,
*  the United States as the drug of choice.
*  There have been people highlighting the issues of potential psychosis in high THC containing.
*  And so it's kind of interesting to see how traditional media is sort of on board certain
*  elements that I put forward.
*  And I think there's some controversy as to whether or not the different strains,
*  the indicas and sativas are biologically different, et cetera.
*  So we'll get down into the weeds, pun intended, during that one.
*  And I'm excited.
*  It's the first time that we've responded to a direct criticism online about scientific content
*  in a way that really promoted like, oh, here, the idea of inviting a particular guest.
*  And so it's great.
*  Let's get a guest who is expert in cannabis.
*  I believe I could be wrong about this, that he's a behavioral neuroscientist,
*  it's slightly different training, but look, he seems highly credentialed.
*  It'd be fun.
*  And we welcome that kind of exchange.
*  I'm not being diplomatic.
*  I'm just saying like, it's cool.
*  Like he's coming on.
*  And he was friendly on the phone, right?
*  Like he literally came out online and was like basically like, kind of like F you,
*  like F this and F you.
*  But you get someone on the phone and say, hey, how's it going?
*  And they're like, oh yeah, well, you know, there was an immediate apology of like,
*  hey, listen, I came out.
*  Normally I'm like, not like that, but online, you know, you get a different.
*  Oh yeah?
*  Okay, listen.
*  So it's a little bit like, it's a little bit like jujitsu, right?
*  People say all sorts of things, I guess, but if they, if you're like, all right, well,
*  let's go, then it's probably a different story.
*  It's not like jujitsu because in jujitsu people don't talk shit because they know what the
*  consequences are.
*  Let me, let me just say on mic and off mic, you have been very respectful towards this person.
*  And I look up to you and respect you and admire the fact that you have been.
*  That said to me, that guy was being a dick.
*  And when you graciously, politely invited him on the podcast, he was still talking down
*  to you the whole time.
*  So I really admire and look forward to listening to you talk to him, but I hope others don't
*  do that.
*  Like you are a positive, humble voice, exploring all the interesting aspects of science.
*  Like you want to learn if there you've got anything wrong, you want to learn about it.
*  The way he was being a dick, I was just hurt a little bit, not because of him, but because
*  like there's some people I really, really admire, brilliant scientists that are not
*  their best selves on Twitter on X.
*  Definitely.
*  I don't understand what happens to their brain.
*  Well, they regress.
*  They regress and they also are protected.
*  You know, you know, when you remove the, I mean, no scientific argument should ever come
*  to physical blows, right?
*  But when you remove the real world thing of being right in front of somebody, people
*  will throw all sorts of stones at a distance, you know, and over a wall and they've got
*  their wife or their husband or their boyfriend or their dog or their cat to go cuddle with
*  them afterwards.
*  But you get in a room and it's like, you know, confrontational people in real life are pretty
*  rare, but hopefully if they do it, they're like willing to back it up with knowledge
*  in this case, right?
*  We're not talking about physical altercation.
*  Yeah.
*  He kept coming and he kept putting on conditions.
*  How do I know you won't this?
*  And I was like, well, you can record the conversation.
*  How do I know you want that?
*  Listen, we'll pay for you to come out.
*  How do you know?
*  And eventually he just kind of relented and to his credit, you know, he's agreed to come
*  on.
*  I mean, he still has to show up, but once he does, you know, we'll treat him right like
*  we would any other guest.
*  Yeah.
*  You treat people really well and I just hope that people are a little bit nicer on the
*  internet.
*  Yeah.
*  Well, you know, X is an interesting one because you, it thickens your skin, you know, to
*  just to go on there.
*  I mean, you have to be ready to deal with.
*  Sure.
*  But I can still criticize people for, for being douchebags because like that's still
*  not good inspiring behavior.
*  Like, especially for scientists that should be sort of symbols of scientific thinking,
*  which requires intellectual humility.
*  Humility is a big part of that.
*  And Twitter is a good place to illustrate that.
*  Yeah.
*  Years ago, I used to, I was a student in TA, then instructor, and then directed a Cold
*  Spring Harbor course on visual neuroscience.
*  These are summer courses that explore different topics.
*  And at night we would host what we hoped were battles in front of the students where
*  you'd get two people on it.
*  You know, would it be neural prosthetics or molecular tools that would first, you know,
*  restore vision to the blind kind of arguments.
*  You kind of like, it's kind of a silly argument because it's going to be a combination of
*  both.
*  Right.
*  But you get these great arguments, but the arguments were always couched in data.
*  And occasionally you'd get somebody would go like, or would curse or something, but
*  it was the rare, very, very well-placed, you know, insult.
*  It wasn't, you know, coming out swinging.
*  I think ultimately, you know, Twitter is a record of people's behavior.
*  The internet is a record of people's behavior.
*  And here I'm not talking about news reports about people's behavior.
*  I'm talking about how people show up online is really important.
*  You've always carried yourself with a ton of composure and respect.
*  And, you know, you just, you would hope that people would grow from that example.
*  Well, I'll tell you that the podcasters that I'm scouting, it's their energy, but it's
*  also how they treat other people, how they respond to comments.
*  And, you know, we're blessed to have pretty significant reach when we put out a podcast,
*  like someone else's podcast, it goes far and wide.
*  So like a skateboard team, like a laboratory where you're selecting people to be in your
*  lab, you're, you want to pick people that you would enjoy working with and are collegial.
*  Etiquette and etiquette is, is lacking nowadays, but you're in the suit and tie, bringing it
*  back.
*  Bringing it back.
*  You said that your conversation with James Hollis.
*  A Jungian psychoanalyst had a big impact on you.
*  What do you mean?
*  James Hollis is a 84 year old Jungian psychoanalyst who's written 17 books, including
*  Under Saturn Shadow, which is on the healing and trauma of men, the Eden project, excuse me,
*  which is about relationships and creating a life.
*  I discovered James Hollis in an online lecture that was recorded, I think, in San Diego.
*  It's on YouTube.
*  The audio is terrible called Creating a Life.
*  And this was somewhere in the 2011 to 2015 span.
*  I can't remember.
*  And I was on my way to Europe and I called my girlfriend at the time.
*  I was like, I just found the most incredible lecture I've ever heard.
*  And I, he talks about the shadow.
*  He talks about your developmental upbringing and how you either align with or go 180 degrees off
*  your parents' tendencies and values in certain areas.
*  He talked about the specific questions to ask of oneself at different stages of life,
*  to live a full life.
*  So it's always been a dream of mine to meet him and to record a podcast.
*  And he wasn't able to travel.
*  So our team went out to DC and sat down with him.
*  We rarely do that nowadays.
*  People come to our studio and he came in, he had some surgeries recently, and he kind of came in
*  with some assistance from a cane and then sat down and just blew my mind.
*  From start to finish, he didn't miss a syllable.
*  And every sentence that he spoke was like a quotable sentence with real potency and
*  actionable items.
*  I think one of the things that was most striking to me was how he said when we
*  take ourselves out of stimulus and response.
*  And we just force ourselves to spend some time in the quiet of our thoughts while walking or
*  while seated or while lying down.
*  It doesn't have to be meditation, but it could be that we access our unconscious mind in ways that
*  reveals to us who we really are and what we really want.
*  And that if we do that practice repeatedly, 10 minutes a day here, 15 minutes a day there,
*  that we start to really touch into our unique gifts and the things that make us each us and
*  the directions we need to take.
*  But that so often we just stay in stimulus response.
*  We just do, do, do, do, do, which is great.
*  We have to be productive, but we miss those important messages.
*  And interestingly, he also put forward this idea of what is this?
*  Get up, shut up, suit up.
*  Something like that.
*  Get out of bed, suit up and shut up and get to work.
*  He also has that in him, kind of a Goggins type mindset.
*  So be able to turn off all this self-reflection and self-analysis and just get shit done,
*  but then also take dedicated time and stop and just let stuff geyser to the surface from
*  the unconscious mind.
*  And he quotes Shakespeare and he quotes Jung and he quotes everybody through history with
*  incredible accuracy and exactly the way needed to drive home a point.
*  But that conversation to me was one that I really felt like, okay, you know, if I don't
*  wake up tomorrow for whatever reason, that one's in the can and I feel really great about
*  it.
*  To me, it's the most important guest recording we've ever done.
*  In particular, because he has wisdom.
*  And while I hope he lives to be 204, chances are he's got another, what, 20, 30 years with
*  us, hopefully more.
*  But I really, really wanted to capture that information and get it out there.
*  So I'm very, very proud of that one.
*  And he's the kind of guy that anyone listens to him, young, old, male, female, whatever.
*  And you're going to get something of value.
*  What do you think about this idea of the shadow?
*  That the good and the bad that we repress that hides from plain sight when we analyze
*  ourselves that's there?
*  You think there's like an ocean that we don't have direct access to?
*  Yes.
*  Yeah.
*  Jung said it, we have all things inside of us and we do.
*  And some people are more in touch with those than others.
*  And some people it's repressed.
*  I mean, does that mean that we could all be horrible people or marvelous people,
*  benevolent people?
*  Perhaps.
*  I think that, thankfully, more often than not, people lean away from the violent and
*  harmful parts of their shadow.
*  But I think spending time thinking about one's shadow, shadows is super important.
*  How else are we going to grow?
*  Otherwise, we have these unconscious blind spots of denial or repression or whatever
*  the psychiatrists tell us.
*  But it clearly exists within all of us.
*  I mean, we have neural circuits for rage.
*  We all do.
*  We have neural circuits for altruism.
*  And no one's born without these things.
*  And some people, they're atrophied and some people, they're hypertrophied.
*  But looking inward and recognizing what's there is key.
*  Or positive things like creativity.
*  Maybe that's what Rick Rubin is accessing when he goes silent, silent body, active mind.
*  That's interesting.
*  What is it for you?
*  What place do you go to that generates ideas, that helps you generate ideas?
*  I have a lot of new practices around this.
*  I mean, I'm always exploring for protocols.
*  I have to.
*  That's like in my nature.
*  When I went and spent time with Rick, I tried to adopt his practice of staying very still
*  and just letting stuff come to the surface or the Dice-Sarathian way of
*  formulating complete sentences while being still in the body.
*  What I found works better is what my good friend Tim Armstrong does to write music.
*  He writes music every day.
*  He's a music producer.
*  He's obviously a singer, guitar player for Rancid.
*  And he's helped dozens and dozens and dozens of female pop artists and punk rock artists
*  write great songs.
*  Many of the famous songs that you've heard from other artists, Tim helped them write.
*  Tim wakes up sometimes in the middle of the night and what he does is he'll start drawing
*  or painting.
*  Joni Mitchell talks about this too.
*  You find some creative outlet that's like 15 degrees off center from your
*  main creative outlet and you do that thing.
*  For me, that's drawing.
*  I like doing anatomical drawings, neuroscience based drawing, drawing neurons, that kind of thing.
*  If I do that for a little while, my mind starts churning on the nervous system and biology and
*  then I come up with areas I'd like to explore for the podcast, ways I'd like to address
*  certain topics.
*  Right now, I'm very interested in autonomic control.
*  A beautiful paper came out that shows that anyone can learn to control their pupil sizes
*  without changing luminance through a biofeedback mechanism.
*  And that gives them control over their so-called automatic autonomic nervous system.
*  And I've been looking at what the circuitry is and it's beautiful.
*  So I'll draw the circuitry that we know underlies autonomic function.
*  And as I'm doing that, I'm thinking, oh, like what about autonomic control and those people that
*  supposedly can control their pupil size?
*  Then you go in and there's a paper published in Nature Press, one of the nature journals,
*  and there's a recent paper on this.
*  Like, oh, cool.
*  And then we talk about this and then how could this be put into a kind of a post or how could this?
*  So doing things that are about 15 degrees off center from your main thing is a great way to
*  access, I believe, the circuits for, in Tim's case, painting goes to songwriting.
*  I think for Joni Mitchell, that was also the case.
*  Right?
*  I think it was drawing and painting to singing and songwriting.
*  For Rick, I don't know what it is.
*  Maybe it's listening to podcasts.
*  I don't know.
*  That's his business.
*  Do you have anything that you like to focus on that allows you then an easier transition
*  into your main creative work?
*  No, I'd really like to focus on emptiness and silence.
*  So I pick the dragon I have to slay.
*  So whatever the problem I have to work on and then just sit there and stare at it.
*  I love how fucking linear you are.
*  And if there's no, if you're tired, I'll just sit.
*  I believe in the, in the power of just waiting and usually I'll stop being tired or their
*  energy rises from somewhere or an idea pops from somewhere, but there needs to be a silence
*  and an emptiness.
*  It's an empty room, just me and the dragon and we wait.
*  That's it.
*  Like if it's a, usually with programming, you're thinking about a particular design.
*  Like how do I design this thing to solve this problem?
*  Any cognitive enhancers?
*  I've got quite the gallery in front of me.
*  Oh, that's right.
*  Yeah.
*  Should we walk through this?
*  Yeah.
*  This is not, this is not a sales thing.
*  This is, I tend to do this bounce back and forth.
*  Your refrigerator just happened to have a lot of different choices.
*  So water.
*  This is all of my refrigerator.
*  I know, right?
*  There's no food in there.
*  There's water.
*  There's element, which they now have canned.
*  Yeah.
*  And yes, they're a podcast sponsor for both of us, but that's not why I cracked one of
*  these open.
*  I like them provided they're cold.
*  And that's by the way, my least favorite flavors.
*  I was saying that's, that's the reason it's still left in the fridge.
*  The cherry one is really good.
*  The black cherry.
*  There's a orange one.
*  Yeah.
*  I pushed the sled this morning and pulled the sled for my workout at the gym.
*  And it was hot today here in Austin.
*  So some salt is good.
*  And then Matina yerba mate, zero sugar, full confession.
*  I helped develop this.
*  I'm a partial owner, but I love yerba mate.
*  Half Argentine, been drinking mate since I was a little kid.
*  There's actually a photo somewhere on the internet when I'm like three sitting on
*  my grandfather's lap, sipping mate out the gourd.
*  And then this, my fun, interesting, this is just a little bit of coffee with a scoop of
*  Brian Johnson gave me cocoa, just like pure unsweetened cocoa.
*  So I put that in chocolate and I like it.
*  It just for the taste.
*  Well, actually nukes my appetite.
*  And since I'm, we're not going out to dinner tonight until later, I figure that's good.
*  Yeah.
*  Brian's interesting one, right?
*  He's really pushing this, this thing.
*  The optimization of everything.
*  Yeah.
*  Although he just hurt his ankle.
*  He posted a photo of the hurt his ankle.
*  So now he's injecting BPC body protection compound.
*  157, which many, many people are taking by the way, I did an episode on peptides.
*  I should just say, you know, BPC 157, one of the known effects in animal models
*  is angiogenesis, like development of new vasculature, which can be great in some context.
*  But also if you have a tumor, you don't really want to vasculize that tumor anymore.
*  So I worry about people taking BPC 157 continually, but, and there's very little human data.
*  I think there's like one study and it's a lousy one.
*  So a lot of animal data.
*  Some of the peptides are interesting.
*  However, there's one that I've experimented with a little bit called pinealin, which I find
*  even if I've just taken it twice a week before sleep, then it times, it seems to do something to
*  the circadian timekeeping mechanism, because then on other days when I don't take it,
*  I get unbelievably tired at that time that normally I would do the injection.
*  These are things that I'll experiment with for a couple of weeks and then typically stop,
*  maybe try something else.
*  But I stay out of things that really stimulate any of the major hormone pathways
*  when it comes to peptides.
*  That's actually a really good question of how do you experiment?
*  Like how long do you try a thing to figure out if it works for you?
*  Well, I'm very sensitive to these things.
*  So I, and I have been doing a lot of things for a long time.
*  So if I add something in, it's always one thing at a time.
*  And I notice right away if it does not make me feel good.
*  Like there's a lot of excitement about some of the so-called growth hormone,
*  secretagogues, hypermoral and testimeral and sermuralin.
*  I've experimented a little bit with those in the past and they've
*  nuked my rapid eye movement sleep, but given me a lot of deep sleep,
*  which doesn't feel good to me, but other people like them.
*  I also just generally try and avoid taking peptides that tap into these hormone pathways
*  because you can run into all sorts of issues, but some people take them safely.
*  But usually after about four or five days, I know if I like something or I don't,
*  and then I move on.
*  But I am not super adventurous with these things.
*  I know people that will take cocktails of peptides with multiple things.
*  They'll try anything.
*  That's not me.
*  And I do blood work.
*  But also I'm, you know, I'm mainly reading papers and podcasting and
*  I'm teaching a course next spring.
*  Stanford, I'm going to do a big undergraduate course.
*  So I'm trying to develop that course and things like that.
*  So I don't need to lift more weight or run further than I already do,
*  which is not that much weight or far as it is.
*  All right.
*  You're not going to the Olympics.
*  You're not trying to truly maximize some aspect of your performance.
*  No, and I'm not trying to get down below whatever, you know,
*  7% body fat or something.
*  I don't have those kinds of goals.
*  So hydration, electrolytes, caffeine in the form of mate, and then this coffee.
*  And then here's one that I think I brought out for discussion.
*  This is a piece of Nicorette.
*  They're not a sponsor.
*  So, um, nicotine is an interesting compound.
*  It will raise blood pressure and it, um, is probably not safe for everybody,
*  but you know, the nicotine is gaining in popularity, like crazy, mainly these, um,
*  pouches that people put in the lip, not, we're not talking about,
*  I'm smoking, vaping, dipping or snuffing.
*  You know, my interest in nicotine started, this was in 2010.
*  I was visiting Columbia medical school and I was in the office of
*  the great neurobiologist Richard Axel won the Nobel prize co-recipient with Linda Buck for the
*  discovery of the molecular basis of olfaction.
*  Brilliant guy.
*  He's probably in his late seventies now.
*  Probably.
*  Yeah.
*  And he kept popping Nicorette in his mouth and I was like, what's this about?
*  And he said, oh, well, this was just anecdote, right?
*  But he said, but he said this, he said, oh, well, you know, it protects against Parkinson's
*  and Alzheimer's.
*  I said, it does.
*  And he goes, yeah, I don't know if he was kidding or not.
*  He's known for making jokes.
*  And then he said that when he used to smoke, it really helped his focus and creativity,
*  but then he quit smoking because he didn't want lung cancer.
*  And he found that he couldn't focus as well.
*  So he would choose Nicorette.
*  So occasionally, like right now, I do a half a piece, but I'm not Russian.
*  So I'm a little, you know, you had to just pop the whole thing in your mouth.
*  So I'll do a couple of milligrams every now and again.
*  And it definitely sharpens the mind on an empty stomach in particular, but you fast all day.
*  You're still doing one meal a day.
*  One meal a day.
*  Yeah.
*  Yeah, I did a nicotine pouch with Rogan at dinner.
*  And that got high.
*  Yeah, that's a lot.
*  That's like usually six or eight milligrams.
*  I know people that get a canister of Zin, take one a day.
*  Pretty soon, they're taking a canister a day.
*  So you have to be very careful.
*  I will only allow myself two pieces of Nicorette total per week.
*  And you will notice that, you know, in the day after you use it, you know, sometimes your throat
*  will feel a little bit like a little spasming, like you might want to cough once or twice.
*  And so, you know, if you're a singer or you're a podcaster or something, you have to do long
*  podcasts. You want to just be mindful of it. But yeah, you're supposed to kind of like keep it in
*  your cheek and here we go.
*  But it did make me intensely focused in a way that was a little bit scary because-
*  The nucleus basalis is in the, you know, in the basal forebrain nucleus has cholinergic neurons
*  that radiate out axons, little wires that release acetylcholine into the neocortex and elsewhere.
*  And when you focus on one particular topic matter or one particular area of your visual field or
*  listening to something and focusing visually, we know that there's an elaboration of the amount
*  of acetylcholine released there and it binds to nicotinic acetylcholine receptor sites there.
*  So it's a kind of an intentional modulation by acetylcholine.
*  So you're getting it with nicotin, you're getting an exogenous or artificial
*  heightening of that circuitry.
*  And the time I had Tucker Carlson on the podcast, he told me that apparently
*  it helps him, as he said publicly, keep his love life vibrant.
*  Really? It causes basic constrictions.
*  He literally said it makes his dick very hard. He said that publicly also.
*  Okay. Well, as little as I want to think about Tucker Carlson's sex life,
*  no disrespect. The major effect of nicotin on the vasculature, my understanding is that it causes
*  vasoconstriction, not vasodilation. Drugs like Stialis, didalafil, Viagra, et cetera, vasodilators,
*  they allow more blood flow. Nicotin does the opposite, less blood flow to the periphery,
*  but provided dosages are kept low. And I don't recommend people use it frequently or at all.
*  And I don't recommend young people use it, you know, 25 and younger. Brain's very plastic at
*  that time. And certainly smoking, dipping, vaping, and snuffing aren't good because you're going to
*  run into trouble for other reasons. But in any case, even there, vaping is a controversial topic.
*  Probably safer than smoking, but has its own issues. And I said something like that. And boy,
*  did I catch a lot of heat for that. Can't say anything as a health science educator,
*  not piss somebody off. It just depends on where the center of mass is and how far outside that
*  you are. For me, the caffeine is the main thing. And actually, it's a really big part of my life.
*  And one of the things you recommend that people wait a bit in the morning to consume caffeine.
*  If they experience a crash in the afternoon, this is one of the misconceptions I
*  have. I regret maybe even discussing it for people that crash in the afternoon.
*  Oftentimes, if they delay their caffeine by 60 and 90 minutes in the morning,
*  they will offset some of that. But if you eat a lunch that's too big or you didn't sleep all
*  the night before, you're not going to avoid that afternoon crash. But I'll wake up sometimes and
*  go straight to hydration and caffeine, especially if I'm going to work out. Here's a weird one.
*  If I exercise before 830 AM, especially if I start exercising when I'm a little bit tired,
*  I get energy that lasts all day. If I wait until my peak of energy, which is mid-morning,
*  10 AM, 11 AM, and I start exercising then, I'm basically exhausted all afternoon.
*  And I don't understand why. It depends on the intensity of the workout. So I like to be done
*  showered and heading into work by 9 AM. But I don't always meet that mark.
*  So you're saying it doesn't affect your energy if you start with exercising?
*  I think you can get energy and wake yourself up with exercise if you start early. And then that
*  fuels you all day long. I think that if you wait until you're feeling at your best to train,
*  sometimes that's detrimental because then in the afternoon when you're doing the work we get paid
*  for, like research, podcasting, et cetera, then oftentimes your brain isn't firing as well.
*  That's interesting. I haven't really rigorously tried that wake up and just start running or-
*  This is the Jaco thing. And then there's this phenomenon called entrainment,
*  where if you force yourself to exercise or eat or socialize or view bright light
*  at a certain time of day for three to seven days in a row, pretty soon there's an anticipatory
*  circuit that gets generated. This is why anyone in theory can become a morning person
*  to some degree or another. And this is also a beautiful example of why you wake up before
*  your alarm clock goes off. People wake up and all of a sudden it goes off. It wasn't because it
*  clicked. It's because you have this incredible timekeeping mechanism that exists in sleep.
*  There's some papers that have been published in the last couple of years, Nature Neuroscience and
*  elsewhere showing that people can answer math problems in their sleep, simple math problems,
*  but math problems nonetheless. This does not mean that if you ask your partner a question in sleep,
*  that they're going to answer accurately. They might screw up the whole
*  cumulative probability of 20% across multiple months.
*  All right, listen. What happened?
*  What happened? Here's the deal. A few years back, I did a four and a half hour,
*  after editing four and a half hour episode on male and female fertility.
*  The entire recording took 11 hours. And by the way, I'm very proud of that episode.
*  Many couples have written to me and said they now have children as a consequence of that episode.
*  And my first question is, what were you doing during the episode? But in all seriousness.
*  We should say that it's four and a half hours. And for people, then they should listen to the
*  episode. It's an extremely technical episode. You're not stopping dropping facts and referencing
*  huge number of papers. It must be exhausting. I don't understand how you can possibly do that.
*  It talks about sperm health, sperm adgenesis. It talks about the ovulatory cycle. It talks about
*  things people can do that are considered absolutely supported by science. It talks about some of the
*  things kind of out on the edge a little bit that are a little bit more experimental. It talks about
*  IVF. It talks about ICSI. It talks about all of that. It talks about frequency of pregnancy as
*  a function of age, et cetera. But there's this one portion there in the podcast where I'm talking
*  about the probability of a successful pregnancy as a function of age. And so there was a clip that
*  was cut in which I was describing cumulative probability. And by the way, we've published
*  cumulative probability histograms in many of my laboratory's papers, including one that was a
*  Nature article in 2018. So we run these all the time. And yes, I know the difference between
*  independent and cumulative probability. I do. The way the clip was cut and what I stated,
*  unfortunately, combined to a pretty great gaffe where I said, you're just adding percentages,
*  20 to 120%. And then I made this kind of, unfortunately, my humor isn't always so good.
*  And I made a joke. I said, 120%, but that's a different thing altogether. What I should have
*  said was, that's impossible. And here's how it actually works. But then it continues where I
*  then describe the cumulative probability histogram for successful pregnancy. But
*  somewhere in the early portion, I misstated something. I made a math error, which implied
*  I didn't understand the difference between independent and cumulative probability,
*  which I do. And it got picked up and run. And people had a really good laugh with that one
*  at my expense. And so what I did in response to it was rather than just say everything I just said
*  now, I just came out online and said, hey folks, in an episode dated this on fertility, I made a
*  math error. Here's the formula for cumulative probability, successful pregnancy at that age.
*  Here's the graph. And I offered it as a teaching moment in two ways. One, for people to understand
*  cumulative probability. It was sort of interesting too, a number of people that had come out
*  critiquing the gaffe. Also, like Balaji and folks came out pointing out that they didn't understand
*  cumulative probability. So there was a lot of posturing. The dog pile, oftentimes people are
*  quick to dog pile. They didn't understand, but a lot of people did understand. Some smart people
*  out there, obviously. I called my dad and he was just laughing. He goes, oh, this is good. This is
*  like the old school way of hammering academics. But the point being, it was a teaching moment,
*  gave me an opportunity to say, hey, I made a mistake. I also made a mistake in another podcast
*  where I did a micron to millimeter conversion or centimeter conversion. And we always correct
*  these in the show note captions. We correct them in the audio now. Unfortunately, on YouTube,
*  it's harder to correct. You can't go and edit in segments. We put in the captions. But that was
*  the one teaching moment. If you make a mistake, it's substantive and relate to data. You apologize
*  and correct the mistake. Use this teaching moment. The other one was to say, hey, in all the
*  thousands of hours of content we've put out, I'm sure I've made some small errors. I think I once
*  said serotonin when I meant dopamine. You're going, you're riffing. And it's a reminder to
*  be careful to edit, double check. But the internet usually edits for us. And then we go make
*  corrections. But it didn't feel good at first. But ultimately, I can laugh at myself about it.
*  Long ago at Berkeley, when I was TAing my first class, it was a biopsychology class,
*  between 1998 or 1999, I was drawing the pituitary gland, which has an anterior and a posterior lobe,
*  actually is a medial lobe too. I had five, 600 students in that lecture hall. And I drew,
*  it was chalkboard. And I drew the two lobes of the pituitary. And I said, my back was to the
*  audience. I said, you know, and so they just sort of hang there. And everyone just erupted in laughter
*  because it looked like a scrotum with two testicles. And I remember thinking like, oh my God,
*  I don't think I can turn around. I can face this. And I'm like, oh, I got to turn around sooner
*  or later. So I turned around and we just all had a big laugh together. It was embarrassing.
*  I'll tell you one thing though, they never forgot about the two lobes of the pituitary.
*  Yeah. And you haven't forgotten about that either.
*  Right. There's a high salience for these kinds of things. And it also was kind of fun to see
*  how excited people get to see people trip. It's like an elite sprinter trips and does something
*  stupid, like, you know, runs the opposite direction out of the blocks or something like that. And,
*  and, or, you know, I recall at one World Cup match years ago, a guy scored against his own team. I
*  think they killed the guy. Do you remember that? Some South American or Central American team.
*  Yeah. And they killed the guy. But yeah, let's, let's look it up. I just said World Cup. Yeah,
*  he was gunned down. Andres Escobar scored against his own team in 1994 World Cup in the United
*  States, just 27 years old playing for the Columbia national team. Yeah. Last name,
*  Escobar. It's a good name. I think it would protect you. Listen, you know, so there are some
*  gaffes that get people killed, right? So, you know, how forgiving are we for online mistakes?
*  You know, it's the nature of the mistakes. People were quite gracious about the,
*  the gaff and some weren't. And, you know, it's interesting that we, as you know, public health
*  science educators, you know, we'll do long podcasts sometimes and, and you need to be
*  really careful. What's great is AI allows you to check these things now more readily. So that's
*  cool. And there are ways that it's now going to be more self-correcting. I mean, you know, I think
*  there's a, there's a lot of errors out there on the internet and people are finding them and
*  it's cool. Like things are getting cleaned up. Yeah. But mistakes nevertheless will happen.
*  Are you, do you feel the pressure of not making mistakes? Sure. I mean, you know, I try and get
*  things right to the best of, you know, to the best of my ability. I check with experts. It's kind of
*  interesting when people really don't like something that was said in a podcast. A lot of times I
*  chuckle because I'm, you know, at Stanford, we have some amazing scientists, but I talk to them
*  people elsewhere. And it's always interesting to me how, you know, I'll get divergent information
*  and then I'll find the overlap in the Venn diagram. And I have this like question,
*  do I just stay with the overlap in the Venn diagram? Like I did an episode on oral health.
*  I didn't know this until I researched that episode, but oral health is critically related
*  to heart health and brain health. There's a bacteria that causes cavities streptococcus,
*  you know, that can make its way into other parts of the body through the mouth that
*  can cause serious issues. There's the idea that some forms of dementia, some forms of heart disease
*  are stored in the mouth. Basically I talked to no fewer than four dentists, dental experts,
*  and there was a lot of convergence. I also learned that teeth can demineralize. That's the
*  formation of cavities. They can also remineralize. As long as the cavity isn't too deep,
*  it can actually fill itself back in, especially if you provide the right substrates for it.
*  That saliva is this incredible fluid that has all this capacity to remineralize teeth,
*  provided the milieu is right. Things like alcohol-based mouth washes, killing off some
*  of the critical things you need. It's fascinating. And I put out that episode thinking, oh, well,
*  I'm not a dentist. I'm not an oral health episode, but I talked to a pediatric dentist. There's a
*  terrific one, Dr. Downscore Stacy, S-T-A-C-I on Instagram, does great content. Talked to some
*  others. And then I just waited for the attack. I was like, here we go. And it didn't come.
*  And dentists were thanking me. I was like, whoa. You know, that's a rare thing. More often than not,
*  if I do an episode about say psilocybin or MDMA, you get some people liking it or ADHD and the
*  drugs for ADHD. We did a whole episode on the Ritalin Vyvanse, Adderall stuff. You get people
*  saying, thank you. You know, I prescribed this to my kid and it really helps. But they're private
*  about the fact that they do it because they get so much attack from other people. So I like to find
*  the center of mass, report that, try and make it as clear as possible. And then I know that there's
*  some stuff where I'm going to catch shit. What's frustrating for me is when I see claims that I'm
*  against fluoridization of water, which I'm not. We talked about the benefits of fluoride. It builds
*  hyper strong bonds within the teeth. I went and looked at some of the literally the crystal
*  structure, but essentially the micron and sub-micron structure of teeth is incredible. And
*  where fluoride can get in there and form these super strong bonds. And you can also form them
*  with things like hydroxyapatite. And why is there fluoride in water? Well, it's the best. Okay.
*  You say some things that are interesting, but then somehow it gets turned into like you're against
*  fluoridization, which I'm not. Or I've been accused of being against sunscreen. I wear mineral-based
*  sunscreen on my face. I don't want to get skin cancer. Or I use a physical barrier. There is a
*  cohort of people out there that think that all sunscreens are bad. I'm not one of them. I'm not
*  what's called a sunscreen truther. But then you get attacked for like, so we're talking about there
*  are certain sunscreens that are problematic. And Rhonda Patrick's now starting to get vocal
*  about this. And so there are certain topics that's interesting for which
*  you have to listen carefully to what somebody is saying, but there's a lumping as opposed to
*  splitting of what health educators say. And so it just seems like with politics, there's this
*  urgency to just put people into a camp of expert versus like renegade or something.
*  And it's not like that. It's just not like that. So the short answer is I really strive,
*  really strive to get things right. But I know that I'm going to piss certain people off.
*  And you've taught me and Joe's taught me and other podcasters have taught me that like,
*  if you worry too much about it, then you aren't going to get the newest information out there.
*  Like peptides, there's very little human data unless you're talking about
*  Velecy or the stuff in the alpha melanocyte stimulating hormone stuff, which are prescribed
*  for female libido to enhance female libido or sermorelin, which is for certain growth hormone
*  deficiencies. With rare exception, there's very little human data. But people are still
*  super interested in a lot of people are taking and doing these things. So you want to get the
*  information out. Do you try to not just look at the science, but research what the communities
*  are talking about, what the various communities are talking about? Like maybe research what the
*  conspiracy theorists are talking about just so you know all the armies that are going to be attacking
*  your castle. Yes. So like for instance, there's a community of people online that believe that like,
*  if you consume seed oils or something that like you're setting up your skin for sunburn,
*  and if you don't, you know, like there's all these like theories, but I like to know what the
*  theories are. I like to know what the extremes are, but I also like to know what the standard
*  conversation is. But there's generally more agreement than disagreement. I think where,
*  you know, I've been kind of bullish actually is, you know, like supplements, like people go,
*  oh, supplements. Well, there's food supplements, like a protein powder, just different than a
*  vitamin. And then they are compounds. There are compounds that have real benefit, but people get
*  very nervous about the fact that they're not regulated. But some of them are vetted with for
*  potency and for safety with more rigor than others, you know. And it's interesting to see
*  how people who take care of themselves and put a lot of work into that are often attacked. That's
*  been interesting. Also, one of the most controversial topics nowadays is Ozempic,
*  Mujaro. I'm very middle of the road on this. I don't understand why the
*  quote unquote health wellness community is so against these things. I also don't understand
*  why they have to be looked at as the only route. For some people, they've really helped them lose
*  weight. And yes, there can be some muscle loss and other lean body loss, but that can be offset with
*  resistance training. They've helped a lot of people. And other people are like, no, this stuff is
*  terrible. I think the most interesting thing about Ozempic Mujaro is that they are GLP-1,
*  they're in the GLP-1 pathway, glucagon-like peptide-1. And it was discovered in Gila monsters,
*  which is a lizard basically. And now the entomologists will dive on me.
*  It's a big lizard looking thing that doesn't eat very often. And they figured out that there's
*  this peptide that allows it to curb its own appetite at the level of the brain and the gut.
*  And it has a lot of homology to sequence homology to what we now call GLP-1. So I love any time
*  there's animal biology links to cool human biology links to a drug that's powerful that
*  can help people with obesity and type 2 diabetes. And there's evidence that can even curb some
*  addictions. Those are newer data. But I don't see it as either or. In fact, I've been a little bit
*  disappointed at the way that the, whatever you want to call it, health wellness biohacking
*  community has slammed on Ozempic monjaro. It's like, they're like, just get out and run. Listen,
*  there are people who are carrying substantial amounts of weight that running could injure them.
*  They get on these drugs and they can improve. And then hopefully they're also doing resistance
*  training and eating better. And then you're bringing all the elements together.
*  Well, why do you think the criticism is happening? Is it that Ozempic became super popular so people
*  are misusing it or that kind of thing? No, I think what it is, is that people
*  think if it's a pharmaceutical, it's bad. Or if it's a supplement, it's bad,
*  depending on which camp they're in. And wouldn't it be wonderful to fill in the gap between this
*  divide? What I would like to see in politics and in health is neither right nor left, but what we
*  can just call a league of reasonable people that looks at things on an issue by issue basis
*  and fills in the center. Because I think most people are, I don't want to say center in a
*  political way, but I think most people are reasonable. They want to be reasonable,
*  but that's not what sells clicks. That's not what drives interest. But I'm a very,
*  I look at issue by issue, person by person. I don't like in-group, out-group stuff. I never have.
*  I've got friends from all walks of life. I said this on another podcast and it always sounds like
*  a political statement, but the push towards polarization, it's so frustrating. If there's
*  one thing that's discouraging to me as I get older each year, I'm like, wow, are we ever going
*  to get out of this polarization? Speaking of which, how are you going to vote for the presidential
*  election? I'm still trying to figure out how to interview the people involved and do it well.
*  What do you think the role of podcast is going to be in this year's election?
*  I would love long form conversations to happen with the candidates. I think it's going to be
*  huge. I would love Trump to go on Rogan. I'm embarrassed to say this, but I would love to,
*  honestly, would love to see Joe Biden go on Joe Rogan also.
*  I would imagine that both would go on, but separately.
*  Separately, I think. Joe does debates, but I think Joe and his best is one-on-one
*  conversation, really intimate. I just wish that Joe Biden would actually do long form conversations.
*  I thought he had done it. I think it was on Jay Shetty's podcast.
*  He did Jay Shetty. He did a few, but when I mean long form, I mean
*  really long form, like two, three hours and more relaxed. It was much more orchestrated.
*  Because what happens when the interview is a little bit too short, it becomes into this generic
*  political type of NBC, CNN type of interview. You get a set of questions and you don't get to really
*  feel the human, expose the human to the light. We talked about the shadow, the good, the bad,
*  and the ugly. I think there's something magical about two, three, four hours.
*  It doesn't have to be that long, but it has to have that feeling to it, where there's not
*  people standing around and everybody's nervous and you're going to be
*  strictly sticking to the question, answer type of feel, but just shooting shit, which
*  Rogan is the best by far in the world at that. I don't think people really appreciate
*  how skilled he is at what he does. The three or four podcasts per week, plus the UFC announcing,
*  plus comedy tours and stadiums, plus doing comedy shows in the middle of the week, plus
*  a husband and a father and a friend and a friend, the guy's got these superhuman levels of output.
*  I agree that long form conversation is a whole other business. I think that people want and
*  deserve to know the people that are running for office in a different way and to really get to
*  know them. Well, listen, I guess you can, I mean, is it clear that he's going to do jail time or
*  maybe he gets away with it? Does that mean you're going to be podcasting from jail?
*  In prison, yeah. In fact, I'm going to figure out how to commit a crime so I can get in prison.
*  I'm sure they have visitors. That just doesn't feel an authentic way to get the interview.
*  Yeah, I understand. You wouldn't be able to wear that suit. You'd be wearing a different suit.
*  That's true. Yeah. It's going to be interesting. I'm not just saying this because you're my friend,
*  but you would do a marvelous job. I think you should sit down with all of them separately to
*  keep it civil and see what happens. Here's one thing that I found really interesting
*  in this whole political landscape. When I'm in Los Angeles, I often get invited to these,
*  like they're not dinners, but gatherings where a bunch of podcasters will come together, but
*  a lot of people from the entertainment industry, big agencies, big tech, like big, big tech. Many
*  of the people have been on this podcast. They'll host a discussion or a debate. What you find,
*  if you look around the room and you talk to people, is that about half the people in the room
*  are very left-leaning and very outspoken about that. They'll tell you exactly who they want to
*  see win the presidential race. The other half will tell you that they're for the other side.
*  A lot of people that people assume are on one side of the aisle or the other
*  are in the exact opposite side. Now, some people are very open about who they're for, but it's been
*  very interesting to see how when you get people one-on-one, they're telling you they want X
*  candidate to win or Y candidate to win. Sometimes I'm like, really? I can't believe it. Like you?
*  Like, yep. It's what people think about
*  people's political leanings is often exactly wrong. That's been eye-opening for me. I've
*  seen that in university campuses too. It's going to be really, really interesting to see what
*  happens in November. In addition to that, as you said, most people are close to the center,
*  despite what Twitter makes it seem like. Most people, whether that's center left or center
*  right, they're kind of close to the center. Yeah. I mean, here's to me the most interesting
*  question. Who is going to be the next big candidate in years to come? Who's that going to be?
*  Right now, I don't see or know of that person. Who's it going to be?
*  Yeah, the young promising candidates. We're not seeing them. Another way to ask that question,
*  who would want to be? Well, that's the issue, right? Who wants to live in this 12-hour news
*  cycle where you're just trying to dunk on the other team so that nobody notices the
*  shit that you fucked up? That's not only not fun or interesting, it's got to be psychosis-inducing
*  at some point. I think that, God willing, some young guy or woman is on this and refuses to
*  back down and was just determined to be president and will make it happen. But
*  I don't even know who the viable candidates are. Maybe you, Lex. We should ask Sagar. Sagar would
*  know. Yeah. Maybe Sagar himself. Sagar's show is awesome. He and Crystal do a great thing.
*  He's incredible. Especially since they have somewhat divergent opinions on things.
*  That's what makes it so cool. He's great. He looks great in a suit. He looks real sexy.
*  He's taking real good care of himself. I think he's getting married soon.
*  Congratulations, Sagar. Forgive me for not remembering your future wife's name.
*  He won my heart by giving me a biography of Hitler as a present. That's what he gave you?
*  I gave you a hatchet with a poem inscribed. That just shows the fundamental difference.
*  With a poem inscribed in it. Which was pretty damn good.
*  I realize everything we bring up on the screen is really depressing, like the soccer player
*  getting killed. Can we bring up something happy? Sure. Let's go to Nature's Metal Instagram.
*  Those are pretty intense. We actually did a collaborative post on a shark thing.
*  Really? What kind of shark thing? To generate the fear VR stimulus for my lab, in 2016,
*  we went down to Guadalupe Island off the coast of Mexico. Me and a guy named Michael Mueller,
*  who's a very famous portrait photographer, but also takes photos of sharks. We used 360 video
*  to build VR of great white sharks. Brought it back to the lab. We published that study
*  in Current Biology. In 2017, went back down there. That was the year that I exited the cage.
*  You lower the cage with a crane. That year I exited the cage. I had a whole mess with an
*  air failure the day before. I was breathing from a hookah line while in the cage. I had no scuba on.
*  Divers were out. The thing got both constricted up and I had an air failure. I had to actually
*  share air and it was a whole mess. Story for another time. The next day, because I didn't
*  want to get PTSD and it was pretty scary, the next day I cage exited with some other divers.
*  It turns out with these great white sharks, in Guadalupe the water is very clear and you
*  can swim toward them and then they'll veer off you if you swim toward them. Otherwise,
*  they see you as prey. Well, in the evening, you've brought all the cages up and you're
*  hopefully all alive. We were hanging out fishing for a tuna. One of the crew on board had
*  a line in the water and was fishing for tuna for dinner. A shark took the tuna off the line.
*  It's a very dramatic take. You can see the absolute size of these great white sharks.
*  The waters there are filled with them. That's the one. This video, just the Neuralink link,
*  was shot by Matt McDougall who is the head neurosurgeon at Neuralink. There it is.
*  It takes it. Believe it or not, it looks like it missed. It didn't get the fish. It actually just
*  cut that thing like a band saw. I'm up on the deck with Matt. When you look at it from the side,
*  you really get a sense of the girth of this thing. As it comes up,
*  if you look at the size of that thing, and they move through the water with such speed.
*  When you're in the cage and the cage is lowered down below the surface,
*  they're going around. You're not allowed to chum the water there. Some people do it.
*  Then when you cage ag sit, they're like, what are you doing out here? Then you swim toward them,
*  they veer off. What's interesting is that if you look at how they move through the water,
*  all it takes for one of these great white sharks, when it sees a tuna or something it wants to eat,
*  is two flicks of the tail and becomes like a missile. It's just unbelievable economy of effort.
*  Ocean Ramsey, who is, in my opinion, the greatest of all cage exit shark divers,
*  this woman who dove with enormous great white sharks, she really understands their behavior
*  when they're aggressive, when they're not going to be aggressive. She and her husband,
*  Juan, I believe his name is, they understand how the tiger sharks differ from the great white
*  sharks. We were down there basically not understanding any of this. We never should have
*  been there. Actually, the air failure the day before, plus cage ags thing the next day,
*  I told myself after coming up from the cage exit, that's it. I'm no longer taking risks with my
*  life. I want to live. Got back across the border a couple of days later. I was like, that's it. I
*  don't take risks with my life any longer. But yeah, Matt McDougall shot that video and then
*  it went quote unquote viral through Nature is Metal. We passed on that video. Actually,
*  I saw a video where an instructor was explaining how to behave with a shark in the water and that
*  you don't want to be swimming away because then you're acting like a prey. That's right. Then
*  you want to be acting like a predator by looking at it and swimming towards it. Right towards them
*  and they'll bank off. Now, if you don't see them, they're ambush predators. You're swimming in the
*  surface. Apparently, if they get close, you should just guide them away by grabbing them and moving
*  them away. Some people will actually roll them. But if they're coming in full speedy, you're not
*  going to roll the shark. But here we are back to dark stuff again. I like the shark attack map.
*  The shark attack map shows that Northern California, there were a couple, actually a
*  guy's head got taken off. He was swimming north of San Francisco. There's been a couple in Northern
*  California. That was really tragic. But most of them are in Florida and Australia. Florida.
*  The Surf Rider Foundation shark attack map. There it is. They have a great map.
*  There you go. They have all these scars on them. If you zoom in on,
*  I mean, look at this. If you go to North America. Look at skulls.
*  Yeah, where there are deadly attacks. But in Northern California, sadly, this is really tragic.
*  If you zoom in on this one, I read about this. This guy, if you can click the link, 52 year old
*  male, he was in chest high water. This is just tragic. I feel so sad for him and his family.
*  He's just three members of the party chose to go in. Nye was in his chest high water,
*  25 to 50 yards from shore. Great. Breached water seized his head and that was it.
*  It does happen. It's very infrequent. If you don't go in the ocean, there's a very,
*  very, very low probability. But if it doesn't happen six times in a row, 120% chance.
*  Yeah. Who do you think wins? A saltwater crocodile or a shark?
*  Okay. I do not like saltwater crocodiles. They scare me to know. Michael Muller, who
*  dove all over the world, he sent me a picture of him diving with salties, saltwater crocs in Cuba.
*  It was a smaller one, but goodness gracious. Have you seen the size of some of those saltwater
*  crocs? Yeah. I'm thinking the sharks are so agile. They're amazing. They've head cammed one or body
*  cammed one moving through the kelp bed. And you look and it's just, they're so agile moving
*  through the water. And it's looking up at the surface, like the cameras looking at the surface.
*  You just realize if you're out there, you're not, and you're swimming and you get hit by a shark.
*  I was going to talk shit and say that a salty has way more bite force, but according to the internet,
*  recently data indicates that the shark has a stronger bite. So I was assuming that a crocodile
*  would have a stronger bite force and therefore agility doesn't matter, but apparently a shark.
*  Yeah. And turning one of those big salties is probably not that, you know, turning around,
*  it's like a battleship. I mean, those sharks are unbelievable. They hit from all sorts. Oh, and they
*  do this thing. We saw this. You're out of the cage or in the cage and you'll look at one and
*  you'll see its eye kind of like looking at you. They can't really fove it, but they'll look at you
*  and you're tracking it. And then you'll look down and you'll realize that one's coming at you.
*  They're ambush predators. They're working together. It's fascinating.
*  I like how you know that they can't foveate. You're already considering the vision system there.
*  Very primitive. Eyes on the side of the head. Their vision is decent enough. They're mostly,
*  obviously, sensing things with their electro sensing in the water, but also olfaction.
*  Yeah. I spend far too much time thinking about and learning about the visual systems of different
*  animals. If you get me going on this, like we'll be here all night.
*  See, this is what I have the smuggler down to. I saw this in a store and I got it
*  because this is from a shark. Goodness. Yeah. I can't say I ever saw one with teeth this big,
*  but it's beautiful. Yeah. It's probably the only probably your blood pressure just goes and you
*  don't feel a thing. Yeah. Before we went down for the cage exit, a guy in our crew, Pat Dawson,
*  a very experienced diver, asked one of the South African divers,
*  so what's the contingency plan if somebody catches a bite? He was like every man for himself. They're
*  like basically saying if somebody catches a bite, that's it. Anyway, I thought we were going to
*  bring up something happy. Oh, that is happy. Nature is beautiful.
*  Yeah. Nature is beautiful. We lived, but there are happy things. You brought up nature as metal.
*  This is the difference between Russian Americans and Americans. It's like maybe this is actually
*  a good time to bring up your ayahuasca journey. I've never done ayahuasca, but I'm curious about
*  it. I'm also curious about Ibogaine, Iboga, but you told me that you did ayahuasca and that for you,
*  it wasn't the dark, scary ride that it is for everybody else. Yeah. It was an incredible
*  experience for me. I did it twice actually. Have you done high dose psilocybin?
*  Never. No. I just did small dose psilocybin a couple of times. I was nervous about it. I was
*  very scared. Yeah, understandably so. I've done high dose psilocybin. It's terrifying,
*  but I've always gotten something very useful out of it. I was nervous about whatever demons might
*  hide in the shadow and the union shadow. I was nervous, but I think it turns out, I don't know
*  what the lesson is to draw from that, but my experience was- Be born Russian.
*  It must be the Russian thing. There's also something to the jungle. It strips away all
*  the bullshit of life and you're just there. I forgot the outside civilization exists. I forgot
*  time because when you don't have your phone, you don't have meetings or calls or whatever,
*  you lose a sense of time. The sun comes up, the sun comes down.
*  That's the fundamental biological timer. Every mammalian species has a short wavelength. You
*  think blue UV type, but absorbing cone and a longer wavelength absorbing cone. It does this
*  interesting subtraction to designate when it's morning and evening because when the sun is low
*  in the sky, you've got short wavelength and long wavelength light. When you look at a sunrise,
*  it's got blues and yellows, orange and yellows. You look in the evening, reds, orange and blues.
*  In the middle of the day, it's full spectrum light. Now, it's always full spectrum light,
*  but because of some atmospheric elements and because of the low solar angle,
*  that difference between the different wavelengths of light is the fundamental signal that the
*  neurons in your eye pay attention to and signal to your circadian timekeeping mechanism.
*  The core of our brain and the suprachiasmatic nucleus, we are wired to be entrained to the
*  rising and setting of the sun. That's the biological timer, which makes perfect sense because
*  obviously as the planets spin and revolve. I also wonder how that is affected by, in the
*  rainforest, the sun is not visible often. You're under the cover of the trees. Maybe that affects-
*  Well, there are social rhythms, there are feeding rhythms. Sometimes in terms of some species will
*  signal the timing of activity of other species. Yet, getting out from the canopy is critical.
*  Of course, even under the canopy during the daytime, there's far more photons than at night.
*  This is always when I'm telling people to get sunlight in their eyes in the morning and in the
*  evening. People say, there's no light, no sunlight this time here. I'm like, go outside on a really
*  overcast day. It's far brighter than it is at night. There's still lots of sunlight,
*  even if you can't see the sun as an object. I love time perception shifts. You mentioned that in the
*  jungle, it's linked to the rising and setting of the sun. You also mentioned that on Ayahuasca,
*  you zoomed out from the earth. These are to me the most interesting aspects of having a human
*  brain as opposed to another brain. Of course, I've only ever had a human brain, which is that you can
*  consciously set your time domain window. We can be focused here. We can be focused on all of
*  Austin or we can be focused on the entire planet. You can make those choices consciously.
*  In the time domain, it's hard. Different activities bring us into fine slicing or more
*  broad bending of time, depending on what we're doing, programming or exercising or researching
*  or podcasting. Just how unbelievably fluid the human brain is in terms of the aperture of the
*  time space window of our cognition and of our experience. I feel like this is perhaps one of
*  the more valuable tools that we have access to that we don't really leverage as much as we should,
*  which is when things are really hard, you need to zoom out and see it as one element within your
*  whole lifespan and that there's more to come. People commit suicide because they can't see
*  beyond the time domain they're in or they think it's going to go on forever. When we're happy,
*  we rarely think this is going to last forever, which is an interesting contrast in its own right.
*  I think that psychedelics, while I have very little experience with them, I have some. It
*  sounds like they're just a very interesting window into the different apertures.
*  Well, how to surf that wave is probably a skill. One of the things I was prepared for,
*  and I think is important, is not to resist. I think I understand what it means to resist the thing,
*  a powerful wave, and it's not going to be good. You have to be able to surf it. I was ready for
*  that, to relax through it. Maybe because I'm quite good at that from knowing how to relax in
*  all kinds of disciplines, playing piano and guitar when I was super young and then through
*  jiu-jitsu, knowing the value of relaxation and through all kinds of sports, should be able to
*  relax the body fully and just accept whatever happens to you. That process is probably why it
*  was a very positive experience for me. Do you have any interest in Iboga? I'm very interested in
*  Ibogaine Iboga. There's a colleague of mine and researcher at Stanford, Nolan Williams,
*  who's been doing some transcranial magnetic stimulation and brain imaging on people who have
*  taken Ibogaine. Ibogaine, as I understand it, gives a 22-hour psychedelic journey where no
*  hallucinations with eyes open, but you close your eyes and you get a very high-resolution image of
*  actual events that happened in your life, but then you have agency within those movies. I think you
*  have to be of healthy heart to be able to do it. I think you have to be on a heart rate monitor.
*  It's not trivial. It's not like these other psychedelics, but there's a wonderful group
*  called Veterans Solutions that has used Iboga combined with some other psychedelics
*  in the veterans community to great success for things like PTSD. It's a group I've really tried
*  to support in any way that I can, mainly by being vocal about the great work they're doing.
*  You hear incredible stories of people who are near cratered in their life or zombie-ed by PTSD
*  and other things post-war, get back a lightness or achieve a lightness and a clarity
*  that they didn't feel they had. I'm very curious about these compounds. The state of Kentucky,
*  we should check this, but I believe it's taken money from the opioid crisis settlement for
*  Ibogaine research. This is no longer ... Yes, if you look here, let's see. Did they do it? Oh, no.
*  No.
*  Oh, no. They backed away.
*  Kentucky backs away from the plan to fund opioid treatment research.
*  They were going to use the money to treat opioid. Now officials are backing off. 50 billion,
*  what, is on its way over the coming years. $50 billion.
*  $50 billion is on its way to state and local government over the coming years. The pool of
*  funding comes from multiple legal statements with pharmaceutical companies that profited from
*  manufacturing or selling opioid painkillers. Kentucky has some of the highest number of
*  deaths from the opioid. They were going to do psychedelic research with Ibogaine,
*  supporting research on illegal folks, psychedelic drug called Ibogaine. Well,
*  I guess they backed away from it. Well, sooner or later, we'll get some happy news up on the
*  internet during this episode.
*  I don't know what to talk about. The shark and the crocodile fighting.
*  Yeah, yeah, that's true. That's true. And you survived the jungle.
*  I was writing to you on WhatsApp multiple times because I was going to put it on the internet,
*  are you okay? And if you're alive, and then I was going to just put it to Twitter,
*  just like, he's alive. But then of course, you're far too classy for that, so you just came back
*  alive. Well, jungle or not, one of the lessons is also, when you hear the call for adventure,
*  just fucking do it. I was going to ask you, it's kind of a silly question, but like,
*  give me a small fraction of things on your bucket list. Bucket list. Yeah. Go to Mars.
*  Yeah, what's the status of that? I don't know, I'm being patient about the whole thing.
*  Red Planet ran that cartoon of you guys going to Mars. That one was pretty funny.
*  That's true. That was pretty funny. The one with Goggins is already up there.
*  Yeah, that's a funny one. Probably also true. I would love to die on Mars.
*  I just love humanity reaching onto the stars and doing this bold adventure and taking big
*  risks and exploring. I love exploration. What about seeing different animal species? I'm a
*  huge fan of this guy, Joel Sartore, where he has this photo-arc project where he takes portraits
*  of all these different animals. If people aren't already following him on Instagram,
*  he's doing some really important work. This guy's Instagram is amazing.
*  Like portraits of animals. Well, look at these portraits. The amount of,
*  I don't want to say personality because we don't want to project anything onto them, but
*  the eyes. He occasionally put them up moving like this little owl. I delight in things like this.
*  I've got some content coming on animals and animal neuroscience and eyes.
*  Dogs or all kinds of animals? All animals. I'm very interested in
*  kids' content that incorporates animals. We have some things brewing there. I could look at this
*  stuff all day long. Look at that bat. People think bats are just flickering,
*  a little annoying, disease-carrying things, but look how beautiful that little sucker is.
*  How's your podcast with the Cookie Monster going?
*  Oh, yeah. We've been in discussions with Cookie. I can't say too much about that, but Cookie Monster
*  embodies dopamine. Cookie Monster wants Cookie right now. It was that one tweet, Cookie Monster,
*  I bounce because cookies come from all directions. It's just embodying the desire for something,
*  which is an incredible aspect of ourselves. The other one is, you remember a little while ago,
*  Elmo put out a tweet, hey, how's everyone doing out there? It went viral. The surgeon general of
*  the United States had been talking about the loneliness crisis. He came on the podcast.
*  A lot of people have been talking about problems with loneliness, mental health issues with
*  loneliness. Elmo puts out a tweet, hey, how's everyone doing out there? Everyone gravitates
*  toward it. The different Sesame Street characters really embody the different aspects of self through
*  very narrow neural circuit perspective. Snuffleupagus is shy, and Oscar the Grouch,
*  he's grouchy, right? The Count, one, two. The archetypes of, yeah.
*  The archetypes of- It's very Jungian once again.
*  Yeah. I think that the creators of Sesame Street clearly either understand that or it's an
*  unconscious genius to that. Yeah, there are some things brewing on conversations with Sesame Street
*  characters. I know you'd like to talk to Vladimir Putin. I'd like to talk to Cookie Monster. It
*  illustrates the differences in our sophistication or something. It illustrates a lot. Yeah,
*  it illustrates a lot. But yeah, I also love animation. I'm not anime. That's not my thing,
*  but animation. I'm very interested in the use of animation to get science content across. There are
*  a bunch of things brewing. Anyway, I delight in Sartori's work and there's a conservation aspect
*  to it as well. I think that mostly want to thank you for finally putting up something where something
*  is not being killed or some sad outcome. These are all really positive. They're really cool.
*  They're really cool. And every once in a while, look at that mountain lion. But I also like to
*  look at these and some of them remind me of certain people, right? So let's just scroll
*  through. For instance, I think when we don't try and process it too much, so like, okay, look at
*  this cat, this civic cat. Amazing. I feel like this is someone I met once as a young-
*  As a curiosity.
*  Curiosity and a playfulness.
*  Carnivore.
*  Carnivore, frontalized eyes.
*  Found in forced-to-death areas.
*  Right. So then you go down, it's like this beautiful fish.
*  Neon pink.
*  Right. It reminds you of some of the influencers you see on Instagram, right? Except this one's
*  natural. Just kidding. Let's see. No filter.
*  No filter.
*  Yeah. Let's see. I feel like-
*  Bears. I'm a big fan of bears.
*  Yeah. Bears are beautiful. This one kind of reminds me of you a little bit. There's like a stoic
*  nature to it, a curiosity. So you can kind of feel like the essence of animals. You don't even
*  have to do psychedelics to get there.
*  Look at that. He's like the behind the scenes of how it's actually-
*  Yeah. And then there's-
*  Wow.
*  Yeah. Yeah. In the jungle, the diversity of life was also stark.
*  From a scientific perspective, just the fact that most of those species are not identified
*  was fascinating. It was like every little insect is a kind of discovery.
*  Right. I mean, one of the reasons I love New York City so much, despite its problems at times,
*  is that everywhere you look, there's life. It's like a tropical reef. If you've ever done
*  scuba diving or snorkeling, you look on a tropical reef and it's like there's some little crab
*  working on something. And everywhere you look, there's life. In the Bay Area, if you go scuba
*  diving or snorkeling, it's like a kelp bed. The Bay Area is like a kelp bed. Every once in a while,
*  some big fish goes by. It's like a big IPO, but most of the time, not a whole lot happens.
*  Actually, the Bay Area, it's interesting as I've been going back there more and more recently.
*  There are really cool little subcultures starting to pop up again.
*  Nice.
*  There's incredible skateboarding. The GX 1000 guys are these guys that bomb down hills.
*  They're nuts. They're just going-
*  So it's just speed, not tricks.
*  You gotta see GX 1000, these guys going down hills in San Francisco. They are wild.
*  Unfortunately, occasionally someone will get hit by a car, but GX 1000.
*  Look, into intersections. They have spotters. You can see someone there.
*  Oh, I see. There's somebody looking out.
*  Into traffic. Yeah, into traffic.
*  In San Francisco.
*  Yeah, this is crazy. This is unbelievable. They're just wild, but in any case.
*  What's on your bucket list that you haven't done?
*  Well, I'm working on a book. I'm actually going to head to a cabin for a couple weeks and write,
*  which I've never done. People talk about doing this, but I'm going to do that.
*  I'm excited for that. Just the mental space of really dropping into writing.
*  Like Jack Nicholson in The Shining?
*  Let's hope not.
*  Okay.
*  Let's hope not. Before I only started doing public facing anything, posting on Instagram in 2019,
*  but I used to head up to Wallala on the northern coast of California,
*  sometimes by myself, to a little cabin there and spend a weekend by myself and just
*  read and write papers and things like that. I used to do that all the time.
*  I miss that. Some of that, I'm trying to spend a bit more time with my relatives in Argentina,
*  relatives on the east coast. I see my parents more. They're in good health, thankfully.
*  I want to get married and have a family. That's an important priority. I'm putting a lot of work
*  in there. Yeah, that's a big one.
*  Yeah. Yeah. I'm putting a lot of work into the runway on that. What else?
*  What's your advice for people about that? Or give advice to yourself about how to find love in this
*  world, how to build a family and get there. And then I'll listen to it someday and see if I
*  hit the marks. Well, obviously pick the right partner, but also do the work on yourself.
*  Know yourself, the Oracle. Know thyself. Listen, I have a friend. He's a new friend,
*  but he's a friend who I met for a meal. He's a very, very well-known actor overseas. His stuff
*  has made it over here. We become friends. We went to lunch and we were talking about work.
*  Being public facing and all this kind of thing. And then I said, you have kids, right? He says,
*  he has four kids. I was like, oh yeah. I see your posts with the kids. You seem really happy.
*  And he said, he just looked at me, leaned in and he said, it's the best gift you'll ever give
*  yourself. And he also said, and pick your partner, the mother of your kids, very carefully.
*  So that's good advice coming from, excellent advice coming from somebody who's very successful
*  in work and family. So that's the only thing I can pass along. We hear this from friends as well,
*  but kids are amazing and family's amazing. And that's the different people, all these people
*  who want to be immortal and live to be 200 or something. There's also the old fashioned way of
*  having children that live on and evolve a new legacy, but they have half your DNA. So that's
*  exciting. Yeah. I think you make an amazing dad. Thank you. It seems like a fun thing.
*  And I've also gotten advice from friends who are super high performing and have a lot of kids.
*  They'll say, just don't overthink it. Start having kids. Let's go. Right. Well, the chaos of kids is
*  it can either bury you or it can give you energy. But I grew up in a big pack of boys, always doing
*  wild and crazy things. And so that kind of energy is great. And if it's not a big pack of wild boys,
*  it's, you know, you have daughters and they can be, you know, different form of chaos,
*  sometimes same form of chaos. How many kids do you think you want?
*  You know, it's either two or five. Yeah. Very different dynamics. You're one of two,
*  right? Yeah. I mean, I'm very close with my sister. I couldn't imagine having another sibling because
*  there's so much richness there. We talk almost every day. You know, three, four times a week,
*  you know, sometimes just briefly, but we're tight. You know, we're really look out for one another.
*  She's amazing person, like truly an amazing person and has like raised her daughter in an amazing way.
*  She's like, you know, my niece is like going to head to college in a year or two. And like my
*  sister's done an amazing job and her dad's done a great job too. They both really put a lot into
*  the family aspect. And she has to spend time with a really amazing person in Peru, in the Amazon
*  jungle. And he is one of 20 kids. Wow. So he's got, it's mostly guys. So it's just a lot of
*  brothers and I think two sisters. Wow. I just had Jonathan Height on the podcast, the guy who's
*  anxious generation, coddling in the American mind. He's great. But he was saying that, you know,
*  in order to keep kids healthy, they need to not be on social media or have smartphones until they're
*  16. I've actually been thinking a lot about getting a bunch of friends onto neighboring properties.
*  You know, everyone talks about this, not creating a commune or anything like that. But I think he,
*  I think Jonathan's right. We were more or less our brain wiring does best when we raised in small
*  village type environments where kids can forage the whole free range kids idea. And I grew up
*  skateboarding and building forts and dirt clod wars and all that stuff. It would be so strange
*  to have a childhood without that. Yeah. And I think more and more as we wake up to the negative
*  aspects of the digital interaction, we'll put more and more value to in-person interaction.
*  So I mean, it's cool to see, for instance, kids in New York City, just kind of moving around the
*  city with so much sense of agency. It's really, really cool. The suburbs, like where I grew up,
*  like as soon as we could get out, take the 7F bus up to San Francisco and hang out with, you know,
*  wild ones like that, you know, while there were dangers, I mean, we couldn't wait to get out of
*  the suburbs. The moment that, you know, forts and dirt clod wars and stuff didn't cut it, we just
*  like wanted into the city. So bucket list, I will probably move to a major city, not Los Angeles or
*  San Francisco in the next few years, New York City, potentially. There's all such different
*  flavors of experiences. Yeah. So I'd love to live in New York City for a while. I've always wanted
*  to do that and I will do that. I've always wanted to also have a place in a very rural area. So
*  Colorado, Montana are high on my list right now. And to be able to pivot back and forth between the
*  two would be great just for such different experiences. And also I like a very physical
*  life. So the idea of getting up in the sun, with the sun in the Montana or Colorado type environment.
*  And I've been doing some, putting some effort towards finding a spot for that. And New York
*  City to me, I know it's got its issues and people say it wasn't what it was. Okay, I get it. But
*  listen, I've never lived there. So for me, it would be entirely new. And, you know,
*  Schull seems full of life. There is an energy to that city and he represents that. I mean,
*  and the full diversity of weird that is represented in New York City is great.
*  Yeah, you walk down this street, there's like a person with like a cat on their head and no
*  one gives a shit. Yeah, that's great. San Francisco used to be like that. The joke was like,
*  you have to be naked and on fire in San Francisco before someone takes it. But now it's changed.
*  But again, recently I've noticed that San Francisco, it's not just about the skateboarders.
*  There's some community houses of people in tech that are super interesting. There's some community
*  housing of people not in tech that I've learned about and been known people have lived there.
*  And it's cool. Like there's stuff happening in these cities that's new and different. I mean,
*  that's what youth is for. They're supposed to evolve things out.
*  So amidst all that, you still have to get shit done. I've been really
*  obsessed with tracking time recently, like making sure I have daily activities,
*  I have habits that I'm maintaining and I'm very religious about making sure I get shit done.
*  Do you use an app or something like that? No, just Google Sheets. So basically a spreadsheet
*  and I'm tracking daily and I write scripts that whenever I achieve a goal, it glows green.
*  Yeah. Do you track your workouts and all that kind of stuff too?
*  No, just the fact that I got the workout done. So it's a checkmark thing. So I'm really, really big
*  on making sure I do a thing. It doesn't matter how long it is. So I have a rule for myself that I
*  do a set of tasks for at least five minutes every day. And it turns out that many of them I do way
*  longer, but just even just doing it. I have to do it every day. And there's currently 11 of them.
*  And it's just the thing. Like one of them is playing guitar, for example.
*  So do you do that kind of stuff? Do you do like daily habits?
*  Yeah, I do. I wake up if I don't feel I slept enough. I do this non-sleep,
*  depressed, yoga, nidra thing that I've talked about a bunch. We actually released a few of
*  those tracks as audio tracks on Spotify. 10 minute, 20 minute ones puts me back into a state that
*  feels like sleep and I feel very rested. Actually, Matt Walker and I are going to run a study.
*  He just submitted the IRB to run a study on NSDR and what it's actually doing to the brain.
*  There's some evidence of increases in dopamine, et cetera, but those are older studies, still
*  cool studies. But so I'll do that, get up, hydrate. And if I've got my act together,
*  I punch some caffeine down, like some Matina, some coffee, maybe another Matina and resistance
*  train three days a week, run three days a week, and then take one day off. And like to be done
*  by 839. And then I want to get into some real work. I actually have a sticky note on my computer.
*  It's like just like reminding me how good it feels to accomplish some real work. And then I go
*  into it right now. It's the book writing, researching a podcast and just fight tooth and
*  nail to stay off social media, text message, WhatsApp, YouTube, all that. Get something done.
*  How long can you go? Can you go like three hours, just deep focus?
*  If I hit a groove, yeah, 90 minutes to three hours, if I'm really in a groove.
*  For me, I start the day actually. That's why I'm afraid I'd really prize that
*  those morning hours. I start with the work and I'm trying to hit the four-hour mark of deep focus.
*  Great. I love it.
*  Then it often can.
*  Some important things.
*  Yeah. I'm really, really big believer. It's often torture, actually. It's really,
*  really difficult.
*  Oh yeah. The agitation. But I've sat across the table from you a couple of years ago when I was
*  out here in Austin doing some work and I was working on stuff. And I noticed you just like
*  stare at your notebook sometimes, just like pen at the same position and then you'll get back into it.
*  Like there are those moments you're building that hydraulic pressure and then go. Yeah. I try and
*  get something done of value. Then the communications start and talking to my podcast producer,
*  my team is everything. I mean, the magic potion in the podcast is Rob Moore, right?
*  Who's been in the room with me every single solo. Costello used to be in there with us because that's
*  it. People have asked, journalists have asked, can they sit in? Friends have asked. Nope, just Rob.
*  For guest interviews, he's there as well. I talk to Rob all the time. All the time. We talk
*  multiple times per day. In life, I've made some errors in certain relationship domains in my life
*  in terms of partner choice and things like that. And certainly don't blame all of it on them,
*  but I played my role. But in terms of picking business partners and friends to work with,
*  I mean, Rob, it's been bullseyes and it's just Rob has been amazing. Mike Blavak, our photographer
*  and the guys I mentioned earlier, we just communicate as much as we need to. And we
*  pour over every decision near neuroticism before we put anything out there.
*  So you included even creative decisions of topics to cover all that.
*  Yeah. Like a photo for the book jacket the other day, Mike shoots photos. And then we look at them,
*  we pour over them together. Logo for the Perform Podcast with Andy Galpin that we're launching,
*  is that the right contour? Mike's got the aesthetic thing because he was at DC so long as a
*  portrait photographer and his cube was close friends with Ken Block, Jim Conner, all the car
*  jumping in the city stuff. I mean, Mike is a master. He's a true master of that stuff.
*  And we just pour over every little decision. But even with sponsors,
*  there are dozens of ads now. By the way, that whole jazzer sizer thing of me saying,
*  a guy went from a two to a seven. I never said that. That's AI. I would never call
*  number off somebody a two to a seven. Are you kidding me? It's crazy. So is AI. If you bought
*  the thing, I'm sorry. But like our sponsors, we list the sponsors that we have and why on our
*  website. And like the decision, do we work with this person or not? Do we still like the product?
*  I mean, we've got ways with sponsors because of changes in the product. Most of the time it's
*  amicable, all good. But every detail and that just takes a ton of time and energy.
*  But I try and work mostly on content and my team is constantly trying to keep me out of the other
*  discussions because I obsess. But yeah, you have to have a team of some sort, someone that you can
*  run things by. For sure. But one of the challenges, the larger the team is, and I'd like to be involved
*  in a lot of different kinds of stuff, including engineering stuff, robotics work, research,
*  all of those interactions, at least for me, take away from the deep work, the deep focus.
*  Unfortunately, I get drained by social interaction, even with the people I love and really respect and
*  all that kind of stuff. You're an introvert. Yeah, like fundamentally an introvert. So
*  to me, it's a trade off getting shit done versus collaborating. And I have to choose wisely because
*  without collaboration, without a great team, which I'm fortunate enough to be a part of,
*  you wouldn't get anything really done. But as an individual contributor to get stuff done,
*  like to do the hard work of researching or programming, all that kind of stuff,
*  you need the hours of deep work. I used to spend a lot more time alone. That's on my bucket list,
*  spend a bit more time dropped into work alone. I think social media causes our brain to go the
*  other direction. I try and answer some comments and then get back to work. I'm really, after
*  going to the jungle, I appreciate not using the device. I play with the idea of spending
*  certainly maybe like one week a month, not using social media at all. I used it. So after that
*  morning block, I'll eat some lunch and I'll usually do something while I'm doing lunch or something.
*  And then a bit more work and that real work, deep work. And then round 230, I do a non-sleep
*  deep rest, take a short nap, wake up, boom, maybe a little more caffeine and then lean into it
*  again. And then I find if you've really put in the deep work, two or three bouts per day by about
*  five or six PM, it's over. I was down at Jaco's place not that long ago and in the evening did a
*  sauna session with him and some family members of his and some of their friends. And it's really
*  cool. They all work all day and train all day. And then in the evening they get together and they
*  sauna and cold plunge. I'm really into this whole thing of gathering with other people
*  at a specific time of day. I have a gym at my house and Tim will come over and train.
*  We've kind of slowed that down in recent months, but I think gathering in groups once a day,
*  being alone for part of the day, it's like very fundamental stuff. We're not saying anything that
*  hasn't been said millions of times before, but how often do people actually do that?
*  And call the party, be the person to bring people together if it's not happening. That's something
*  I've really had to learn even though I'm an introvert. Gather people together. You came
*  through town the other day and there's a lot of people at the house. It was Brad. Actually,
*  it was Wayne because I was getting a massage when you walked in. I don't sit around getting massages
*  very often, but I was getting one that day. And then everyone came in and the dog came in and
*  everyone was piled in. It was very sweet. Again, no devices, but choose wisely the people
*  you gather with. And I was clothed. Thank you for clarifying. I wasn't, which is very weird.
*  Yeah, the friends you surround yourself with. That's another thing. I understood that from
*  Ayahuasca and from just the experience in the jungle is just select the people. Just be careful
*  how you allocate your time. I just saw on somewhere, Conor McGregor has this good line.
*  I wrote it down about loyalty. He said, don't eat with people you wouldn't starve with.
*  That guy's, I mean, he's big on loyalty. All the shit talk, all of that, set that aside. To me,
*  loyalty is really big because then if you invest in certain people in your life and they stick by
*  you and you stick by them and what else is life about? Yeah. Well, hardship will show you who your
*  real friends are. That's for sure. And we're fortunate to have a lot of them. It'll also
*  show you who really has put in the time to try and understand you and understand people.
*  People are complicated. I love that. So can you read the quote once more?
*  Don't eat with people you wouldn't starve with.
*  Yeah. So in that way, a hardship is a gift.
*  It shows you. Definitely. And it makes you stronger. It definitely makes you stronger.
*  Let's go get some food. Yeah. You're one meal a day guy. I actually ate something earlier,
*  but it was like a protein shake and a couple pieces of biltong. I hope we're eating a steak.
*  I hope so too. I'm full of nicotine and caffeine.
*  Yeah. What do you think? How do you feel? I feel good.
*  Yeah. I was thinking you'd probably like it. I only did a half a piece
*  and I won't have more for a little while, but a little too good.
*  Yeah. Thank you for talking once again, brother.
*  Yeah. Thanks so much, Lex. It's been a great ride, this podcast thing. And you're the reason I
*  started the podcast. You inspired me to do it. You told me to do it. I did it. And you've also been
*  an amazing friend. You showed up in some very challenging times and you've shown up for me
*  publicly. You've shown up for me in my home, in my life. And it's an honor to have you as a friend.
*  Thank you. I love you, brother. Love you too.
*  Thanks for listening to this conversation with Andrew Huberman. To support this podcast,
*  please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from
*  Carl Jung. Until you make the unconscious conscious, it will direct your life and you
*  will call it fate. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
