---
Date Generated: October 22, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 9182s
Video Keywords: ['Graham Hancock', 'alex friedman', 'lex ai', 'lex debate', 'lex freedman', 'lex fridman', 'lex friedman', 'lex interview', 'lex lecture', 'lex mit', 'lex podcast', 'lex transcript']
Video Views: 1515229
Video Rating: None
Video Description: Graham Hancock a journalist and author who for over 30 years has explored the controversial possibility that there existed a lost civilization during the last Ice Age, and that it was destroyed in a global cataclysm some 12,000 years ago. He is the presenter of the Netflix documentary series "Ancient Apocalypse", the 2nd season of which has just been released.
Thank you for listening ❤ Check out our sponsors: https://lexfridman.com/sponsors/ep449-sb
See below for timestamps, transcript, and to give feedback, submit questions, contact Lex, etc.

*Transcript:*
https://lexfridman.com/graham-hancock-transcript

*CONTACT LEX:*
*Feedback* - give feedback to Lex: https://lexfridman.com/survey
*AMA* - submit questions, videos or call-in: https://lexfridman.com/ama
*Hiring* - join our team: https://lexfridman.com/hiring
*Other* - other ways to get in touch: https://lexfridman.com/contact

*EPISODE LINKS:*
Graham's Website: https://grahamhancock.com/
Ancient Apocalypse (Season 2): https://netflix.com/title/81211003
Graham's YouTube: https://youtube.com/GrahamHancockDotCom
Graham's X: https://x.com/Graham__Hancock
Graham's Facebook: https://facebook.com/Author.GrahamHancock
Fingerprints of the Gods (book): https://amzn.to/4eM3QXC

*SPONSORS:*
To support this podcast, check out our sponsors & get discounts:
*Notion:* Note-taking and team collaboration.
Go to https://lexfridman.com/s/notion-ep449-sb
*Riverside:* Platform for recording podcasts and videos from everywhere.
Go to https://lexfridman.com/s/riverside-ep449-sb
*LMNT:* Zero-sugar electrolyte drink mix.
Go to https://lexfridman.com/s/lmnt-ep449-sb
*Shopify:* Sell stuff online.
Go to https://lexfridman.com/s/shopify-ep449-sb
*BetterHelp:* Online therapy and counseling.
Go to https://lexfridman.com/s/betterhelp-ep449-sb

*OUTLINE:*
0:00 - Introduction
1:34 - Lost Ice Age civilization
8:39 - Göbekli Tepe
20:43 - Early humans
25:43 - Astronomical symbolism
37:11 - Younger Dryas impact hypothesis
55:31 - The Great Pyramid and the Sphinx of Giza
1:16:04 - Sahara Desert and the Amazon rainforest
1:25:25 - Response to critics
1:49:31 - Panspermia
1:56:58 - Shamanism
2:20:58 - How the Great Pyramid was built
2:28:17 - Mortality

*PODCAST LINKS:*
- Podcast Website: https://lexfridman.com/podcast
- Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/2lwqZIr
- Spotify: https://spoti.fi/2nEwCF8
- RSS: https://lexfridman.com/feed/podcast/
- Podcast Playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLrAXtmErZgOdP_8GztsuKi9nrraNbKKp4
- Clips Channel: https://www.youtube.com/lexclips

*SOCIAL LINKS:*
- X: https://x.com/lexfridman
- Instagram: https://instagram.com/lexfridman
- TikTok: https://tiktok.com/@lexfridman
- LinkedIn: https://linkedin.com/in/lexfridman
- Facebook: https://facebook.com/lexfridman
- Patreon: https://patreon.com/lexfridman
- Telegram: https://t.me/lexfridman
- Reddit: https://reddit.com/r/lexfridman
---

# Graham Hancock Lost Civilization of the Ice Age & Ancient Human History  Lex Fridman Podcast #449
**Lex Fridman:** [October 16, 2024](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NMHiLvirCb0)
*  The big question for me in that timeline is why didn't we do it sooner? Why did it take so long?
*  Why did we wait until after 12,000 years ago, really after 10,000 years ago, to start seeing
*  the beginnings of civilization? The following is a conversation with Graham Hancock, a journalist
*  and author who for over 30 years has explored the controversial possibility that there existed a
*  lost civilization during the last ice age and that it was destroyed in a global cataclysm some
*  12,000 years ago. He is the presenter of the Netflix documentary series Ancient Apocalypse,
*  the second season of which has just been released, and it's focused on the distant past of the
*  Americas, a topic I recently discussed with the archaeologist Ed Barnhart. Let me say that Ed
*  represents the kind of archaeologist, scholar, I love talking to on the podcast, extremely
*  knowledgeable, humble, open-minded, and respectful in disagreement. I'll do many more podcasts on
*  history, including ancient history. Our distant past is full of mysteries, and I find it truly
*  exciting to explore those mysteries with people both on the inside and the outside of the mainstream
*  and the various disciplines involved. This is the Lex Friedman podcast. To support it,
*  please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, dear friends, here's Graham Hancock.
*  Let's start with a big foundational idea that you have about human history,
*  that there was an advanced ice age civilization that came before and perhaps seeded what people
*  now call the six cradles of civilization, Mesopotamia, Egypt, India, China, Andes,
*  and Mesoamerica. So let's talk about this idea that you have. Can you at the highest possible
*  level describe it? It would be better to describe it as a foundational sense of puzzlement and
*  incompleteness in the story that we are taught about our past, which envisages more or less,
*  there have been a few ups and downs, but more or less straightforward evolutionary progress.
*  We start out as hunter-foragers, then we become agriculturalists. The hunter-forager phase could
*  go back hundreds of thousands of years. I mean, this is where it's also important to mention that
*  anatomically modern humans, and we're not the only humans. We had Neanderthals from, I don't know,
*  400,000 years ago to about 40,000 years ago. They were certainly human because anatomically
*  modern humans interbred with them and we carry Neanderthal genes. There were the Denisovans,
*  maybe 300,000 to perhaps even as recently as 30,000 years ago. And again, interbreeding took place.
*  They're obviously a human species. So, you know, we've got this background of humans who didn't
*  look quite like us. And then we have anatomically modern humans. And I think the earliest
*  anatomically modern human skeletal remains are from Jebel Irhoud in Morocco and date to about
*  310,000 years ago. So, the question is, what were our ancestors doing after that? And I think we
*  can include the Neanderthals and the Denisovans in that general picture. And why did it take
*  so long? This is one of the puzzles, one of the questions that bother me. Why did it take so long
*  when we have creatures who are physically identical to us? We cannot actually weigh and measure their
*  brains, but from the work that's been done on the crania, it looks like they had the same brains
*  that we do with the same wiring. So, if we've been around for 300,000 plus years at least,
*  and if ultimately in our future was the process to create civilization or civilizations,
*  why didn't it happen sooner? Why did it take so long? Why was it such a long time?
*  Even the story of anatomically modern humans has kept on changing. I remember a time when it was
*  said that there hadn't been anatomically modern humans before 50,000 years ago.
*  And then it became 196,000 years ago with the findings in Ethiopia, and then 310,000 years ago.
*  There's a lot of missing pieces in the puzzle there. But the big question for me in that
*  timeline is why didn't we do it sooner? Why did it take so long? Why do we wait until after 12,000
*  years ago, really after 10,000 years ago, to start seeing the beginnings, what are selected as the
*  beginnings of civilization in places like Turkey, for example? And then there's a relatively slow
*  process of adopting agriculture, and by 6,000 years ago, we see ancient Sumer emerging as a
*  civilization. And we're then in the pre-dynastic period in ancient Egypt as well, 6,000 years ago,
*  beginning to see definite signs of what will become the dynastic civilization of Egypt
*  about 5,000 years ago. And interestingly, round about the same time, you have the Indus Valley
*  civilization popping up out of nowhere. And by the way, the Indus Valley civilization
*  was a lost civilization until the 1920s, when railway workers accidentally stumbled
*  across some ruins. I've been to Harappa and Mohenjo-daro, and these are extraordinarily
*  beautifully centrally planned cities. Clearly, they're the work of an already sophisticated
*  civilization. One of the things that strikes me about the Indus Valley civilization is that we
*  find a steatite seal of an individual seated in a recognizable yoga posture. And that seal is 5,000
*  years old. And the yoga posture is mula bandhasana, which involves a real contortion of the ankles and
*  twisting the feet back. It's an advanced yoga posture. So there it is 5,000 years ago. And that
*  then raises the question, well, how long did yoga take to get to that place when it was already
*  so advanced 5,000 years ago? What's the background to this? China, the Yellow River civilization.
*  Again, it's around about the same period, 5,000 to 6,000 years ago, you get these first signs
*  of something happening. So it's very odd that all around the world, we have this sudden upsurge of
*  civilization about 6,000 years ago, preceded by what seems like a natural evolutionary process
*  that would lead to a civilization. And yet, certain ideas being carried down and manifested
*  and expressed in many of these different civilizations. I just find that whole idea
*  very puzzling and very disturbing. Especially when I look at this radical break that takes place in
*  not just the human story, but the story of all life on earth, which was the last great
*  cataclysm that the earth went through, which was the Younger Dryas event. It was an extinction level
*  event. That's when all the great megafauna of the ice age went extinct. It's after that,
*  event that we start seeing this, what are taken to be the beginnings of the first gradual steps
*  towards civilization. We come out of the upper Paleolithic as it's defined, the end of the old
*  Stone Age and into the Neolithic. And that's when the wheels are supposedly set in motion to start
*  civilization rolling. But what happened before that? And why did that suddenly happen then?
*  And I can't help feeling, and I've felt this for a very long while, that there are major missing
*  pieces in our story. It's often said that I'm claiming to have proved that there was an advanced
*  lost civilization in the ice age. And I am not claiming to have proved that. That is a hypothesis
*  that I am putting forward to answer some of the questions that I have about prehistory.
*  I think it's worthwhile to inquire into those possibilities because the Younger Dryas event was
*  a massive global cataclysm, whatever caused it. And it's strange that just after it,
*  we start seeing these first signs. So the current understanding in mainstream archaeology
*  is that after the Younger Dryas is when the civilizations popped up in different places
*  of the globe with a lot of similarities, but they popped up independently.
*  Yeah, independently and by coincidence. And by coincidence, those big civilizations that we all
*  remember as the first civilizations, Sumer, Egypt, the Indus Valley Civilization, China,
*  they all pop up at pretty much the same time. That is the mainstream view.
*  And they don't just pop up, they kind of build up gradually. First, there's some settlements.
*  Oh, definitely, yes.
*  And then there's different dynamics of how they build up and the role of agriculture and that is
*  also not obvious, but it's just, there's a first a kind of settlement, a stabilization of where the
*  people are living, then they start using agriculture, then they start getting urban centers and that kind
*  of stuff.
*  It seems like an entirely reasonable argument. Everything about that makes sense. There is no
*  doubt that you're seeing evolutionary progress, social evolution taking place in those thousands
*  of years before Sumer emerges. But what's happening now, really, I spent much of the
*  90s and the late 1980s investigating this issue of a lost civilization. I wrote a series of books
*  about it, but by 2002, when I published a book called Underworld, which was the most massive and
*  most heavy book that I've ever written because I was writing very defensively at the time.
*  By the time I finished that book, my wife, Santa and I spent seven years scuba diving all
*  around the world looking for structures underwater often led by local fishermen or local divers
*  to anomalies that they'd seen underwater. By the time that book was finished, I thought,
*  actually, I've done this story. I've walked the walk. I really don't have much more to say about
*  it. And I turned in another direction and I wrote a book called Supernatural Meetings with the
*  Ancient Teachers of Mankind recently retitled Visionary. And that was about the role of,
*  fundamentally, about the role of psychedelics in the evolution of human culture. And I didn't think
*  that I would go back to the lost civilization issue. But Gobekli Tepe in Turkey kept on forcing
*  itself upon me. The more and more discoveries there, the 11,600 year date from enclosure D,
*  which has the two largest megalithic pillars. And I reached a point where I realized I have to get
*  back in, I have to get back in the water. And I have to investigate this again. And Gobekli Tepe
*  was a game changer. But I think it's a game changer for everything. Because Gobekli Tepe,
*  the extraordinary nature of it, we're looking at a major megalithic site, which is at least
*  five and a half thousand years older than, say, Gigantia in Malta, which was previously considered
*  to be the oldest megalithic site in the world. And this led, of course, to a huge amount of interest
*  and attention, both from the Turkish government, who see the potential, tourism potential of having
*  the world's oldest megalithic site, and from archaeologists. And this in turn has led to
*  exploration and excavation throughout the region. And what they're finding throughout that whole
*  region around Gobekli Tepe, and going down into Syria and further down into the Jordan Valley,
*  as far as Jericho, and even across a bit of the Mediterranean into Cyprus, is what Turkish
*  archaeologists are now calling the Tas-Tepeler civilization. They're calling it a civilization,
*  the Stone Hills civilization, with very definite identifying characteristics, semi-subterranean
*  circular structures, the use of T-shaped megalithic pillars, sometimes not anywhere near as big as
*  those at Gobekli Tepe. It's clear that Gobekli Tepe now was not the beginning of this process,
*  it was actually, in a way, the end of this process. It was the summation of everything that that
*  Stone Hills civilization had achieved. But what is becoming clear is that this is a period
*  between, before the foundation of Gobekli Tepe, as far as we know, that date of 11,600 years ago,
*  is the oldest date for Gobekli Tepe. But of course, there's a lot of Gobekli Tepe still
*  underground, so we can't say for sure that that's the oldest, but it's the oldest so far
*  excavated. What we're seeing is that in that whole region around there, something was in motion,
*  and it began to go into motion round about the beginning of the Younger Dryas. And this is where
*  these two dates are really important. The Younger Dryas, I'll round the figures off, begins around
*  12,800 years ago, and it ends around 11,600 years ago. So Gobekli Tepe's construction date, if it is
*  11,600 years ago, if they don't find older materials, marks the end of the Younger Dryas.
*  But the beginning of the Younger Dryas, we're already seeing the stirrings of the kind of
*  culture that manifests in full form at Gobekli Tepe. And after the construction of Gobekli Tepe,
*  in fact, even during the construction of Gobekli Tepe, we see agriculture beginning to be adopted.
*  The people who created Gobekli Tepe were all hunter-foragers at the beginning. But by the time
*  Gobekli Tepe was finished, and it was definitely deliberately finished, closed off, closed down,
*  deliberately buried, covered with earth, covered with rubble, and then topped off with a hill,
*  which is why Gobekli Tepe is called what it is. Gobekli Tepe means pot-bellied hill,
*  or the hill of the navel. For a long time, Gobekli Tepe was thought to be just a hill
*  that looked a bit like a pot belly. Can you say how it was discovered? I think this is one of the
*  most fascinating things on earth, period. So maybe can you say what it is and how it was discovered?
*  Well, Gobekli Tepe is, first of all, the oldest fully elaborated megalithic site that we know of
*  anywhere in the world. It doesn't mean the older ones won't be found, but it is the oldest so far
*  found. The part of the site that's been excavated, which is a tiny percentage of the whole site,
*  we do know. My first visit to Gobekli Tepe was in 2013, and Dr. Klaus Schmidt, the late Dr. Klaus
*  Schmidt, who died a year later, was very generous to me and showed me around the site for over a
*  period of three days. He explained to me that they've already used ground penetrating radar
*  on the site, and they know that there's much more Gobekli Tepe still underground. So anything is
*  possible in terms of the dating of Gobekli Tepe. But what we have at the moment is a series of
*  almost circular, but not quite circular enclosures, which are walled with relatively
*  small stones. And then inside them, you have pairs of megalithic pillars. And the archetypal
*  part of that site is enclosure D, which contains the two largest upright megaliths,
*  about 18 feet tall, and reckoned to weigh somewhere in the range of 20 tons, if I have
*  my memory correct. They're substantial, hefty pieces of stone. It isn't some kind of
*  extraordinary feat to create a 20 foot tall or 20 ton megalith, nor is it an extraordinary feat
*  to move it. There's nothing magical or really weird about that. Human beings can do that,
*  and always have. Besides, the quarry for the megaliths is right there. It's within 200 meters
*  of the main enclosures. So that's not a mystery. But the mystery is why suddenly this new form
*  of architecture, these massive megalithic pillars appear. And the pillars, one of the things that
*  interests me about the pillars is their alignment. And there is good work that's been done, which
*  suggests that enclosure D aligns to the rising of the star Sirius. And the rising points of the star
*  Sirius appear to be mapped by the other enclosures, which are all oriented in slightly
*  different directions. It was the work entirely of hunter-foragers. But by the time Gobekli Tepe was
*  completed, agriculture was being introduced and was taking place there. Now you asked how Gobekli
*  Tepe was found. The answer to that is that there was a survey of that pot-bellied hill in the 1960s
*  by some American archaeologists. And they were looking, absolutely looking for stone age material,
*  for material from the Paleolithic. And they had found some Paleolithic flints, upper Paleolithic
*  flints around there. So it looked like a good place to look. But then they noticed sticking out
*  of the side of the hill, some very finely cut stone, bits of very large and very finely cut
*  stone. And looking at that, the workmanship was so good that those archaeologists were confident
*  that it had nothing to do with the stone age. And they thought they were looking at perhaps some
*  Byzantine remains. And they abandoned the site and never looked at it further. And it wasn't until
*  the German Archaeological Institute got involved, and particularly Klaus Schmidt, who I think was a
*  genius, had real insight into this and started to dig at Gobekli Tepe that they realized what they'd
*  found, that they'd found potentially the oldest megalithic site in the world. And they'd found it
*  at a place where agriculture, according to the established historical timeline, that's where
*  agriculture at any rate in Europe and Western Asia begins. It begins in Anatolia in Turkey,
*  and then it gradually disseminates westward from there. And yet the understanding is
*  it was created by hunter-gatherers. It was created by hunter-gatherers, yeah. There was no agriculture
*  11,600 years ago in Gobekli Tepe. But by the time Gobekli Tepe was decommissioned, and I use that
*  word deliberately, was closed down and buried, agriculture was all around it. And this was
*  agriculture of people who knew how to cultivate plants. Do we have an understanding when it was
*  turned into a, if I could say, a time capsule, so protected by forming a mound around it? Yes.
*  Is it around that similar time? It stood from roughly 11,600 years ago to about 10,400 years
*  ago to about 8,400 BC. So around 1,200 years, it was there, and it continued to be elaborated
*  as a site. And while it was being elaborated as a site, we see agriculture, I'm going to use the
*  word being introduced. There'd been no sign of it before, and suddenly it's there. And to me,
*  that's another of the mysteries about Gobekli Tepe. And then with the new work that's being
*  done, we realized that it's part of a much wider phenomenon, which it spreads across an
*  enormous distance. And the puzzling thing is that after Gobekli Tepe, there almost seems to be a
*  decline. Things fall down again, and then we enter this long, slow process of the Neolithic,
*  thousands of years, gradual developments until we come to ancient Sumer and Mesopotamia. But
*  agriculture has taken a firm route by then. Actually, one other thing, I'll just say this
*  in passing. When I talk about a lost civilization introducing ideas to people, I'm often accused of
*  stealing credit from the indigenous people who had those ideas in the first place. So I do find it
*  slightly hypocritical that archaeology fully accepts that the idea of agriculture was
*  introduced to Western Europe from Turkey, and that Western Europeans didn't invent agriculture. It was
*  absolutely introduced by Anatolian farmers who traveled west. So the notion of dissemination
*  of ideas perhaps shouldn't be so annoying to archaeologists as it is.
*  And perhaps we should also state, if we look at the entirety of history of hominids,
*  humans or hominids have been explorers. I didn't even know this when I was preparing for this.
*  Looking at Homo erectus, 1.9 million years ago, almost right away, they spread out through the
*  whole world. And homo sapiens evolved from them. And we should also mention, since we're talking
*  about controversial debates going on, as I understand, there's still debates about
*  the dynamics of all that was going on there, like we mentioned in Africa.
*  I think the current understanding, we didn't come from one particular point of Africa,
*  that there's multiple locations. This is the out of Africa theory. I think it's more than a theory.
*  It's really strongly evidenced. Why? Because we're part of the great ape family, and it's
*  an African family. There's no doubt that human beings, our deep origins are in Africa. But then
*  there, as you rightly say, there were these very early migrations out of Africa by species that
*  are likely ancestral to anatomically modern humans, including definitely Homo erectus and
*  astonishingly distant travels that they undertook. Yes, I think there is an urge to explore
*  in all of humanity. I think there is an urge to find out what's around the next corner,
*  what's over the brow of the next hill. And I think that goes very deep into human character.
*  And I think it was being manifested in those early adventures of people who left Africa and
*  traveled all around the world. And then settling in different parts of the world, I think a lot of
*  anatomically modern human evolution took place outside Africa as well, not only in Africa.
*  So I guess the general puzzlement that you're filled with is given that these creatures
*  explore and spread and try out different environments, why did it take
*  hundreds of thousands of years for them to develop complicated society settlements?
*  That's the first big question. Why did it take so long? And that raises in my mind
*  a hypothesis, a possibility. Maybe it didn't take so long. Maybe things were happening that we haven't
*  yet got hold of in the archaeological record, which await to be discovered. And of course,
*  there are huge parts of the world that have not been studied at all by archaeology. But the fact
*  that huge parts of the world have not been studied at all by archaeology is not on its own enough to
*  suggest that we're missing a chapter in the human story. The reason that I come to that isn't only
*  puzzlement about that 300,000 year gap. It's also to do with the fact that there's common
*  iconography, there's common myths and traditions, and there's common spiritual ideas that are found
*  all around the world. And they're found amongst cultures that are geographically
*  distant from one another and that are also distant from one another in time. They don't
*  necessarily occur at the same time. And this is where I think that archaeology is perhaps
*  desperately needing a history of ideas as well as just a history of things, because an idea
*  can manifest again and again throughout the human story. So there are particular issues.
*  For example, the notion of the afterlife destiny of the soul, what happens to us when we die.
*  And believe me, when you reach my age, that's something you do think about,
*  what happens. I used to feel immortal when I was in my 40s, but now that I'm 74,
*  I definitely know that I'm not. Well, it would be natural for human beings all around the world to
*  have that same feeling, that same idea. But why would they all decide that what happens to the
*  soul after death is that it makes a leap to the heavens, to the Milky Way, that it makes a journey
*  along the Milky Way, that there it is confronted by challenges, by monsters, by closed gates.
*  The course of the life that that person has lived will determine their destiny in that afterlife
*  journey. And this idea, the path of souls, the Milky Way is called the path of souls. It's
*  very strongly found in the Americas, right from South America through Mexico, through into North
*  America, but it's also found in ancient Egypt, in ancient India, in ancient Mesopotamia, the same
*  idea. And I don't feel that that can be a coincidence. I feel that what we're looking at is
*  an inheritance of an idea, a legacy that's been passed down from a remote common source to
*  cultures all around the world, and then has taken on a life of its own within those cultures.
*  So the remote common source would explain both the similarities and the differences
*  in the expression of these ideas. The other thing, very puzzling thing, is
*  this sequence of numbers that are a result of the precession of the equinoxes. At least,
*  I think that's the best theory to explain them. Here, I think it's important to
*  pay tribute to the work of Giorgio de Santillana and Hertha von Deschend. Giorgio de Santillana
*  was professor of history of science actually at MIT, where you're based, back in the 60s.
*  And Hertha von Deschend was professor of the history of science at Frankfurt University.
*  And they wrote an immense book in the 1960s called Hamlet's Mill. And Hamlet's Mill
*  differs very strongly from established opinion on the issue of the phenomenon of precession.
*  And I'll explain what precession is in a moment. Generally, it's held that it was the Greeks
*  who discovered the precession. And the dating on that is put back not very far, maybe 2,300 years
*  ago or so. Santillana and von Deschend are pointing out that knowledge of precession is
*  much, much older than that, thousands of years older than that. And they do actually trace it.
*  I think I'm quoting them pretty much correctly to some almost unbelievable ancestor,
*  civilization. Reading that book was one of the several reasons that I got into this mystery in
*  the first place. Okay. Now, the precession of the equinoxes, to give it its full name,
*  results from the fact that our planet is the viewing platform from which we observe the stars.
*  And our planet, of course, is rotating on its own axis at roughly 1,000 miles an hour at the equator.
*  But what's less obvious is that it's also wobbling on its axis. So if you imagine the extended North
*  Pole of the Earth pointing up at the sky, in our time, it's pointing at the star Polaris,
*  and that is our pole star. But Polaris has not always been the pole star,
*  precisely because of this wobble on the axis of the Earth. Other stars have occupied the
*  pole position. And sometimes the extended North Pole of the Earth points at empty space. There is
*  no pole star. That's one of the obvious results of the wobble on the Earth's axis.
*  The other one is that there are 12 well-known constellations in our time, the 12 constellations
*  of the zodiac that lie along what is referred to as the path of the sun. The Earth is orbiting the
*  sun, and we are seeing what's in direct line with the sun in our view. And the zodiacal constellations
*  all lie along the path of the sun. So at different times of the year, the sun will rise against the
*  background of a particular zodiacal constellation. Today we live in the age of Pisces, and it's
*  definitely not an accident that the early Christians used the fish as their symbol.
*  This is another area where I differ from archaeology. I think the constellations of
*  the zodiac were recognized as such much earlier than we suppose. Anyway, to get to the point,
*  the key marker of the year, certainly in the Northern Hemisphere, was the spring equinox.
*  The question was what constellation is rising behind the sun? What constellation is housing
*  the sun at dawn on the spring equinox? Right now it's Pisces. In another 150 years or so,
*  it'll be Aquarius. We do live in the dawning of the age of Aquarius. Back in the time of
*  the late ancient Egyptians, it was Aries, going back to the time of Ramesses or before.
*  Before that, it was Taurus, and so on and so forth. It's backwards through the zodiac
*  until 12,500 years ago, you come to the age of Leo when the constellation of Leo
*  houses the sun on the spring equinox. Now this process unfolds very, very, very, very slowly.
*  The whole cycle, and it is a cycle, it repeats itself roughly every 26,000 years. Put a more
*  exact figure on it, 25,920 years. That may be a convention. Some scholars would say it was a bit
*  less than that, a bit more, but you're talking fractions. It's in that area, 25,920 years.
*  To observe it, you really need more than one human lifetime because it unfolds very, very slowly at
*  a rate of one degree every 72 years. The parallel that I often give is hold your finger up to the
*  horizon, the distant horizon. The movement in one lifetime in a period of 72 years is about the
*  width of your finger. It's not impossible to notice in a lifetime, but it's difficult. You've got to
*  pass it on. What seems to have happened is that some ancient culture, the culture that Santayana
*  and Vandeshan call some almost unbelievable ancestor culture, worked out the entire process
*  of procession and selected the key numbers of procession, of which the most important number,
*  the governing number, is the number 72. But we also have numbers related to the number 72.
*  72 plus 36 is 108. 108 divided by 2 is 54. These numbers are also found in mythology
*  all around the world. There were 72 conspirators who were involved in killing the god Osiris
*  in ancient Egypt and nailing him up in a wooden coffer and dumping him in the Nile. There are
*  432,000 in the Rig Vesas. 432,000 is a multiple of 72. At Angkor in Cambodia, for example, you have
*  the bridge to Angkor Thom. On that bridge, you have figures on both sides, sculpted figures,
*  which are holding the body of a serpent. That serpent is Vazuki. What they're doing is they're
*  churning the milky ocean. It's the same metaphor of churning and turning that's defined in the
*  story of Amladi's mill. There are 54 on each side. 54 plus 54 is 108. 108 is 72 plus 36. It's a
*  precessional number according to the work that Santayana and Vandeshan did. The fascination with
*  this number system and its discovery all around the world is one of the puzzles that intrigue me
*  and suggest to me that we are looking at ancestral knowledge that was passed down and probably was
*  passed down from a specific single common source at one time, but then was spread out very, very
*  widely around the world. So one of the defining ways that you approach the study of human history
*  that I think contrasts with mainstream archaeology is you take this sort of astronomical symbolism
*  and the relationship between humans and the stars very seriously. I do, as I believe the ancients
*  did. I think it's important to sort of consider what humans would have thought about back then.
*  Now we have a lot of distractions. We have social media, we can watch videos on YouTube,
*  whatever. But back then, especially before sort of electricity, the stars is like
*  the sexiest thing to talk about. There's no light pollution. There's no light pollution.
*  So there's that's in your space. The majesty of the heavens. Every single night, you're spending
*  looking up at the stars. And you can imagine there's a lot of sort of status value to be the guy
*  who's very good at studying the stars, and sort of the scientists of the day. And I'm sure there's
*  going to be these geniuses that emerge. They're able to do two things. One, tell stories about
*  the gods or whatever, based on the stars. And then also, as we'll probably talk about,
*  use the stars practically for navigation, for example. So it makes sense that the stars had a
*  primal importance for the ideas of the times, for the status, for religious explorations.
*  It was an ever-present reality. And it was bright, and it was brilliant, and it was full of lights.
*  It's inconceivable that the ancients would not have paid attention to it. It was an overwhelming
*  presence. And that's one of the reasons why I'm really confident that the constellations that we
*  now recognize as the constellations of the zodiac were recognized much earlier. Because it's hard
*  to miss when you pay attention to the sky, that the sun over the course of the solar year is
*  month by month rising against the background of different constellations. And then there's a much
*  longer process, the process of precession, which takes that journey backwards, and where we have a
*  period of 2160 years for each sign of the zodiac. I think it would have been hard for the ancients
*  to have missed that. They might not have identified the constellations in exactly the same way we do
*  today. That may well be a Babylonian or Greek convention. But that the constellations were
*  there, I think, was very clear, and that they were special constellations, unlike other ones higher up
*  in the sky, which were not on the path of the sun, that people paid attention to.
*  Well, but detecting the precession of the equinox is hard, because especially they don't have any
*  writing systems, they don't have any mathematical systems, so everything is told through words.
*  Yeah, well, let's not underestimate oral traditions. Oral traditions, that's something we've lost in
*  our culture today. One of the things that happens with the written word is that you gradually lose
*  your memory. Actually, there's a nice story from ancient Egypt about the god Thoth, the god of
*  wisdom, who is very proud of himself, because he has invented writing. Look at this gift he says to
*  a mythical pharaoh of that time. Look at the gift that I am giving humanity, writing. This is a
*  wonderful thing. It'll enable you to preserve so much that you would otherwise lose. And the pharaoh
*  in this story replies to him, no, you have not given us a wonderful gift. You have destroyed
*  the art of memory. We will forget everything. Words will roam free around the world, not
*  accompanied by any wise advice to set them into context. And actually, that's a very interesting
*  point. And we do know that cultures that still do have oral traditions are able to preserve
*  information for very long periods of time. One thing I think is clear in any time, in any period
*  of history, is human beings love stories. We love great stories. And one way to preserve information
*  is to encode it, embed it in a great story. And so carefully done that actually it doesn't matter
*  whether the storyteller knows that they're passing on that information or not. The story itself is
*  the vehicle. And as long as it's repeated faithfully, the information contained within it will be
*  passed on. And I do think this is part of the story of the preservation of knowledge.
*  So that's one of the reasons that you take myths seriously.
*  I take them very seriously. And the other, there's many reasons, but I can't help being
*  deeply impressed and deeply puzzled by the worldwide tradition of a global cataclysm
*  within human memory. I mean, we know scientifically that there have been
*  many, many cataclysms in the past going back millions of years. I mean, the best known one,
*  of course, is the K-PG event, as it's now called, that made the dinosaurs extinct 65 million or 66
*  million years ago. But has there been such a cataclysm in the lifetime of the human species?
*  Yeah, the Mount Toba eruption about 70,000 years ago was pretty bad. But a global cataclysm,
*  the Younger Dryas really ticks all the boxes as a worldwide disaster, which definitely involved
*  sea level rise, both at the beginning and at the end of the Younger Dryas. It definitely involved
*  the swallowing up of lands that previously had been above water. And I think it's an excellent
*  candidate for this worldwide tradition of a global cataclysm, of which one of, but not the only
*  distinguishing characteristics was a flood, an enormous flood, and the submergence of lands
*  that had previously been above water, underwater. The fact that this story is found all around the
*  world suggests to me that the archaeological explanation is, look, people suffer local floods
*  all the time. I mean, as we're talking, there's flooding in Florida. But I don't think anybody
*  in Florida is going to make the mistake of believing that that's a global flood. They know
*  it's local. But that's the argument largely of archaeology dealing with the flood myths,
*  though, that some local population experienced a nasty local flooding event, and they decided to
*  say that it affected the whole world. I'm not persuaded by that, particularly since we know
*  there was a nasty epoch, the Younger Dryas, when flooding did occur and when the earth was subjected
*  to events cataclysmic enough to extinguish entirely the megafauna of the Ice Age.
*  So there is the Younger Dryas impact hypothesis that provides an explanation of what happened
*  during this period that resulted in such rapid environmental change. So can you explain this
*  hypothesis? Yes. The Younger Dryas impact hypothesis, YDIH for short, is not a lunatic
*  fringe theory, as its opponents often attempt to write it off. It's the work of more than 60
*  major scientists working across many different disciplines, including archaeology and including
*  oceanography as well. They are collectively puzzled by the sudden onset of the Younger Dryas
*  and by the fact that it is accompanied 12,800 years ago by a distinct layer in the earth.
*  You can see it most clearly at Murray Springs in Arizona, for example. You can see it's about the
*  width of a human hand, and there's a draw there that's been cut by flash flooding at some time,
*  and that draw has revealed the sides of the draw. You can see the cross-section,
*  and in the cross-section is this distinct dark layer that runs through the earth,
*  and it contains evidence of wildfires. There's a lot of soot in it. There are also
*  nanodiamonds in it. There is shocked quartz in it. There is quartz that's been melted at
*  temperatures in excess of 2,200 degrees centigrade. There are carbon microsperials.
*  All of these are proxies for some kind of cosmic impact. I talked a moment ago about the extinction
*  of the dinosaurs. Lewis and Walter Alvarez, who made that incredible discovery, initially their
*  discovery was based entirely on impact proxies, just as the Younger Dryas is. There was no crater,
*  and for a long time they were disbelieved because they couldn't produce a crater,
*  but when they finally did produce that deeply buried chicks-glued crater, that's when people
*  started to say, yeah, they have to be right. But they weren't relying on the crater. They
*  were relying on the impact proxies, and they're the same impact proxies that we find in what's
*  called the Younger Dryas boundary layer all around the world. It's the fact that at the moment when
*  the earth tips into a radical climate shift, it's been warming up for at least 2,000 years before
*  12,800 years ago. People at the time must have been feeling a great sense of relief. We've been
*  living through this really cold time, but it's getting better. Things are getting better. Then
*  suddenly around 12,800 years ago, some might say 12,860 years ago, there's a massive global plunge
*  in global temperatures, and the world suddenly gets as cold as it was at the peak of the ice age.
*  It's almost literally overnight. It's very, very, very rapid. Normally in an epoch when the earth
*  is going into a freeze, you would not expect sea levels to rise, but there is a sea level rise,
*  a sudden one, right at the beginning of the Younger Dryas. Then you have this long frozen period from
*  12,800 to 11,600 years ago. Then equally dramatically and equally suddenly, the Younger Dryas comes to
*  an end, and the world very rapidly warms up, and you have a recognized pulse of meltwater at that
*  time as the last of the glaciers collapse into the sea, called Meltwater Pulse 1B, around about 11,600
*  years ago. This is a period which is very tightly defined. It's a period when we know that human
*  populations were grievously disturbed. That's when the so-called Clovis culture of North America
*  vanished entirely from the record during the Younger Dryas, and it's the time when the mammoths
*  and the saber-toothed tigers vanished from the record as well. Is there a good understanding of
*  what happened geologically, whether there was an impact or not? What explains this huge dip in
*  temperature and then rise in temperature? The abrupt cessation of the global meridional
*  overturning circulation of which the Gulf Stream is the best known part. The main theory that's
*  been put forward up to now, and I don't dispute that theory at all, is that the sudden freeze
*  was caused by the cutting off of the Gulf Stream, basically, which is part of the central heating
*  system of our planet. No wonder it became cold. What's not really been addressed before is why
*  that happened, why the Gulf Stream was cut, why a sudden pulse of meltwater went into the world
*  ocean. It was so much of it, and it was so cold that it actually stopped the Gulf Stream in its
*  tracks. That's where the Younger Dryas impact hypothesis offers a very elegant and very
*  satisfactory solution to the problem. Now, the hypothesis, of course, is broader than that.
*  Amongst the scientists working on it are, for example, Bill Napier, an astrophysicist and
*  astronomer. They have assembled a great deal of evidence which suggests that the culprit
*  in the Younger Dryas impact event or events was what we now call the torrid meteor stream,
*  which the Earth still passes through twice a year. It's now about 30 million kilometers wide.
*  It takes the Earth a couple of days to pass through it on its orbit. It passes through it in June,
*  and it passes through it at the end of October. The suggestion is that the torrid meteor stream
*  is the end product of a very large comet that entered the solar system round about 20,000 years
*  ago, came in from the Oort cloud, got trapped by the gravity of the sun, and went into orbit around
*  the sun, an orbit that crossed the orbit of the Earth. However, when it was one object,
*  the likelihood of a collision with the Earth was extremely small.
*  But as it started to do what all comets do, which was to break up into multiple fragments,
*  because these are chunks of rock held together by ice, and as they warm up, they split and
*  disintegrate and break into pieces. As it passed through that, its debris stream became larger and
*  larger and wider and wider. The theory is that 12,800 years ago, the Earth passed through a
*  particularly dense part of the torrid meteor stream and was hit by multiple impacts all around
*  the planet, certainly from the west of North America, as far east as Syria. We are by and
*  large not talking about impacts that would have caused craters, although there certainly were some.
*  We're talking about air bursts. When an object is 100 or 150 meters in diameter,
*  and it's coming in very fast into the Earth's atmosphere, it is very unlikely to reach the
*  Earth. It's going to blow up in the sky. The best known recent example of that is the Tunguska event
*  in Siberia, which took place on the 30th of June, 1908. The Tunguska event was nobody disputes. It
*  was definitely an air burst of a cometary fragment. The date is interesting, because the 30th of June
*  is the height of the beta torrid. It's one of the two times when the Earth is going through the
*  torrid meteor stream. Well, luckily, that part of Siberia wasn't inhabited, but 2,000 square miles
*  of forest were destroyed. If that had happened over a major city, we would all be thinking very
*  hard about objects out of the torrid meteor stream and about the risk of cosmic impact.
*  The suggestion is that it wasn't one impact, it wasn't two impacts, it wasn't three impacts.
*  It was hundreds of air bursts all around the planet, coupled with a number of bigger objects,
*  which the scientists working on this think hit the North American ice cap largely. Some of them may
*  also have hit the Northern European ice cap, resulting in that sudden, otherwise unexplained,
*  flood of meltwater that went into the world ocean and caused the cooling that then took place.
*  This was a disaster for life all over the planet. It's interesting that one of the sites
*  where they find the Younger Dryas boundary and where they find overwhelming evidence of an
*  air burst and where they find all the shocked quartz, the carbon microspherules, the nanodiamonds,
*  the trinitite, and so on and so forth, all of those impact proxies are found at Abu Huraira.
*  That was a settlement within 150 miles of Gobekli Tepe, and it was hit 12,800 years ago,
*  and it was obliterated. Interestingly, it was re-inhabited by human beings within probably
*  five years, but it was completely obliterated at that time. It's difficult to imagine that the
*  people who lived in that area would not have been very impressed by what they saw happening,
*  by these massive explosions in the sky and the obliteration of Abu Huraira.
*  Now, this is a theory. The Younger Dryas impact, it's a hypothesis, actually. It's not even a
*  theory. A theory is, I think, considered a higher level than a hypothesis. That's why it's the
*  Younger Dryas impact hypothesis. Of course, it has many opponents, and there are many who disagree
*  with it. There have been a series of peer-reviewed papers that have been published, supposedly
*  debunking the Younger Dryas impact hypothesis. One, I think, was in 2011. It was called a requiem
*  for the Younger Dryas impact hypothesis, and there's one just been published a few months
*  ago or a year ago called a complete refutation of the Younger Dryas impact hypothesis, something
*  like that, some lengthy title. It's a hypothesis that has its opponents. Even within those of us
*  who are looking at the alternative side of history, there are different points of view.
*  Robert Shock from Boston University, the geologist who demonstrated that the erosion on the Sphinx
*  may well have been caused by exposure to a long period of very heavy rainfall.
*  He doesn't go for the Younger Dryas impact hypothesis. He fully accepts that the Younger
*  Dryas was a global cataclysm and that the extinctions took place, but he thinks it was
*  caused by some kind of massive solar outburst. What everybody's agreed on is the Younger Dryas
*  was bad, but there is dispute about what caused it. I personally have found the Younger Dryas
*  impact hypothesis to be the most persuasive, which most effectively explains all the evidence.
*  How important is the impact hypothesis to your understanding of the Ice Age advanced civilizations?
*  So is it possible to have another explanation for environmental factors that could have
*  erased most of an advanced civilization during this period?
*  In a sense, it's not the impact hypothesis that is central to what I'm saying. It's the
*  Younger Dryas that's central to what I'm saying. And the Younger Dryas required a trigger.
*  Something caused it. I think the Younger Dryas impact hypothesis, the notion that we're looking
*  at a debris stream of a fragmenting comet and we can still see that debris stream because it's still
*  up there and we still pass through it twice a year, is the best explanation. But I don't mind
*  other explanations. It's good that there are other explanations. The Younger Dryas is a big mystery,
*  and it's not a mystery that's been solved yet. And that word advanced civilization,
*  this is another word that is easily misunderstood. And I've tried to make clear many, many times that
*  when we consider the possibility of something like a civilization in the past, we shouldn't
*  imagine that it's us, that it's something like us. We should expect it to be completely different
*  from us, but that it would have achieved certain things. So amongst the clues that intrigue me
*  are those precessional numbers that are found all around the world and are a category of ancient
*  maps called Portolanos, which suddenly started to appear just after the crusade that entered
*  Constantinople and sacked Constantinople. The Portolanos suddenly start to appear,
*  and they're extremely accurate maps. Most of the ones that have survived are extremely accurate
*  maps of the Mediterranean alone, but some of them show much wider areas. For example, on these
*  Portolanos-style maps, you do find a depiction of Antarctica again and again. And another thing that
*  these maps have in common is that many of the mapmakers state that they based their maps on
*  multiple older source maps, which have not survived. These maps are intriguing because
*  they have very accurate relative longitudes. Our civilization did not crack the longitude problem
*  until the mid-18th century with Harrison's chronometer, which was able to keep accurate
*  time at sea. So you could have the time in London and you could have the local time at sea at the
*  same time, and then you could work out your longitude. There might be other ways of working
*  out longitude as well, but there it is. The fact is these Portolanos have extremely accurate relative
*  longitudes. Secondly, some of them show the world to my eye as it looked during the ice age. They
*  show a much extended Indonesia and Malaysian Peninsula, and the series of islands that make
*  up Indonesia today are all grouped together into one landmass. And that was the case during the ice
*  age. That was the Sunda Shelf. And the presence of Antarctica on some of these maps also puzzles
*  and intrigues me and is not satisfactorily explained in my view by archaeology, which says,
*  oh, those mapmakers, they felt that the world needed something underneath it to balance it.
*  So they put a fictional landmass there. I don't think that makes sense. I think somebody was
*  mapping the world during the last ice age, but that doesn't mean that they had our kind of tech.
*  It means that they were following that exploration instinct, that they knew how to navigate. They'd
*  been watching the stars for thousands of years before. They knew how to navigate and they knew
*  how to build seagoing ships. And they explored the world and they mapped the world. Those maps
*  were made a very, very long time ago. Some of them, I believe, were likely preserved in the
*  library of Alexandria. I think even then they were being copied and recopied.
*  We don't know exactly what happened to the library of Alexandria, except that it was destroyed.
*  I suggest it's likely this was during the period of the Roman Empire. I suggest it's likely that
*  some of those maps were taken out of the library and taken to Constantinople. And that's where
*  they were liberated during the crusade and entered world culture again and started to be copied
*  and recopied. So from this perspective, when we talk about advanced ice age civilization,
*  it could have been a relatively small group of people with the technology of
*  their scholars of the stars and their expert seafaring navigators. Yes. That's about as far
*  as I would take it. And when I say that it, as I have said on a number of occasions, that it had
*  technology equivalent to ours in the 18th century, I'm referring specifically to the ability to
*  calculate longitude. I'm not saying that they were building steam engines. I don't see any evidence
*  for that. And perhaps some building tricks and skills of how to... Well, definitely. And this
*  again is where you come to a series of mysteries which are perhaps best expressed on the Giza plateau
*  in Egypt with the three great pyramids and the extraordinary megalithic temples that
*  many people don't pay much attention to on the Giza plateau and the great Sphinx itself.
*  This is an area of particular importance in understanding this issue. Well, can you actually
*  describe the Sphinx and the great pyramids and where you find most mysterious and interesting
*  about them? Well, first of all, the astronomy. And here I must pay tribute to two individuals,
*  actually three individuals in particular. One of them is John Anthony West, passed away in 2018.
*  He was the first person in our era to begin to wonder if the Sphinx was much older than it had
*  been. Actually, he got that idea from a philosopher called Schwaller de Lubix, who'd noticed what he
*  thought was water erosion on the body of the Sphinx. John West picked that up and he was a
*  great amateur Egyptologist himself. He spent most of his life in Egypt and he was hugely versed in
*  ancient Egypt. And when he looked at the Sphinx and at the strange scalloped erosion patterns and
*  the vertical fissures, particularly in the trench around the Sphinx, he began to think maybe Schwaller
*  was right. Maybe there was some kind of flooding here. And that's when he brought Robert Shock,
*  second person I'd like to recognise, geologist at Boston University. He brought Shock to Giza,
*  and Shock was the first geologist to stick his neck out, risk the ire of Egyptologists,
*  and say, well, it looks to me like the Sphinx was exposed to at least a thousand years of heavy
*  rainfall. And as Shock's calculations have continued, as he's continued to be immersed
*  in this mystery, he's continuously pushed that back. And he's now again looking at the date of
*  around 12,000, 12,500 years ago during the Younger Dryas for the creation of the Great Sphinx.
*  And then, of course, this is the period of the wet Sahara, the humid Sahara. The Sahara
*  was a completely different place during the Ice Age. There were rivers in it. There were
*  lakes in it. It was fertile. It was possibly densely populated. And there was a lot of rain.
*  There's not no rain in Giza today, but there's relatively little rain. The next person,
*  not enough rain to cause that erosion damage on the Sphinx. The next person who needs to be
*  mentioned in this context is Robert Boval. Robert and I have co-authored a number of books together.
*  Unfortunately, Robert has been very ill for the last seven years. He's got a very bad chest
*  infection. And I think also that Robert became very demoralized by the attacks of Egyptologists
*  on his work. But Robert is the genius. And it does take a genius some time to make these connections
*  because nobody noticed it before that the three pyramids of Giza are laid out on the ground in
*  the pattern of the three stars of Orion's belt. And skeptics will say, well, you can find any
*  buildings and line them up with any stars you want. But Orion actually isn't any old constellation.
*  Orion was the god Osiris in the sky. The ancient Egyptians called the Orion constellation Sahu.
*  And they recognize it as the celestial image of the god Osiris. So what's being copied on the
*  ground is the belt of a deity, of a celestial deity. It's not just a random constellation.
*  And then when we take precession into account, you find something else very intriguing happening.
*  First of all, you find that the exact orientation of the pyramids as it is today, and pretty much
*  as it was when they're supposed to have been built 4,500 years ago, it's not precisely related to how
*  Orion's belt looked at that time. There's a bit of a twist is they're not quite right.
*  But as you precess the stars backwards, as you go back and back and back, and you come to around
*  10,500 BC, 12,500 years ago in the Younger Dryas, you find that suddenly they lock perfectly. They
*  match perfectly with the three pyramids on the ground. And that's the same moment that the great
*  Sphinx, an equinoctial monument aligned perfectly to the rising sun on the spring equinox. Anybody
*  can test this for themselves. Just go to Giza on the 21st of March, be there before dawn,
*  stand behind the Sphinx, and you will see the sun rising directly in line with the gaze of the
*  Sphinx. But the question is, what constellation was behind the Sphinx? And 12,500 years ago,
*  it was the constellation of Leo. And actually, the constellation of Leo has a very Sphinx-like
*  look. And I and my colleagues are pretty sure that the Sphinx was originally a lion entirely.
*  And that over the thousands of years, it became damaged, it became eroded, particularly the part
*  of it that sticks out the head. There were periods when the Sphinx was completely covered in sand,
*  but still the head stuck out. By the time you come to the fourth dynasty, when the great pyramids
*  are supposedly built, by the time you come to the fourth dynasty, the head of the lion, original lion
*  head, would have been a complete mess. And we suggest that it was then re-carved into a pharaonic
*  head. Egyptologists think it was the pharaoh Khafre, but there's no real strong resemblance.
*  But it's definitely wearing the nemes headdress of an ancient Egyptian pharaoh. And we think that
*  that's the result of a re-carving of what was originally not only a lion-bodied, but also a
*  lion-headed monument. It wouldn't make sense if you create an equinoctial marker in the time of
*  Khafre, 4,500 years ago. And the Sphinx is an equinoctial marker. It's 270 feet long and 70
*  feet high, and it's looking directly at the rising sun on the equinox. If you create it then,
*  you'd be more likely to create it in the shape of a bull, because that was the age of Taurus,
*  when the constellation of Taurus housed the sun on the spring equinox. So why is it a lion? And
*  again, we think that's because of that observation of the skies and putting on the ground,
*  as above, so below, putting on the ground an image of the sky at a particular time. Now,
*  the fact that the Giza Plateau, it's a fact, of course, that Egyptologists completely dispute,
*  but the fact that the principal monuments of the Giza Plateau, the three great pyramids,
*  and the great Sphinx all lock astronomically on the date of around 10,500 BC, to me is most unlikely
*  to be an accident. And actually, if you look at computer software at the sky at that time,
*  you'll see that the Milky Way is very prominent and seems to be mirrored on the ground by the
*  River Nile. I suggest that may be one of the reasons amongst many why Giza was chosen as the
*  site for this very special place. So the point I want to make is that an astronomical design
*  on the ground, which memorializes a very ancient date, does not have to have been done 12,500 years
*  ago. From the ancient Egyptian point of view, you're there 4,500 years ago, and there's a time
*  8,000 years before that, which is very, very, very important to you. You could use astronomical
*  language and megalithic architecture to memorialize that date on the Giza Plateau,
*  which is what we think we're looking at, except for one thing, and that's the erosion patterns
*  on the Sphinx. And we're pretty sure that the Sphinx, at least, does date back to 12,500 years
*  ago. And with it, the megalithic temples, the so-called Valley Temple, which stands just
*  to the east and just to the south of the Sphinx, and the Sphinx Temple, which stands directly in
*  front of the Sphinx. The Sphinx Temple has largely been destroyed, but the Valley Temple,
*  attributed to Khafre, on no good grounds whatsoever, is a huge megalithic construction
*  with blocks of limestone that weigh up to 100 tons each. And yet, it has been remodeled, refaced
*  with granite. There are granite blocks that are placed on top of the core limestone blocks.
*  And those core limestone blocks were already eroded when the granite blocks were put there. Why?
*  Because the granite blocks have actually been purposefully and deliberately cut to fit into
*  the erosion marks on the, we believe, much older megalithic blocks there. So,
*  I think Giza is a very complicated site. I would never seek to divorce the dynastic ancient
*  Egyptians from the Great Pyramids. They were closely involved in the construction of the
*  Great Pyramids as we see them today. But what I do suggest is that there were very low platforms
*  on the Giza Plateau that are much older and that when we look at the three Great Pyramids,
*  we're looking at a renovation and a restoration and an enhancement of much older structures that
*  had existed on the Giza Plateau for a much longer period before that. Actually, the Great Pyramid
*  is built around a natural hill, and that natural hill might have been seen as the original
*  primeval mound to the ancient Egyptians. So, the idea is that the Sphinx was there
*  long before the pyramids, and the pyramids were built by the Egyptians to celebrate further
*  an already holy place. Yeah, and there were platforms in place where the pyramids stand.
*  Not the pyramids as we see them today, but the basis, the base of those pyramids was already
*  in place at that time. So, what's the case? What's the evidence that the Egyptologists
*  used to make the attributions that they do for the dating of the pyramids and the Sphinx?
*  Well, the three Great Pyramids of Giza are different from later pyramids. This is another
*  problem that I have with the whole thing, is the story of pyramid building. When did it really
*  begin? And the timeline that we get from Egyptology is the first pyramid is the pyramid of the pharaoh
*  Zoser, the step pyramid at Saqqara, about a hundred years or so before the Giza pyramids
*  were built. And then we have this explosion in the fourth dynasty of true pyramids. We have
*  three of them attributed to a single pharaoh, Sneferu, who built supposedly the pyramid at
*  Maidum and the two pyramids at Dahshur, the Bent and the Red Pyramid. And then within that same
*  hundred year span, we have the Giza pyramids being built. This is according to the Orthodox
*  chronology. And then suddenly, once the Giza project is finished, pyramid building goes into
*  a massive slump in ancient Egypt. And the pyramids of the fifth dynasty are, frankly speaking, a mess
*  outside. They're very inferior constructions. You can hardly recognize them as pyramids at all.
*  But what happens when you go inside them is you find that they're extensively covered
*  in hieroglyphs and imagery repeating the name of the king who was supposedly buried in that place.
*  Whereas the Giza pyramids have no internal inscriptions whatsoever. What we do have is
*  one piece of graffiti about which there is some controversy. Basic statistics, it's a six million
*  ton structure. Each side is about 750 feet long. It's aligned almost perfectly to true north,
*  south, east and west within three sixtieths of a single degree. The sixtieths because degrees are
*  divided into sixties. And it's the precision of the orientation and the absolute massive size of
*  the thing. Plus it's very complicated internal passageways that are involved in it.
*  In the ninth century, the Great Pyramid still had its facing stones in place. But there was an Arab
*  caliph, Caliph al-Mamun, who had already realized that other pyramids did have their entrances in
*  the north face. Nobody knew where the entrance to the Great Pyramid was. But he figured there's an
*  entrance to this thing. It's going to be in the north face somewhere. So he put together a team of
*  workers and they went in with sledgehammers and they started smashing where he thought would be
*  the entrance. And they cut their way into the Great Pyramid for a distance of maybe 100 feet.
*  And then the hammering that they did dislodged something. They heard a little bit further away
*  something big falling. And they realized there was a cavity there and they started heading
*  in that direction. And then they joined the internal passageway of the Great Pyramid,
*  the descending and the ascending corridors that go up. When you go up the ascending corridor, every
*  one of the internal passageways in the Great Pyramid that people can walk in slopes at an
*  angle of 26 degrees. That's interesting because the angle of slope of the exterior of the Great
*  Pyramid is 52 degrees. So we know mathematicians were at work as well as geometers in the creation
*  of the Great Pyramid. If you go up the Grand Gallery, which is at the end of the so-called
*  ascending corridor and it's above the so-called Queen's Chamber, you go up the Grand Gallery,
*  you're eventually going to come to what is known as the King's Chamber in which there is a
*  sarcophagus. And that sarcophagus is a little bit too big to have been gotten through the narrow
*  entrance passageway. It's almost as though the so-called King's Chamber was built around the
*  sarcophagus already in place. Above the King's Chamber are five other chambers. These are known
*  as relieving chambers. The theory was that they were built to relieve the pressure on the King's
*  Chamber of the weight of the monument. But I think what makes that theory dubious is the fact that
*  even lower down where more weight was involved, you have the Queen's Chamber and there are no such
*  relieving chambers above that. In the top of these five chambers, a British adventurer and vandal
*  called Howard Vise, who dynamited his way into those chambers in the first place,
*  allegedly found, well, he claims he found a piece of graffiti left by a work gang
*  naming the pharaoh Khufu. And it's true, I've been in that chamber and there is the cartouche of
*  Khufu there, quite recognizable. But the dispute around it is whether that is a genuine piece of
*  graffiti dating from the Old Kingdom or whether Howard Vise actually put it there himself because
*  he was in desperate need of money at the time. I'm not sure what the answer to that question is.
*  Another reason why, but it's one of the reasons that Egyptologists feel confident in saying that
*  the pyramid is the work of Khufu. Another is what is called the Wadi al-Jaffa papyri, where on the
*  Red Sea, a diary, the diary of an individual called Meraire was found and he talks about bringing
*  highly polished limestone to the Great Pyramid. And it's clear that what he's talking about
*  is the facing stones of the Great Pyramid. He's not talking about the body of the Great Pyramid,
*  he's talking about the facing stones of the Great Pyramid during the reign of Khufu. So
*  that's another reason why the Great Pyramid is attributed to Khufu. But I think that
*  Khufu was undoubtedly involved in the Great Pyramid and in a big way, but I think he was
*  building upon and elaborating a much older structure. And I think the heart of that structure
*  is the subterranean chamber, which is 100 feet vertically beneath the base of the Great Pyramid.
*  Anybody who suffers from claustrophobia will not enjoy being down there. You've got to go down a
*  26 degree sloping corridor until a distance of about 300 feet. It's 100 feet vertically,
*  but the slope means you're going to walk a distance of about, not walk, you're going to
*  eight walk. You're almost going to have to crawl. I've learned from long experience that the best
*  way to go down these corridors is actually backwards. If you go forward, you keep bumping
*  your head on them because they're only three feet, five inches high. You get down to the bottom,
*  you have a short horizontal passage, and then you get into the subterranean chamber.
*  The theory of Egyptology is that this was supposed to be the burial place of Khufu.
*  But after cutting out that 300 foot long, 26 degree sloping passage, a lot of which passes
*  through bedrock and having cut the subterranean chamber out of bedrock, gone to all that trouble,
*  they decided they wouldn't bury him there. They built what's now known as the Queen's chamber
*  as his burial chamber, but then they decided that wouldn't do either. So they then built the
*  King's chamber and that's where the Pharaoh is supposed to have been buried. Those Arab raiders
*  under Khalif Mahmood didn't find anything in the Great Pyramid at all. Your idea is that
*  the Sphinx and maybe some aspects of the pyramid were much earlier. Why that's important is in that
*  case, it would be evidence of some transfer of technology from a much older civilization.
*  The idea is that during the Younger Dryas, most of that civilization was either destroyed or damaged
*  and they desperately scattered across the globe. Seeking refuge. Seeking refuge and telling stories
*  of maybe one, the importance of the stars, their knowledge about the stars and their knowledge
*  about building and knowledge about navigation. That's roughly the idea. So it's interesting that
*  the ancient Egyptians have a notion of an epoch that they call Zeptepi, which is the first time.
*  It means the first time. This is when the gods walked the earth. This is when seven sages brought
*  wisdom to ancient Egypt and that is seen as the origin of ancient Egyptian civilization.
*  By the ancient Egyptians themselves, there are king lists that go back way beyond the first dynasty,
*  go back 30,000 years into the past in ancient Egypt. Considered to be entirely mythical by
*  Egyptologists, but nevertheless, it's interesting that there's that reference to remote time.
*  Now, what you also have in Egypt are what might almost be described as secret societies.
*  The followers of Horus are one of those specifically tasked with bringing forward
*  the knowledge from the first time into later periods. The souls of Pei and Neken are another
*  one of these mysterious secret society groups who are possessors of knowledge that they transmit
*  to the future. What I'm broadly suggesting is that those survivors of the Angadrias Cataclysm
*  who settled in Giza may have been relatively small in number. It's interesting that they are
*  referred to in the Edfu building text as seven sages because that repeats again and again.
*  It's also in Mesopotamia, it's seven sages, seven Apkalu who come out of the waters of the Persian
*  Gulf and teach people all the skills of agriculture and of architecture and of astronomy.
*  It's found all around the world that there was a relatively small number of people who took refuge
*  in Giza who benefited from the survival skills of the hunter-foragers who lived at Giza at that time
*  and who also passed on their knowledge to those hunter-foragers. But it was not knowledge that was
*  ready to be put into shape at that time. That knowledge was then preserved and kept and handled
*  within very secretive groups that passed it down over thousands of years and finally it bursts into
*  full form in the fourth dynasty in ancient Egypt. The notion that knowledge might be
*  transferred over thousands of years shouldn't be absurd. We know for example in the case of
*  ancient Israel it goes back to the time of Abraham which is pretty much I think around 2000 BC
*  and knowledge has been preserved from that time right up to the present day. So if you can
*  preserve knowledge for 4,000 years you can probably preserve it for eight.
*  Now of course the air bars on us are quite large but if an advanced Ice Age civilization existed
*  where do you think it was? Where do you think we might find it one day if it existed? And how big
*  do you think it might have been? Well this is where I'm often accused of presenting a God of
*  the gaps argument that I think there was a lost civilization because there's lots of the earth
*  that archaeologists have never looked at. Of course I'm not thinking that. These are very special
*  gaps that I'm interested in and I'm interested in them because of all the curiosities and the
*  puzzlement that I've expressed to you before. It's not just because there are gaps in the
*  archaeological record. It's because those gaps involve places that were very interesting places
*  to live during the Ice Age and they specifically include the Sahara Desert which was not a desert
*  during the Ice Age and went through this warm wet period when it was very very fertile. Certainly
*  some archaeology has been done in the Sahara but it's fractional. It's tiny and I think if we want
*  to get into the origins, true origins of ancient Egyptian civilization, of the peoples of ancient
*  Egypt, we need to be looking in the Sahara for that. And the Amazon Rainforest is another example
*  of this. I think the Sahara is about nine million square kilometers. The Amazon that's left under
*  dense canopy rainforest is about five million square kilometers, maybe closer to six. And then
*  you have the continental shelves that were submerged by sea level rise at the end of the
*  Ice Age. Now it's well established that sea level rose by 400 feet but it didn't rise by 400 feet
*  overnight. It came in dribs and drabs. There were periods of very rapid, quite significant
*  sea level rise and there were periods when the sea level was rising much more slowly. So that
*  400 foot sea level rise is spread out over a period of about 10,000 years but there are episodes
*  within it like Meltwater Pulse 1B, like Meltwater Pulse 1A when the flooding was really immense.
*  How big do you think it might have been and do you think it was spread across the globe? So if there
*  were expert navigators, do you think they spread across the globe? Well, the reason that I'm talking
*  about the gaps is I don't know where this civilization started or where it was based. All
*  I'm seeing are clues and mysteries and puzzles that intrigue me and which suggest to me that
*  something is missing from our past. And I'm not inclined to look for that missing something in,
*  for example, Northern Europe because Northern Europe was not a very nice place to live during
*  the Ice Age. I mean, nobody smart would build a civilization in Northern Europe 12,000 years ago.
*  It was a hideous, frozen wasteland. The places to look are places that were hospitable and
*  welcoming to human beings during the Ice Age. And that of course includes the coastlines
*  that are now under water. Of course, it includes the Sahara Desert and of course,
*  it includes the Amazon rainforest as well. All of these places I think are candidates
*  for quote unquote my lost civilization. And because I think largely from those ancient maps
*  that it was a navigating, seafaring civilization, I suspect that it wasn't only in one place.
*  It was probably in a number of places. And then I can only speculate. Maybe there was
*  a cultural value where it was felt that it was not appropriate to
*  interfere with the lives of hunter-foragers at that time. Maybe it was felt that they should
*  keep their distance from them. Just as even today, there is a feeling that we shouldn't be interfering
*  too much with the uncontacted tribes in the Amazon rainforest. Although interestingly,
*  some of those tribes are now using cell phones. That possibility may have been there in the past.
*  And only when we come to a global cataclysm does it become essential to have outreach and actually
*  to take refuge amongst those hunter-forager populations. That is the hypothesis that I'm
*  putting forward. I'm not claiming that it's a fact. But for me, it helps to explain the evidence.
*  So that speaks to one of the challenges that archaeologists provide to this idea,
*  is that there is a lot of evidence of humans in the Ice Age and they appear to be all hunter
*  gatherers. But like you said, only a small percent of areas where humans have lived have been
*  studied by archaeologists. That's right. Very tiny percent. And even a tiny percent of every
*  archaeological site has been studied by archaeologists too. Typically, one to five
*  percent of any archaeological site is excavated. I mean, that's why Goubekli Tepe fills my mind
*  with imagination, especially seeing as the time capsule. It's almost certain that there's places
*  on earth we haven't discovered that once we do, even if it's after the Ice Age, will change our
*  view of human history. Do you think there is going to be a place, like what will be your dream thing
*  to discover like Goubekli Tepe that says a definitive perturbation to our understanding
*  of Ice Age history? Some kind of archive, some kind of hall of records. There's both mystical
*  associations with the Hall of Records at Giza from people like the Edgar Cayce Organization.
*  There's also ancient Egyptian traditions which suggest that something was concealed beneath the
*  Sphinx. This is not an idea that is alien to ancient Egypt. It's quite present in ancient Egypt.
*  So far, as far as I know, nobody has dug down beneath the Sphinx. Of course, there's very good
*  reasons for that. You don't want to damage the place too much. Let's call it the Hall of Records.
*  I'd love to find that. But I think in a way, that's what Goubekli Tepe is. Goubekli Tepe is a Hall of
*  Records. You know, it's interesting that just as I've tried to outline, I hope reasonably clearly,
*  that the three great pyramids of Giza match Orion's belt in 10,500 BC, just as the Sphinx
*  matches Leo in 10,500 BC, 12,500 years ago or so. Pillar 43 in Enclosure D at Goubekli Tepe
*  contains what a number of researchers, myself included, regard as an astronomical diagram.
*  Martin Swetman of Edinburgh University has brought forward the best work in this field,
*  but it was initially started by a gentleman called Paul Burley, who noticed that one of the
*  figures on Pillar 43 is a scorpion, very much like we represent the constellation of Scorpio today,
*  and that above it is a vulture with outstretched wings, which is in a posture very similar to the
*  constellation that we call Sagittarius. And on that outstretched wing is a circular object.
*  And the suggestion is that it's marking the time when the sun was at the center of the dark rift
*  in the Milky Way at the summer solstice 12,500 years ago. That's what it's marking. And
*  it's interesting that the same date can be deduced from Pillar 40. Of course, it's controversial.
*  Martin Swetman's ideas are by no means accepted by archaeology, but he's done very, very thorough
*  detailed statistical work on this, and I'm personally convinced. So we have a time capsule
*  at Gobekli Tepe, which is memorializing a date that is at least 1,200 years before Gobekli Tepe
*  was built, if that dating of 11,600 years ago proves to be absolutely the oldest date,
*  as it is at present. The date memorialized on Pillar 43 is 12,800 years ago, the beginning of
*  the Younger Dryas, the beginning of the impact event. And then Giza does the same thing, but in
*  much larger scale. It uses massive megalithic architecture, which is very difficult to destroy,
*  and a profound knowledge of astronomy, to encode a date in a language that any culture, which is
*  sufficiently literate in astronomy, will be able to decode. We don't have to have a script that
*  we can't read, like we do with the Indus Valley civilization or with the Easter Island script.
*  We don't have to have a script that can't be interpreted. If you use astronomical language,
*  then any astronomical literate civilization will be able to give you a date. The Hoover Dam
*  has a star map built into it, and that star map is part of an exhibition that was put there at
*  the founding of the Hoover Dam. And what it does is it freezes the sky above the Hoover Dam
*  at the moment of its completion. And Oscar Hansen, the artist who created that piece,
*  said so specifically that this would be so that any future culture would be able to know the time
*  of the dam's construction. So you can use astronomy and architecture to memorialize a particular date.
*  Quick pause, bathroom break?
*  Sounds good.
*  So to me, the story that we've been talking about, it is both exciting if the mainstream archaeology
*  narrative is correct and the one you're constructing is correct. Both are super interesting because
*  the mainstream archaeology perspective means that there is something about the human mind
*  from which the pyramids, these ideas spring naturally. You place humans anywhere,
*  you place them on Mars, it's going to come out that way. So that's an interesting story of human
*  psychology that then becomes even more interesting when you evolve out of Africa with Homo sapiens,
*  how they think about the world. That's super interesting. And then if there's an ancient
*  civilization, advanced civilization that explains why there's so many similar types of ideas that
*  spread, that means that there's so much undiscovered still about the spring of these ideas of civilization
*  that come. So to me, they're both fascinating. So I don't know why there's so much in-fighting.
*  But I think it's partly territorial. I think that I cannot speak of all archaeologists,
*  but some archaeologists feel very territorial about their profession. And they do not feel
*  happy about outsiders entering their realm, especially if those outsiders have a large
*  platform. And I found that the attacks on me by archaeologists have increased step by step with
*  the increase of my exposure. I wasn't very interesting to them when I just had one minor
*  bestseller in 1992 with a book called The Sign and the Seal. But when Fingerprints of the Gods was
*  published in 1995 and became a global bestseller, then I started to attract their attention and
*  appear to have been regarded as a threat to them. And that is the case today. That is why
*  Ancient Apocalypse Season 1 was defined as the most dangerous show on Netflix. It's why the Society
*  for American Archaeology wrote an open letter to Netflix, asking Netflix to reclassify the series
*  as science fiction. It's why they accused the series of antisemitism, misogyny, white supremacism,
*  and a whole bunch of other things. There's nothing to do with anything that's
*  in the series. It was like, we must shut this down. This is so dangerous to us. Certainly,
*  not a danger. There are many more dangerous things in the world than a television series
*  going on right now. But maybe it was seen as a danger to archaeology, that this non-archaeologist
*  was in archaeological terrain and being viewed and seen by large and read by large numbers of people.
*  Maybe that was part of the problem. Human nature being what it is, I noticed that two of my
*  principal critics, John Hoopes from the University of Kansas and Flint Dibble, who's now teaching at
*  the University of Cardiff in Wales in the UK, are both people who like to have media exposure.
*  John Hoopes has just recently started a YouTube channel. Flint Dibble has had one for quite a
*  while, a pretty small number of followers. I think that they feel that they should be the ones
*  who are getting the global attention and that it's not right that I am. The best way to
*  stop that is to stop me, to shut me down, to get me cancelled, and basically requiring Netflix to
*  relabel my series from a documentary to a science fiction, which is what they actually had the
*  temerity to suggest to Netflix. If that had gone through, if Netflix had listened to them,
*  that would have effectively been the cancellation of my documentary series. It would no longer have
*  been ranked under documentaries. So it was a deliberate attempt to shut me down and I see
*  that going on again and again, and it's so unfortunate and so unnecessary. I've become
*  very defensive towards archaeology. I hit back. After 30 years of these attacks on my work,
*  I'm tired of it and I do defend myself. Sometimes I'm perhaps over vigorous in that defense. Maybe I
*  was a little bit too strong in my critique of archaeology in the first season of Ancient
*  Apocalypse. Maybe I should have been a bit gentler and a bit kinder. I've tried to reflect that in
*  the second season and to bring also many more indigenous voices into the second season as well
*  as the voices of many more archaeologists. Yeah, in general, I got a chance to get a
*  glimpse of the archaeology community and in archaeology, in science in general, I
*  don't have much patience for this kind of arrogance or snark or dismissal of
*  general human curiosity that I think your work inspires in people. So that's why people like
*  Ed Barnhart, who I recently had a conversation with, he radiates kindness and curiosity as well.
*  And it's like that kind of approach to ideas, especially about human history,
*  it inspires people, inspires millions of people to ask questions. I mean, that's why you had Keanu
*  Reeves on the new season. He's basically coming to the show from that same perspective of curiosity.
*  Keanu is genuinely curious about the past and very, very interested in it. And he's bringing to
*  it questions that everybody brings to the past. He's speaking for every man in the series.
*  So given that, can you maybe steelman the case that archaeologists make about this period that
*  we've been talking about? Can you make the case that that is indeed what happened is it was
*  hunter-gathered for a long time. And then there was a cataclysm, a very difficult period in human
*  history with the young Adrass and that changed the environment and then led to the springing up of
*  civilizations at different places on earth. Can you sort of make the case for that?
*  Oh no, I completely understand why that is the position of archaeology, because that's what they've
*  found. Archaeology is very much wishing to define itself as a science and it uses the techniques of
*  weighing and measuring and counting are very key to what archaeology does. And in what they've found
*  and what they've studied around the world, they don't see any traces of a lost civilization.
*  And the idea that besides, we live in a very politically correct world today, and the idea
*  that some kind of lost civilization brought knowledge to other cultures around the world is
*  seen as almost racist or colonialist in some way. It triggers that aspect as well. But basically,
*  I think majority of archaeologists are in complete good faith on this. I don't think that anybody's
*  really seeking to frame me. I think that what we're hearing from most archaeologists, some
*  much more vicious than others, but what we're hearing from most archaeologists is this is what
*  we found and we don't see evidence for a lost civilization in it. And to that, I must reply,
*  please look at the myths. Please consider the implications of the younger Dryas. Please look
*  at the ancient astronomy. Please look at those ancient maps and don't just dismiss them and
*  sneer at them. And for God's sake, please look more deeply at the parts of the world that were
*  immensely habitable and attractive during the Ice Age and that have hardly been studied by archaeology
*  at all before you tell us that your theory is the only one that can possibly be correct. In fact,
*  it's a very arrogant and silly position of archaeology because archaeological theories
*  are always being overthrown. It can take years. It can take decades. It took decades in the case
*  of the Clovis first hypothesis for the settlement of the Americas. But sooner or later, a bad idea
*  will be kicked out by a preponderance of evidence that that idea does not explain.
*  R. If we can just look back at your debate with Flint Dibble on Joe Rogan experience,
*  what are some takeaways from that? What have you learned? Maybe what are some things you like
*  about Flint? You said that he's one of your big critics, but what do you like about his ideas
*  and what were you maybe bothered by? F. First of all, just very recently,
*  and it can be found on my YouTube channel and it's signaled on my website, I have made a video,
*  runs about an hour, which looks at a series of statements that Flint made during the debate,
*  which I was not prepared to answer. And it turns out that some of those statements are not correct.
*  The notion, for example, that there were three million shipwrecks that have been mapped, Flint
*  actually uses the word mapped, three million shipwrecks that have been mapped at one point
*  in the debate. And I've put that clip into the video that I brought out. That is not a fact.
*  That is an estimate, a UNESCO estimate. And actually in the small print on one of the slides
*  that he has on the screen, you can see the word estimate, but he never expresses that word out loud.
*  So those who are listening to the podcast rather than watching it wouldn't even have a chance to
*  see that. And I sitting there in the studio didn't see that word estimate either. And I didn't know
*  that. I thought, my God, Flint has a point here. If there'd been three million shipwrecks found and
*  mapped, if that's the case, the absence of any shipwreck from a lost civilization of the ice
*  age is a problem. But then I discovered that it isn't three million shipwrecks that have been
*  mapped. It's much, much less than that. And maybe it's 250,000, still a large number, but most of
*  them from the last thousand years. And unfortunately, what Flint didn't go into, and perhaps he should
*  have shared with the audience, and again, I go into this in the video, is that there is
*  indisputable evidence that human beings were seafarers. As much as 50 or 60,000 years ago,
*  the peopling of Australia involved a relatively short 90 kilometers, 100 kilometer ocean voyage,
*  but nevertheless, it was an ocean voyage. And it must have involved a large enough people,
*  a large enough number of people to create a permanent population that wouldn't go
*  extinct. The settlement of Cyprus is the same thing. It was always an island, even during the ice age.
*  And no ships have survived that speak to the settlement of Australia, and no ships have
*  survived that speak to the settlement of Cyprus either. But that doesn't mean that that thing
*  didn't happen. I should just like linger on this, because for me, it was the shipwrecks thing was
*  convincing. And then looking back, first of all, watching your video, but also just realizing the
*  peopling of Australia part. That's mind boggling. 50,000 years ago. Just imagine being the person
*  standing on the shore, looking out into the ocean, standing on the shore of a harsh environment,
*  looking out to the ocean, harsh environment, and deciding that, you know what, I'm going to go
*  towards near certain death. I don't know what's on the other side of that water. You can't see 90
*  kilometers. Humans did it. Yeah. Yeah. I love humans so much. And again, it's that urge to explore.
*  And I suggest that it probably began with a few pioneers who made the journey there and back.
*  They ventured into the water. They definitely had boats. And lo and behold, after a two or three day
*  voyage, they ended up on a coastline. You're an individual. You've got my relatively straightforward
*  island hopping with where each island is within sight of each other as far as Timor. And when you
*  get to Timor, suddenly you can't island hop anymore. There's an expansive ocean that you
*  can't see across. But that urge to explore, that curiosity that is central to the human condition
*  would undoubtedly have led some adventurous individuals to want to find out more and even
*  be willing to risk their lives. And that first reconnoitering of what lay beyond that strait
*  would have undoubtedly been undertaken by very few individuals, not enough to create a permanent
*  population in Australia. But when they came back with the good news that there's a whole land there,
*  that's the land that geographers call Sahul, which in just as Sunda was the Ice Age,
*  Indonesian and Malaysian Peninsula all joined together into one landmass. So Sahul was New
*  Guinea joined to Australia. So they would have made landfall in New Guinea. And then they think,
*  well, here is this vast, open, incredible land. We need to bring more people here.
*  And that would have involved larger craft. You need to bring people with resources,
*  and you need to bring enough of them, both men and women, in order to produce a population that
*  will not rapidly become extinct. And it's the same in Cyprus. There, the detailed work that's
*  been done suggests very strongly that we're looking at planned migrations of groups of people
*  in excess of a thousand at a time, bringing animals with them. And this certainly would
*  have involved multiple boats and boats of a significant size. And there's no archaeological
*  evidence of those boats? None whatsoever. The oldest boat that's ever been found in the world
*  is the Dokos shipwreck off Greece, which is around 5,000 years old, if I recall correctly.
*  So everything that makes a boat is lost to time?
*  Yes. Boats can be preserved under certain circumstances. There's a wreck at the bottom
*  of the Black Sea, almost two miles deep. I didn't know the Black Sea was that deep.
*  But there's a wreck, and there's no oxygen down there, that is more than 2,000 years old and is
*  still in pretty much perfect condition. But in other conditions, the structure of the ship
*  evaporates. Sometimes what you're left with is the cargo of the ship. And you could say there was a
*  ship that sank here, but the ship itself has gone. The fact is, we know that our ancestors were
*  seafarers as much as 50,000 years ago, and no ship has survived to testify to that, yet we accept
*  that they were. Do you think one day we'll find a ship that's 10, 20, 30, 40, 50,000 years old?
*  It's not impossible. I think it's quite unlikely, given the very thin survival of ships the further
*  back you go in time, with the oldest, as I say, being about 6,000 years old now. And then the
*  other thing to take into account is the Younger Dryas event itself and the cataclysmic circumstances
*  of that event and the roiling of the seas that would have taken place then. How much would have
*  survived in a boat accident at that time, would have survived for thousands of years afterwards,
*  I'm not sure. But I don't give up hope. It's possible.
*  So, okay, so that's back to the three million shipwrecks.
*  So what's your takeaway from that debate?
*  Well, my takeaway from that debate is that I should have been better prepared
*  and I should have been less angry. I have to say that Flint had really disturbed me with these
*  constant snide, not quite exact references to racism and white supremacism in my work. I detest
*  such things. And to have those labels stuck on me, he's always avoided taking direct responsibility,
*  pretty much always avoided. There's one example that I include in the video I've made where he
*  really hasn't successfully avoided it. But in most cases, he's trying to say that I rely on sources
*  that were racist, but he's not saying that I myself am a racist. But the end result of those
*  statements is that people all around the world came to the conclusion that Graham Hancock is a
*  racist and a white supremacist. And that really got under my skin and it really upset me. And I
*  felt angry about it. And I felt that I was there to defend ancient apocalypse season one, whereas
*  in fact, what I was there to do was to listen to a series of lectures where an archaeologist tells
*  me what archaeologists have found and that somehow I'm to deduce that from what they have found,
*  they're not going to find anything else, at least not anything to do with the lost civilization.
*  CB I feel you. I've seen the intensity of the attacks and the whole racism label
*  is the one that can get under your skin. And it's a toolbox that's been prevalent over the past,
*  let's say decade, maybe a little bit more as a method of cancellation when a person is
*  is the opposite of racist very often. It's kind of hilarious to watch, but it can get under your
*  skin, especially when you have certain dynamics that happen on the internet, where it seeps into
*  a Wikipedia page. And then other people read that Wikipedia page and you get to hear it from like
*  friends, oh, I didn't know you're at whatever. And you realize that Wikipedia description of who you
*  are actually has a lot of power, not by people that know you well, but by people that just kind
*  of are learning about you for the first time. And they can really start to annoy you and get
*  under your skin when people are kind of indirectly injecting their writing articles about you. They
*  can then be cited by Wikipedia. It can really bother a person who is actually trying to do good
*  science or just trying to inspire people with different ideas.
*  I felt that my work was being deliberately misrepresented. And I felt that I as a human
*  being was being insulted and wronged in ways that are deeply hurtful. My wife and I have six
*  children between us and we have nine grandchildren. And of those nine grandchildren, seven are of
*  mixed race. And this is my family. And these are kids who are going to grow up and read Wikipedia
*  and learn from reading Wikipedia that grandpa was some kind of racist. This is a personal issue for
*  me. And I'm afraid I carried that personal anger into the debate and it made me less effective
*  than I should have been. But ultimately I do want to pay tribute to Flint. He is an excellent
*  debater. He's got a very sharp mind. He's a very clever man and he's very fast on his feet.
*  And I recognize that. I was definitely up against a superior debater in that debate. I'm not sure
*  that I have those debating skills and I certainly didn't have them on that particular day. I also
*  admire about Flint something else, which is that he was willing to be there. Most archaeologists
*  don't want to talk to me at all. They want to insult me from the sidelines. They want to make
*  sure that Wikipedia keeps on calling me a pseudo-archaeologist or a purveyor of pseudo-archaeological
*  theories. They want to make sure that the hints of racism are there, but they actually don't want
*  to sit down and confront me. At least Flint was willing to do that and I'm grateful to him for
*  that. And I think in that sense, it is an important encounter between people with, let's say, an
*  alternative view of history and those with the very much mainstream view of history that archaeology
*  gives us. And he's also a very determined character. He doesn't give up. So all of those
*  things about him I admire and respect. But I think he fought dirty during the debate and I've said
*  exactly why in this video that I now have up on YouTube. To say a positive thing that I enjoyed,
*  I think towards the end, him speaking about agriculture was pretty interesting. So the
*  techniques of archaeology are pretty interesting. Where you can get some insights through the fog
*  of time about what people were doing, how they were living. That's pretty interesting.
*  It's very interesting. It's a very important discipline. And I've said many times before,
*  publicly, I couldn't do any of my work without the work that archaeologists do.
*  I emphasize very strongly in this video that I don't study what archaeologists study. But
*  nevertheless, the data that archaeologists have generated over the last century or so
*  has been incredibly valuable to me in the work that I do. But when I look at the great Sphinx
*  and the studies of archaeology saying that this is the work of the pharaoh Khafre,
*  despite the absence of any single contemporary inscription that describes it to Khafre,
*  and in fact, the presence of other inscriptions that say that it was already there in the time
*  of Khufu, I am not looking at what Egyptologists study. They just dismiss all of that and lock into
*  the Khafre connection. At Gobekli Tepe, I'm not really looking at what archaeologists look at.
*  I'm looking at the alignments of the megaliths and how they seem to track procession of the
*  star Sirius over a period of time. Archaeologists aren't interested in any of that. So I value and
*  respect archaeology. I think it's an incredible tool for investigating our past. But I wish
*  archaeologists would bring a slightly gentler frame of mind to it and a slightly opener
*  perspective, and also that archaeologists would be willing to trust the general public
*  to make up their own minds. It's as though certain archaeologists are afraid of the public being
*  presented with an alternative point of view, which they regard as quote unquote dangerous,
*  because they somehow underestimate the intelligence of the general public and think
*  the general public are just going to accept that much. Actually, by condemning those alternative
*  point of view, archaeologists make it much more likely that the general public will accept those
*  alternative point of view, because there is a great distrust of experts in our society today.
*  And behaving in a snobbish, arrogant way, we archaeologists are the only people who are really
*  qualified to speak about the past. And anybody else who speaks about the past is dangerous.
*  That actually is not helpful to archaeology in the long term. There could be a much more positive and
*  a much more cooperative relationship. And I can see that relationship with a gentleman like Ed
*  Barnhart. It was very much the case with archaeologist Marti Parsenon from the University
*  of Helsinki and with geographer Alceo Ranze, Brazilian geographer, very, very senior figure,
*  who I worked with in the Amazon for season two of Ancient Apocalypse, looking at these astonishing
*  earthworks that have emerged from the Amazon jungle and which more and more are now being found with
*  LIDAR. Indeed, we found some of them ourselves with LIDAR while we were there.
*  Yeah, that was an incredible part of the show that I got a chance to preview.
*  It's like there's all this earthworks, yeah, the traces of things built on the ground that probably
*  you can only really appreciate when you look from up above. So the idea that they build stuff that
*  you can only appreciate when viewed from up above means they had a very deep relationship with the
*  sky. With the sky. And a very good knowledge of geometry as well, because these are geometrical
*  structures. And some of them even seem to incorporate geometrical games, almost of the
*  kind, like squaring the circle. It's not quite that, but you have a lovely square earthwork with
*  a lovely circle earthwork right in the middle of it. Whatever else they were, they were geometers.
*  They were not just builders of fantastically huge earthworks that nobody expected in the Amazon,
*  not just builders of cities that we now know existed in the Amazon,
*  but that they were astronomers and mathematicians as well.
*  Everything we're talking about is so full of mystery, it's just fascinating,
*  especially the farther back we go. That's what I love about the past,
*  is the mystery that's there. And that's another thing that I regret about some archaeologists,
*  their mission seems to be to drain all mystery out of the past, to suck it dry like some kind
*  of vampire sucking the blood out of the past and to reduce it to a series of numbers that appear
*  to be scientific. I think that's most unfortunate. The past is deeply mysterious. The whole story of
*  life on earth is deeply mysterious. I mean, we were talking about the timeline of human beings,
*  but if you go back to the formation of the earth itself, if I've got the figures right,
*  it's about four and a half billion years ago that the earth supposedly formed.
*  It was then incredibly hot and inhospitable to life for the next several hundred million years.
*  But it was actually Francis Crick who pointed out something odd, that within a hundred million years
*  of the earth being cool enough to support life, there's bacterial life all over the planet.
*  And Crick wrote a book called Life Itself that was published in 1981. And he suggested that life had
*  been brought here by a process of panspermia. Now that's an idea that's around in circulation,
*  that comets may carry bacteria which can seed life on planets. But Crick actually in Life Itself was
*  talking about directed panspermia. He envisaged, this is Crick, not me, he envisaged an alien
*  civilization far away across the galaxy which faced extinction. Perhaps a supernova was going
*  to go off in the neighborhood. They were highly advanced. Their first thought might have been,
*  let's get ourselves off the planet and go and populate some other planet. But the distances
*  of interstellar space were so great. So their second thought was, let's preserve our DNA.
*  Let's put bacteria, genetically engineered bacteria into cryogenic chambers and fire them
*  off into the universe in all directions. And bottom line of Crick's theory in life itself is
*  one of those cryogenic containers containing bacterial life from another solar system crashed
*  into the early earth. And that's why life began so suddenly here on earth.
*  If we as a human civilization continue, I think that is one way to create backups of us elsewhere
*  in the universe given the space is to do a life gun and shoot it everywhere. And then it just plants.
*  And you kind of hope that whatever is the magic that makes up human consciousness,
*  and if that magic is already there in the initial DNA of the bacteria.
*  The potential for that magic is there.
*  The potential is there.
*  And evolutionary forces will work upon it in different ways in different environments.
*  But the potential is there. Yes, it's something that we would do. If we were facing
*  a complete extinction of life on planet earth, a major global effort would be made to preserve
*  it somehow. And that might well include firing off cryogenic chambers into the universe and
*  hoping that some of them would land somewhere hospitable.
*  And as you were mentioning, there's just so many interesting mysteries along the way here.
*  For example, I mean, it's like, I think like three billion years, it was single cell organisms.
*  So it seems like life was pretty good. Single cell organisms that there's no need for
*  multicellularity that like for animals, for any of this kind of stuff. So why is that?
*  It seems like you could adapt much better if you're a more complicated organism. It took
*  a really long time to take that leap. Is it because it's really hard to do? And what was
*  the forcing function to do that kind of leap? And the same, I mean, for us to be selfish
*  and self-obsessed, for us humans, like what was the magic leap to Homo sapiens from the other
*  hominids? And why did Homo sapiens win out against Neanderthals and the other competitors?
*  Why are they not around anymore? So those are all fascinating mysteries. And it feels like
*  the more we propose sort of radical ideas about our past and take it seriously and explore,
*  the more we'll be able to sort of figure out that puzzle that leads all the way back to
*  Homo sapiens and maybe all the way back to the origin of life on earth.
*  I think that Homo sapiens is the tail end of a very long,
*  deep series of mysteries that goes back right to the beginning of life on this planet and probably
*  long before actually, because this planet is part of the universe and God knows what else is out
*  there in the universe. Why do you think Homo sapiens evolved? What was the magic thing?
*  There's a bunch of theories about fire leading to meat to cooking, which can fuel the brain,
*  that's one. The other is like social interaction, we're able to use our imagination to construct
*  ideas and share those ideas and tell great stories. And that is somehow an evolutionary advantage.
*  Do you have any like favorite conceptions? Well, it's interesting. There's no doubt that
*  anatomically modern humans and Neanderthals coexisted in Europe for at least 10,000 years,
*  probably more than that. And yet one of the popular views is that anatomically modern humans
*  wiped out the Neanderthals, that we killed them off. But at the same time, we were into breeding
*  with the Neanderthals. In a sense, the Neanderthals are not gone. They are still within us today. We
*  are part Neanderthal. There's another theory that I've read about. There is some evidence that
*  Neanderthals were cannibals, that ritual cannibalism took place amongst Neanderthals,
*  and particularly the eating of human brains. And this can cause a kuru, which can kill off
*  whole populations. That's another suggestion of whether Neanderthals died out. There's lots of
*  possibilities that have been put forward. Maybe we just out competed them. Maybe anatomically modern
*  humans had some brain connections that they didn't have, even though the Neanderthal brain was
*  bigger than the brain of anatomically modern human beings. As the old saying goes,
*  size isn't everything. Maybe we just had a more compact, more efficient brain. The fact of the
*  matter is that Neanderthals and Denisovans did not survive the rise of Homo sapiens.
*  For our discussion, though, what is interesting is all the hominids seem to be explorers.
*  Yes.
*  They spread. I didn't know this.
*  The fact that Homo erectus was all over the planet more than a million years ago
*  is testament to that. I do think that exploration urge is fundamental to humanity. I would like to
*  say that's what I think I'm doing. I'm exercising my urge to explore the past in my own way,
*  making my own path and defining my own route.
*  That's the leap from non-human to human. One of the things you've discussed is your idea of what
*  was the leap to human civilization. What is the drive or what is the inspiration for humans to
*  form civilizations? For you, that's shamanism.
*  Definitely.
*  Can you explain what that means?
*  I think that shamanism is the origin of everything, of value in humanity. I think it was the earliest
*  form of science. When I spend time with shamans in the Amazon, I observe people who are constantly
*  experimenting with plants in a very scientific way. They're always trying a pinch of this and
*  a pinch of that in different forms, for example, of the ayahuasca brew to see if it enhances it or
*  makes it different in any way. The invention of curare is a remarkable scientific feat,
*  which is entirely down to shamans in the Amazon. They are the scientists of the hunter-forager
*  state of society. They were the ancient leaders of human civilization. I think all civilization
*  arises out of shamanism. Shamanism is a naturally scientific endeavor where experimentation is
*  undertaken and exploration and investigation of the environment around us. What I'm suggesting is
*  that one group, perhaps more than one group, went a bit further than other groups did and used that
*  study of the skies and developed navigational techniques and were able to sail and explore
*  the earth. Ultimately, what lies behind it is the same curiosity and investigative skill that
*  shamans are still using in the Amazon to this day. I do see them as scientists in a very
*  proper use of the word. Do you think something like ayahuasca was a part of that process?
*  Yes. Ayahuasca is the result of shamanistic investigation of what's available in the Amazon.
*  Of course, ayahuasca is all the fad in Western industrialized societies today. Some people see
*  it as a miracle cure for all kinds of ailments and problems. Perhaps it is. Perhaps it can be
*  in certain ways. Ayahuasca itself is not an Amazonian word. It comes from the Quechua
*  language and it means the vine of souls or the vine of the dead. The ayahuasca vine is only one
*  of two principal ingredients in the ayahuasca brew. The other ingredient are leaves that contain
*  dimethyltryptamine. There are two sources of that. One is a bush called Cicotria viridis.
*  That's its botanical name. They call it chacruna in the Amazon. Its leaves are rich in dimethyltryptamine
*  DMT, which is arguably the most powerful psychedelic known to science. The other source
*  comes from another vine, Diplopteris cabrirana, which the leaves of that vine also contain DMT.
*  The ayahuasca vine on its own is not going to give you a visionary journey. The leaves that contain
*  DMT on their own, whether they come from Diplopteris or whether they come from chacruna,
*  are not going to give you a visionary journey. The reason they're not going to give you the
*  visionary journey is because of the enzyme monoamine oxidase in the gut that shuts down
*  DMT when absorbed orally. Basically, DMT is not accessible orally unless you combine it
*  with a monoamine oxidase inhibitor. That's what I mean when I'm talking about science in the Amazon
*  because there are so many tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands different species of plants
*  and trees in the Amazon. They've gone around and they found just two or three of them that put
*  together can produce these extraordinary visionary experiences. Just imagine the number of plants
*  they had to have eaten, consumed and smoked, all kinds of combinations to arrive at that.
*  Exactly. To realize that this is something very special and then to use the principles there to
*  find another form of it. So ayahuasca is the form that is made with the ayahuasca vine
*  and the leaves of the chacruna plant. But Yahe is made from the ayahuasca vine and the leaves of
*  another vine Diplopteris cabrirana, which contain not only NNDMT, which is the DMT that everybody's
*  pretty much familiar with these days, but also 5-MeO DMT. The Yahe experience, which I have also
*  had, in my view, is more intense and more powerful almost to the point of being overwhelming
*  than the ayahuasca experience. But the result of this sophisticated chemistry that we find taking
*  place here is a brew which is hideous to drink. I find it quite repulsive. I almost
*  retch just smelling it in the cup, but then unleashes these extraordinary experiences.
*  And it isn't just pretty visuals. It's the sense of encounters with sentient others,
*  that there are sentient beings, that somehow we're surrounded by a realm of sentience that
*  is not normally accessible to us. And that what the ayahuasca brew and certain other psychedelics,
*  like some psilocybin mushrooms in a high enough dose can do it as well. LSD can do it. But
*  ayahuasca is the master in this of lowering the veil to what appears to be a seamlessly convincing
*  other realm, other world. And of course, the hardline rational scientists will say that's
*  just all fantasies of your brain. But I don't think we fully understand or even close to
*  understanding exactly what consciousness is. And I remain open to two possibilities,
*  that consciousness is generated by the brain, is made by the brain in the way that a factory makes
*  cars. But I also am open to the possibility that the brain is a receiver of consciousness,
*  just as a television set is the receiver of television signals.
*  And that if that is the case, then we locked into the physical realm, we need our everyday
*  alert problem solving state of consciousness. And that's the state of consciousness that Western
*  civilization values and highly encourages. But these other states of consciousness that allow us
*  to access alternative realities are possibly more important. It may be apocryphal, but it was
*  reported after Francis Crick's role and his Nobel Prize for the discovery of the double helix,
*  that he finally got it under the influence of LSD. There's the classic example of
*  Kerry Mullis and the Polymerase chain reaction. He said he got that under the influence of LSD.
*  So the notion that the alert problem solving state of consciousness is the only valuable
*  state of consciousness is disproved by valuable experiences that people have had in a visionary
*  state. But the question that remains unresolved is those entities that we encounter, and not
*  everybody encounters them, and you're certainly not going to encounter them on every ayahuasca trip.
*  There are ayahuasca journeys where nothing seems to happen. I suspect something does happen,
*  but it happens at a subconscious level. I know that shamans in the Amazon regard those trips
*  where actually you don't see visions as amongst the most valuable. And they say you are learning
*  stuff that you're not remembering, but you're learning it anyway. These sentient others that
*  are encountered, what are they? Are they just figments of our brain on drugs? Or are we actually
*  gaining access to a parallel reality which is inhabited by consciousness, which is in a
*  non-physical form? And I'm equally open to that idea. I think that may be what is going on here
*  with ayahuasca. But the other thing is that there is a presence within the ayahuasca brew,
*  and she is present both in ayahuasca and in yaha. And that's one of the reasons why the shamans say
*  that actually the master of the process is the ayahuasca vine, not the leaves. It's as though
*  the vine has harnessed the leaves to gain access to human consciousness. And there, if you have
*  sufficient exposure to ayahuasca or yaha, you drink it enough times. I've had maybe 75 or 80
*  journeys with ayahuasca. You definitely start to feel an intelligent presence with a definite
*  personality, which I interpret as feminine and which most people in the West interpret it as
*  feminine and call her Mother Ayahuasca. There are some tribes in the Amazon who interpret the
*  spirit of ayahuasca as male, but in all cases, that spirit is seen as a teacher. That's fundamentally
*  what ayahuasca is. It's a teacher, and it teaches moral lessons. And that's fascinating, that a
*  mixture of two plants should cause us to reflect on our own behavior and how it may have hurt and
*  damaged and affected others and fill us with a powerful wish not to repeat that negative behavior
*  again in the future. The more baggage you carry in your life, the harder the beating that ayahuasca
*  is going to give you until it forces you to confront and take responsibility for your own
*  behavior. And that is an extraordinary thing to come from a plant brew in that way. And I think
*  yes, I think ayahuasca is the most powerful of all the plant medicines for accessing these
*  mysterious realms, but there's no doubt you can access them. They're all tryptamines. They're all
*  related to one another in one way. You can access them through LSD, and you certainly can access
*  them through psilocybin mushrooms as well in large enough dose. Both possibilities, as you describe,
*  are interesting. And to me, they're kind of akin to each other. I wonder what the limit of the
*  brain's capacity is to create imaginary worlds and treat them seriously and make them real,
*  and in those worlds, explore and have real sort of moral deep brainstorming sessions
*  with those entities. So it's almost like the power of the human mind to imagine
*  taken to its limit. It is. And the curious thing is that the same iconography,
*  people paint their visions after ayahuasca sessions. People were painting in Europe,
*  in the cave of Lascaux, for example, and of course they had access to psilocybin mushrooms
*  in prehistoric Europe. There's a remarkable commonality in the imagery that is painted.
*  I like to give credit to where credit is due, and there are two names that need to be mentioned
*  here. One is the late, great Terence McKenna and his book Food of the Gods, where he proposed
*  the idea very strongly that it was our ancestral encounters with psychedelics that made us fully
*  human. That's what switched on the modern human mind. And very much the same idea began to be
*  explored a bit earlier by Professor David Lewis Williams at the University of Witwatersrand in
*  South Africa, a fabulous book called The Mind in the Cave, where he is again arguing that these
*  astonishing similarities in cave art and rock art all around the world can only be properly explained
*  by people in deeply altered states of consciousness attempting to remember when they return to a normal
*  everyday state of consciousness, attempting to remember their visions and document them
*  on permanent media like the wall of a cave. So typically you get a lot of geometric patterns,
*  but you also got entities. And those entities often are therianthropes, part animal, part human
*  in form, might have the head of a wolf and the body of a human being, might have the head of a
*  bird and the body of a human being, and so on and so forth, and that they communicate with us in the
*  visionary state. Interestingly, although this sounds like woo-woo, and it is an area that most
*  scientists would steer clear of at risk of their careers, there is very serious work now being done
*  at Imperial College in London and at the University of California at San Diego, where volunteers are
*  being given extended DMT. There's a new technology, DMTX, where the DMT is fed directly into the
*  bloodstream by drip, and it's possible to keep the individual in the peak DMT state, which normally
*  when you smoke or vape DMT, you're looking if you're lucky at 10 minutes, or if you're unlucky,
*  if it's a bad journey, because those 10 minutes can seem like forever. But with DMTX, with the
*  drip feeding of DMT into the bloodstream, these volunteers actually could be kept in the peak
*  state for hours. And unlike LSD, where you rapidly build up tolerance, nobody ever builds up tolerance
*  to DMT. It always hits you with the same power, even if you took it yesterday and the day before,
*  and you're taking it tomorrow as well, it's still going to have that same power. There's no tolerance
*  there. So that's how they can use that lack of tolerance to keep volunteers in this state.
*  And then when they debrief those volunteers, they're also putting them in MRI scanners and
*  looking at what's happening in the brain. But when they debrief them, they're all talking about
*  encounters with sentient others. There's even a group now called sentient others, where people are
*  exchanging, volunteers are now exchanging their experiences. They weren't allowed to do so at the
*  beginning of the experiment, but now that most of them have left it, they're exchanging their
*  experiences. And it's all about encounters with sentient others who wish to teach them moral
*  lessons. Now, to me, that's wild. What is going on here? How do we account for this? Yeah, I get the
*  notion of hallucinations and brightly colored visuals, but the moral lessons that come with it,
*  those are very odd. Yeah. And would you say that the reason that could give birth to a civilization
*  is it because such visions can help create myths, and especially like religious myths,
*  that would be a cohesive thing for a large group of people to get around? Yeah. And can help us to be
*  better members of our own community. Right, with moral lessons. Yeah, more contributing members of
*  our community, more caring, more nurturing members of our community. That's got to be good for any
*  community. I've said this a dozen times, but I'll say it again. If I had the power to do so,
*  I would make it a law, an absolute law, that anybody running for a powerful political position,
*  particularly if that position is president or head of state in any kind of way, that that person has
*  to undergo the ayahuasca ordeal first. They have to have 10 or 12 sessions of ayahuasca
*  as a condition for applying for the job. I suspect that most who had had those experiences
*  wouldn't want to apply for the job anymore. They would want to live a different kind of life.
*  And those who did want to carry on being a leader of a nation would be very different people from
*  the people who are leading the nations of the earth into chaos and destruction today. Yeah,
*  they would be doing it for the right reasons. I mentioned to you, I recently interviewed Donald
*  Trump and actually brought up this same idea that it would be a much better world if most of Congress
*  and most politicians would take some form of psychedelic at the very least. I have no doubt
*  that it would be a better world. I mean, this raises an interesting point, which is the role
*  of government in controlling our consciousness. And in my opinion, the so-called war on drugs
*  is one of the fundamental abuses of human rights that have been undertaken in the past 60 years.
*  It should be a Republican issue. If I understand the Republican Party correctly,
*  the Republican Party believes in individual freedom for adults as much as possible,
*  and particularly the freedom to make choices over their own bodies. But in the case of even
*  cannabis, I know that's one of the great things that's happening in America. It's happening
*  state by state where cannabis is being legalized and that draconian hand of government has been
*  taken off the back of people who are consuming a medicine that is far less harmful than alcohol,
*  which is glorified in our society. We cannot say that we are free if we allow a government to
*  dictate to us what experiences we may or may not have in our inner consciousness while doing no harm
*  to others. And the point there is we already have a whole raft of laws that deal with us when we do
*  harm to others. Do we really need laws that tell us what we may or may not experience in the inner
*  sanctum of our own consciousness? I think it's a fundamental violation of adult sovereignty.
*  We would have much less drug problems if these drugs were all legalized and made available to
*  people without shaming them, without punishing them in any way, but just part of normal social
*  life. And then you could be sure that you were getting good product rather than really shitty
*  product, which has been cut with all sorts of other things. Ultimately, the way forward is for
*  adults to take responsibility for their own behavior and for society to allow that to happen
*  and not to have big government taking responsibility for decisions that should be in the hands of
*  individuals. And for me also is exciting some of these substances like psilocybin are being
*  integrated into scientific studies, lower skills. It's really interesting. We've seen a revolution
*  in the way science looks at psychedelics in the last 20, 25 years. They were in that highly
*  demonized category. But again, it's one of those paradigms which gets overwhelmed by new evidence
*  and it began to be realized that psilocybin and other psychedelics are very helpful in a range
*  of conditions from which people suffer. Post-traumatic stress disorder, the fear of death when you're
*  suffering from terminal cancer can be overwhelming. And it's been found that psilocybin can remove
*  that. Deep depressions can be evaporated with one single massive psilocybin journey. They just go
*  away. There's really good science on this and they are being integrated into conventional medicine
*  more and more. We'll see it happening. I'm not sure if it'll happen as much as fast as I would
*  like to see it happen in my lifetime, but it is going to happen. Yeah, actually just recently
*  found out that he had a Ted Talk war on consciousness that was taken down. And that was
*  just part of just the general resistance because it wasn't really a radical talk.
*  I was talking about ayahuasca and I was talking about the view that I hold very strongly that as
*  long as we do no harm to others, sovereign adults should be allowed to make decisions about their
*  own bodies and not face a jail sentence or shaming as a result. So it was a TedX talk,
*  not a Ted Talk, organized by a local Ted group. They call them TedX talks. And I gave this talk
*  about the war on consciousness and it was immediately pulled down from Ted's main channel
*  with all kinds of bizarre reasons being given. But unfortunately, it was too late because a
*  number of people had already downloaded the talk and then uploaded it onto other YouTube channels.
*  And actually their banning of it made it go viral in a way that would not have happened otherwise.
*  But again, it's a sign that points of view that are not acceptable to those in positions of power
*  are simply dismissed and shut down, or at least attempts are made to do so.
*  In general, just along that line of thinking, I'm pretty sure that what we understand about
*  consciousness today will seem silly to humans from 100 years from now.
*  You bet it will. Especially if we harness psychedelics to investigate consciousness.
*  That is what is happening at Imperial College right now, is the investigation of the experience.
*  There are other trials that are looking for the therapeutic potential of DMT, but in this case,
*  they're looking entirely at the experiences that people have and why they're so similar
*  people from different age groups and different genders and different parts of the world are
*  all having the same experiences. And for me, from an engineer perspective,
*  it's interesting if it's possible to engineer consciousness in artificial beings.
*  It's another way to approach the question of how special is human consciousness.
*  From where does it arise? Is it something that permeates all of life? And in that case,
*  what is the thing that makes life special? What is life? What is these living organisms that we
*  have here that evolved to create humans? What is truly special about humans? It's both scary
*  and exciting to consider the possibility that we can create something like this.
*  Yeah, but why not? We're a vehicle for consciousness, in my view. I think consciousness
*  is present in all life on earth. I don't think it's limited to human beings. We have the equipment
*  to manifest and express that consciousness in the way that a dog, for example, doesn't have,
*  or a snail doesn't have, or a pigeon doesn't have. But when I look at two pigeons sitting on my
*  garden fence and rubbing up close to each other and enjoying each other's company and taking off
*  together and hanging out together, I think they're conscious beings. And I think consciousness is
*  everywhere. I think it's the basis of everything. And I suspect that fundamentally,
*  consciousness is non-physical and that it can manifest in physical forms where it can then
*  have experiences that would not be available in the non-physical state. That's a guess.
*  That'd be fascinating because then you can construct all kinds of physical forms
*  to manifest the consciousness. And see if consciousness
*  enters if they become conscious. Isn't there some suggestion that artificial intelligence
*  is already becoming conscious? That makes humans really uncomfortable.
*  Because we are at the top of the food chain. We consider ourselves truly special. And
*  to consider that there's other things that could be special is scary.
*  Well, look how other people make us uncomfortable too. I mean, look at the state of the world today.
*  All the conflicts that are raging. That's because we're afraid. When I say we,
*  I'm speaking nation by nation, we are afraid of other people. We fear that they're going to
*  hurt us or damage us in some way. And so we seek to stop that. It's the root of many, many conflicts,
*  this fear. And so fear of AI may not be such a good idea after all. It might be very interesting
*  to go down that route and see where it comes. Certainly in terms of exploring consciousness,
*  it is very interesting. Yeah, fear is a useful thing,
*  but it can also be destructive. Well, it can be destructive and it can shut you down completely.
*  If you look into the future, maybe the next hundred years, what do you hope are the interesting
*  discoveries in archaeology that we'll find? Well, I'd really like to know how the Great
*  Pyramid was built. And we now have with new tech, with scanning technology, it's now become
*  apparent that there are many major voids within the Great Pyramid. Right above the Grand Gallery,
*  there's what looks like a second Grand Gallery that has been identified with remote scanning.
*  And new chambers, one of them has even been opened up already, are being found as a result of this.
*  So it may be that the Great Pyramid will ultimately give up its secrets. I often think
*  that the Great Pyramid is partly designed to do that. It's designed to invite its own initiates.
*  Some people aren't interested in the Great Pyramid at all, but some people are fascinated by it and
*  they're drawn towards it. And when they're drawn towards it, it immediately starts raising questions
*  in their minds and they seek answers to their questions. So it's like saying, here I stand,
*  investigate me, find out about me, figure out what I am. Why have I got these two shafts cut into the
*  side of the so-called Queen's Chamber? Why do they slope up through the body of the Great Pyramid?
*  Why do they not exit on the outside of the Great Pyramid? Why, when we send a robot up those shafts,
*  do we find them after about 160 feet blocked by a door with metal handles? Why, when we drill
*  through that door to see what's beyond it, three or four feet away, we see another door.
*  It's like very frustrating, but it's saying to us, keep on exploring. If you're persistent enough,
*  we'll eventually give you the answer. So I'm hoping that that answer will come
*  as to how this most mysterious of monuments was actually built and the inspiration that lay behind
*  it. Certainly, I'm sure it was never a tomb or a tomb only. The later pyramids might have been.
*  Actually, no pharaonic burial has been discovered in any pyramid, but nevertheless, it's pretty
*  clear that the later pyramids with the pyramid texts written on the walls, like the Pyramid of
*  Unas, Fifth Dynasty pyramid at Saqqara, were tombs. But the Great Pyramid, to go to that length to
*  create a tomb, to make it a scale model of the earth, to orient it perfectly to true north,
*  to make it 6 million tons, this is not a tomb. This is something else. This is a curiosity device.
*  This is something that is asking us to understand it. And I hope we will understand it. And I hope
*  Egyptologists will be willing to set aside that prejudice that they're only looking at a tomb
*  and consider other possibilities. And as new tech is revealing these previously unknown inner
*  spaces within the Great Pyramid, I think that's going to become more and more likely.
*  Matthew 18 So not just the how it was built, but the why.
*  Richard 18 But the why.
*  Matthew 18 And to you, it seems
*  obvious that there would be a cosmic motivation.
*  Richard 18 Yeah, very, very much so. As above, so below.
*  Which is an idea in the Hermetica. The god Hermes, for the Greeks, was the Greek version of Thoth,
*  the wisdom god of ancient Egypt. And that's where that saying comes from. It comes from the
*  Hermetica. But it's expressing an ancient Egyptian idea to mirror the perfection of the heavens on
*  earth. Matthew 19
*  So you think there's something interesting to be discovered about the how it was built?
*  You mean beyond the sort of the ideas of using ramps and what's-
*  Richard 18 Yeah, ramps won't do it.
*  Ramps won't do it, nor will wet sand. It's true that the ancient Egyptians did haul big
*  objects on sleds on wet sand. There are even reliefs that show the process where an individual
*  is standing on the front of the sledge pouring water down to lubricate the sand underneath.
*  And that's a perfectly respectable way to move a 200-ton block of stone across flat sand if you
*  have enough people to pull it. But that is not going to help you get dozens of 70-ton granite
*  blocks 300 feet in the air to form the roof of the king's chamber and the floor of the chamber
*  above it and the roof of that chamber and the floor of the chamber above that and so on and so
*  forth. Wet sand never got those objects up there. Somehow they were lifted up there. Now, yeah,
*  ramps are proposed as the solution. But where are the remains of those ramps? If you're going to
*  carry blocks weighing up to two or three tons right to the top of the Great Pyramid to complete
*  your work, you're going to need a ramp that's going to extend out into the desert for more
*  than a mile at a 10-degree slope. And it's calculated that a 10-degree slope is about
*  the maximum slope that human labor can haul objects up a ramp. And that ramp can't just be
*  compacted sand since heavy objects are being hauled up. It's going to have to be made of very solid
*  material, almost as solid as the pyramid itself. Where is it? We don't see any trace of those so
*  called ramps that are supposed to have been involved in the construction of the pyramid.
*  I think we don't know. I think we have no idea it's built. That's why there's so many different
*  theories. We haven't got the answer yet. But the how of it is one of the big mysteries from our
*  past. I love the Great Pyramids as a kind of puzzle that was created by the ancient peoples
*  to be solved by later peoples. I mean, this is, I don't know if you're aware of the 10,000 year
*  clock that was built by Jeff Bezos and Danny Hillis in Sierra Diablo mountains in Texas. So
*  they're building a clock that takes once a year for 10,000 years. So it's talking about,
*  and it's supposed to sort of run, you know, if there's a nuclear apocalypse, it just runs.
*  And it's an example of modern humans thinking like, okay, if 10,000 years from now and beyond,
*  if something goes wrong or the future humans that are way different come back and they analyze what
*  happened here, how can we create monuments that they could then analyze and in that way be curious
*  about in their curiosity, discover some deep truths about this current time. It's an interesting kind
*  of notion of like, what can we build now? That would last. And the answer is that the majority
*  of what we build now wouldn't last. It would be gone within a few thousand years. But what would
*  last is massive megalithic structures like the Great Pyramid, that would last. And it could be
*  used to send a message to the future. I think Gobekli Tepe serves a similar function. I mean,
*  there it was. It was buried 10,400 years ago. And then for the next 10,000 years, nobody touched it.
*  Nobody knew it was there. It took the genius of Klaus Schmidt, the original excavator, to
*  realize what he'd found and what it was. But the great thing about the sealing of Gobekli Tepe,
*  the deliberate burial of Gobekli Tepe, is it means that no later culture trod over it and imposed
*  their organic materials on it and messed up the dating sequences and so on and so forth, or
*  vandalized it or used it as a quarry. It's all there intact. So you mentioned that the Pyramids
*  and some of the other amazing things that humans have built was the results of us humans struggling
*  with our mortality. That's the ultimate goal. That seems to me what's at the heart of many pyramids
*  around the world is that they're connected in one way or another to the notion of death
*  and to the notion of the exploration of the afterlife. And this is, of course,
*  the fundamental mystery that all human beings face. We may wish to ignore it. We may wish to
*  pretend that it's not going to happen, but we are, of course, all mortal. Every one of us,
*  all eight billion or however many of us that are on the planet right now, we're all going to face
*  death sooner or later. And the question is, what happens? And there are a few cultures that really
*  intensely, deeply studied that mystery. We are not one of them. The general view of science,
*  I think, is that we're accidents of evolution. When we die, the light blinks out. There's no
*  more of us. There's no such thing as the soul. But that's not a proven point. There's no experiment
*  that proves that's the case. We know we die, but we don't know whether there's such a thing as a soul
*  or not. Yeah, it's the great mystery. It's the great mystery that we all share. And those cultures
*  that have investigated it, and ancient Egypt is the best example, have investigated it thoroughly
*  and map out the journey that we make after death. But that notion of a journey after death and of
*  hazards and challenges along the way, and ultimately of a judgment, that notion is found
*  right around the world. And it even manifests into the three monotheistic face that are still
*  present in the world today. Well, you're one such human. And you said you contemplate your own.
*  Death. Yeah. Are you afraid of it? No, I'm not afraid of death at all. I'm curious about death.
*  I think it could be very interesting. I think it's the beginning of the next great adventure.
*  So I don't fear it. And I would like to live as long as my body is healthy enough to make living
*  worthwhile. But I don't fear death. What I do fear is pain. I do fear the humiliation that old age and
*  the collapse of the faculties can bring. I do fear the cancers that can strike us down and riddle
*  us with pain and agony. That I fear very, very much indeed. But death is going to come to all of us.
*  I accept it. It's going to come to me. And I'm not going to say I'm looking forward to it. But
*  when it happens, I'm going to approach it, I hope, with a sense of curiosity and a sense of adventure,
*  that there's something beyond this life. It isn't heaven, it isn't hell, but there's something.
*  The soul goes on. I think reincarnation is a very plausible idea. Again, modern science would reject
*  that. But there's the excellent work of Ian Stevenson, children who remember past lives,
*  who found that children up to the age of seven often have memories of past lives. And in cultures
*  where memories of past lives are discouraged, they tend not to express that much. But in cultures
*  where memories of past lives are encouraged, like India, they do express it. And he found several
*  subjects, children under the age of seven in India, who were able to remember specific details of a
*  past life. And he was able to go to the place where that past life unfolded and validate those
*  details. So if consciousness is the basis of everything, if it's the essence of everything,
*  and consciousness benefits in some way from being incarnated in physical form,
*  then reincarnation makes a lot of sense. All the investment that the universe has put into creating
*  this home for life may have a much bigger purpose than just accident.
*  What a beautiful mystery this whole thing is.
*  Yeah, we are immersed in mystery. We live in the midst of mystery. We're surrounded by mystery.
*  And if we pretend otherwise, we're deluding ourselves.
*  And Graham, thank you so much for inspiring the world to explore that mystery.
*  Thank you for talking today.
*  Thank you, Lex. It's been a pleasure.
*  Thanks for listening to this conversation with Graham Hancock. To support this podcast,
*  please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from
*  Charles Darwin. It is not the strongest of the species that survives, nor the most intelligent.
*  It is the one that is the most adaptable to change.
*  Thank you for listening, and hope to see you next time.
