---
Date Generated: April 08, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 6642s
Video Keywords: ['agi', 'ai', 'ai podcast', 'artificial intelligence', 'elon musk', 'joe rogan', 'lex ai', 'lex fridman', 'lex friedman', 'lex jre', 'lex mit', 'lex pod', 'lex podcast', 'tulsi gabbard']
Video Views: 664046
Video Rating: None
---

# Tulsi Gabbard: War, Politics, and the Military Industrial Complex | Lex Fridman Podcast #423
**Lex Fridman:** [April 02, 2024](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_El9riy9Zjw)
*  It's a sad state of affairs when some of the most influential voices in our country
*  will label someone a lover or supporter of dictators simply because you're saying,
*  hey, we shouldn't be going to war. There is another way.
*  The following is a conversation with Tulsi Gabbard, who was a longtime Democrat, including
*  being the vice chair of the Democratic National Committee. She endorsed Bernie in 2016 and Biden
*  in 2020. She has been both loved and heavily criticized for her independent thinking and
*  bold political stances, especially on topics of war and the military industrial complex.
*  She served in the US military for many years, achieving the rank of Lieutenant Colonel.
*  And now she's the author of a new book called For Love of Country.
*  This is the Lex Friedman podcast. To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description.
*  And now, dear friends, here's Tulsi Gabbard.
*  You've served in the US military for many years, achieving rank of Lieutenant Colonel.
*  You were deployed in Iraq in 2004 and five, Kuwait in 2008 and nine. What lessons about life and
*  about country have you learned from that experience of war? So many. Central to those lessons learned
*  was having my eyes open to the very real cost of war. Of course, I served in a medical unit
*  during that first deployment to Iraq. It was 2005 during the height of that war.
*  Unfortunately, we took a lot of casualties. We, across the entire US military,
*  my brigade that I deployed with was from the Hawaii National Guard. We had approximately
*  3,000 soldiers who were operating in four different areas of Iraq. My first task every day was to go
*  through a list of every injury, combat-related injury that had occurred the day before
*  in the country. I went through that list name by name, looking to see if any one of our nearly
*  3,000 soldiers from Hawaii had been hurt in the line of duty. Then, if seeing them on the list,
*  tracking them down, where were they? Were they getting the care they needed?
*  Would they be able to get sufficient care to stay in country and return to duty? Did I need to get
*  them evacuated? Usually, it would be to military hospitals that at that time were in Landstuhl
*  and Ramstein in Germany. Then from there, getting them to either Brooke Army Medical Center,
*  which is here in Texas that specialized in burn-related injuries or to Walter Reed,
*  and tracking them and their care until they were finally home with their families.
*  It never became a routine task. It never became like, okay, cool, check the list,
*  dot the i's, cross the t's. It was that daily confrontation with the reality of the cost of war.
*  Friends of mine were killed in combat.
*  Experiencing firsthand that high human cost of war caused me, 20-something-year-old from Hawaii,
*  I'd left my seat in the state legislature to volunteer to deploy with my brothers and sisters
*  in my unit to Iraq. Recognize the cost of war, I think, in two fundamental ways. Number one is
*  the high human cost of war on our troops and on the people in the country where this war was
*  being waged, and also the cost on American taxpayers. Seeing then back in, again, 2005
*  and recognizing KBR Halliburton, one of the biggest defense contracting companies then,
*  and I know that they are still very much in that business now. Dick Cheney being connected with
*  that company at one point or another. But in our camp specifically, which was one of the larger
*  ones in Iraq at that time, there wasn't anything that happened in our camp that didn't have the
*  KBR Halliburton logo imprinted on it. We had a big shack looking place where we ate our meals. They
*  call it a dining facility, a DFAC in the military, and they served four meals a day. They brought in
*  and they being KBR Halliburton, they imported workers in from places like Nepal and Sri Lanka
*  and the Philippines to come in and cook food and work at this dining facility.
*  I got curious about how much it cost us as taxpayers. And so I started asking around
*  some of the people, and I think at that time it was like, well, every time a soldier or a
*  service member walks through the door, if I were to go in for breakfast and grab a banana and walk
*  out, that's an automatic $35 per head, per meal, four times a day, thousands and thousands of people.
*  And then we made friends. There's a pretty large Filipino community in Hawaii,
*  a lot of Filipino soldiers from Hawaii. We made friends with the Filipino workers who were there.
*  They would often go in the back of the tents and set up their own rice cookers and cook their own
*  meals, which is where the real good food was. But just started talking to them and getting to know
*  them and ask, hey, how much do you get paid? And on average, it was like, oh, I get paid like $500
*  a month, $500 a month to go and do this work of either cleaning out porta potties, picking up
*  trash, the dining facility, doing laundry, all of these different tasks because the military
*  wanted soldiers to be out doing things that only soldiers could do. Understandable. But when I
*  started putting two and two together and knowing that this company, one company alone was making
*  trillions of dollars, trillions of dollars, and yet this Filipino mom is making $500 a month,
*  maybe getting one day off a week, maybe working 12 hours a day otherwise.
*  And I said, how often are you able to go home to your family? Well, they'll let us go home
*  a couple of weeks every other year. It was an eye-opening experience that growing up in Hawaii,
*  I frankly hadn't given much thought to before. But it's what led me ultimately coming back from
*  that first deployment. There was no way that I could go back to the life that I had left behind.
*  And I knew somehow, some way, I needed to find a way to use those experiences to try to make a
*  positive impact, to try to influence those, I mean, frankly, the politicians who were making
*  decisions to go and launch these regime change wars and send our men and women in uniform into
*  war. And to what end, ultimately? If we can just go back to that list.
*  Yeah. So the list is just name and injury, name and injury.
*  Name, unit, potentially location, if someone had documented that and their injury.
*  And it's just pages and pages of that.
*  Yeah. Yeah. And I knew, I didn't get to call home every day, but
*  when I called home and talked to my parents, I felt the tension in their voice. And they didn't
*  want me to worry about anything at home. And so they were always like, hey, how are you? What can
*  we send you? And this and that. But it wasn't like I was calling them from down the street and
*  saying, hey, how's it going? Let's go have lunch or whatever. And so I knew that the reason for
*  that tension was they were terrified of getting a phone call, delivering the worst possible news.
*  And that was what I thought of as I went through that list of how it is the reality of war.
*  Behind every one of those names on that list was a husband or a wife, parents,
*  you know, sons and daughters, family members who had no idea what we were dealing with, really.
*  All they knew was what they saw on the news. And what my dad told me later when I got home
*  after that deployment was that every time they saw the news and they saw a helicopter
*  shot down or crashed or some IED, they held their breath until they saw or heard the news of
*  who it was or what it was. What can you say about
*  what the soldiers had to go through physically and psychologically when they get injured?
*  The physical, you know, I mean, some injuries appeared to be minor upfront. At that time,
*  traumatic brain injury was not something that was talked about much, if at all. And so, you know,
*  many had visible wounds. Others are now what we know were appeared like, all right, cool,
*  you checked out, but had invisible wounds. Those who were injured in a way that did not allow them
*  to get back to work found it emotionally very difficult to be put on a plane and evacuated out
*  of there. Feeling guilty that they were leaving their friends behind and not thinking about
*  themselves or not feeling bad for themselves, but instead feeling bad for being forced to be in a
*  position to leave. You know, for soldiers, it's not, of course, we all have our own political
*  opinions on things, but when it comes right down to it in a war zone, it's about your friends,
*  it's about your brothers and sisters that you're serving alongside. It's not about the politicians
*  or whatever insanity is going on in Washington. It's about getting up and going out, getting the
*  job done and coming back home together. I mean, I had friends of mine who were from Hawaii,
*  who were from American Samoa, very culturally tight-knit community who confided in me throughout
*  that year that we were there, some of the infantry soldiers who were going out on security
*  patrols and doing raids every day, just some of the very traumatic experiences that they went
*  through. No physical injury, but creating a kind of emotional stress and trauma that as human beings,
*  they were struggling in dealing with. On a positive note, the Polynesian culture especially,
*  but also Asian culture and other cultures around the world, our guys found that as they were,
*  shortly after we got there, the unit that we were replacing, we're taking the guys out on
*  patrol and saying, hey, here's this village, here's where we found friendlies or here's where
*  we know that there are insurgents operating and they've got allies and lookouts and showing them
*  the lay of the land basically. What our guys found was that as they were doing these ride-alongs,
*  they call it a left seat, right seat when you're coming in and taking over, that there was a bit
*  of a tense, even adversarial type of relationship where on the military side, there was an assumption
*  of suspicion or lack of trust just with the local Iraqi people who lived around the base that we
*  were at. Without anybody telling them to culturally, our guys began trying to build relationships.
*  And for Hawaii and Samoa and we had soldiers from Guam and Saipan, little things like you're riding
*  down in a Humvee, you've got a gunner in the turret with a 50 cal or a machine gun of some sort,
*  little things like pointing the muzzle to the sky as you're riding through a town rather than
*  pointing it directly at where people are walking down the street was a huge gesture of an assumption
*  of, hey, let's actually talk and become friends. We had our guys riding down the street and throwing
*  chakkas out to the local people there, breaking bread, sharing tea and building those relationships.
*  And again, I served in a medical unit and what we saw was a downward shift in casualties from
*  the unit that had been there before us simply because of that basic human connection that our
*  guys sought to make. And then gradually finding like, hey, local people who lived in the town
*  right next to us were saying, hey, somebody was digging a big hole a mile down the road.
*  You might want to bypass that or check that out and finding weapons caches and IEDs and
*  provides explosive devices and other things that helped save people's lives.
*  On the cost side of things, how is it possible for a company like Hal Burton or others to get away with
*  $40 bananas or however much it was, the overhead costs? Look, what they will claim is that it's
*  expensive to move logistics through a country at war, but they get away with it. Ultimately,
*  these insane, this insane war profiteering and they're not alone. Obviously, there are other
*  companies that this is their business model. They get away with it because of their political
*  connections and the lobbyists that they have, the relationships they have with politicians.
*  And ultimately what President Eisenhower warned against with regard to that cozy relationship
*  between Congress and even what he called then the military industrial complex.
*  It's been alive and well. He warned us against it. And I would say it's thriving more now
*  than ever before. How powerful is the military industrial complex as a thing? Is it a machine
*  that can be slowed down, can be stopped, can be reversed? It can be. It's powerful. I don't think
*  you can overstate the powerful nature of it because it extends so deeply within our government.
*  It's not just those in these specific big defense contracting companies that benefit from it.
*  You look at the revolving door within the Pentagon, for example, where you have both
*  high ranking people who wear military uniforms as well as those who serve as high ranking
*  Department of Defense civilians who are literally working their way into a big payout when they
*  leave that job. We see it with our own Secretary of Defense now. He retired as a general officer,
*  went and served on one of the boards for one of the big defense contractors and then now back as
*  the Secretary of Defense. We see the same thing in Congress with members of Congress and senior
*  professional staffers in Congress. Same exact revolving door where you have people, whether
*  they're writing contracts for the Department of Defense, for the company that then wins the bid
*  for that contract and then going and working for that company, or those in Congress who are writing
*  policies and doing exactly the same thing. You have been both a war hawk and a war dove at times. So
*  what is your philosophy on when war is justified and when it is not? War is justified when it is
*  in the best interest of our national security and when it is the last resort, when all diplomatic
*  efforts have been completed and exhausted and war is the last possible route that must be taken to
*  ensure the safety, security, and freedom of the American people. So that's a high level,
*  beautiful ideal, but there's messy details. So terrorism, for example. Yes. The United States
*  involvement in the war in Iraq and Afghanistan was in part the big umbrella of the war on terrorism.
*  So when you decide whether something is justified or not and whether something
*  can be defeated or not, how hard is it? Is it even possible? To what degree is it possible
*  to defeat terrorism? Well, first of all, part of the problem of our foreign policy has been
*  how many conflicts, wars, military actions have been waged in the name of this quote unquote war
*  on terrorism, in the name of national security. Legislation like the Patriot Act that violates
*  civil liberties, our civil liberties and freedoms in the name of the war on terrorism
*  and national security when it's not justified. And so I'll use Afghanistan as an example.
*  I support the initial mission that lifted off shortly after the attack on 9-11, the Islamist
*  terrorist attack on 9-11. It was a relatively small group of US military launched to go after
*  those Al Qaeda cells and Osama bin Laden in the wake of that attack.
*  That is the mission that should have been supported and focused on in its execution.
*  Instead, as you know, attention was diverted very quickly to the regime change war in Iraq
*  that was waged on false pretenses and the resources and focus was taken away from that initial
*  mission that went to Afghanistan. And the war in Afghanistan blew up into something that became
*  about regime change and governance and the Taliban and less focus on Al Qaeda and Osama bin Laden.
*  And it became this thing that even general officers had a hard time articulating. What is
*  the objective here? What are we trying to accomplish? What does winning look like?
*  At what point do we know it's time to exit and get out? And as you look at things like the
*  Afghanistan files and others, the answers to these simple and essential questions
*  shifted and changed over time, over a very long time. Similarly, in Iraq, I bought into a lot of
*  what was being sold by the administration and by Democrats and Republicans and Congress at the time.
*  And very quickly, even as I was on the ground there, started to have my eyes opened up into
*  how we had been lied to tremendously and how that protracted war went on for a very, very long time
*  with decisions being made that ultimately served to strengthen terrorist groups like Al Qaeda,
*  the creation of ISIS and others really undermining our national security interests in the meantime.
*  Understanding the enemy that you are trying to defeat is essential to being able to build a strategy.
*  The declaration of President Biden, for example, saying, well, the war on terror is over. The war
*  on terror is over. What does that mean? Or the forever wars are over. Well, what does that actually
*  mean? I served on my last most recent deployment in 2021 to East Africa and Somalia, where Al-Shabaab
*  is one of those Islamist terrorist groups that follows the same ideology as Al Qaeda, ISIS,
*  Hamas and others. This group has been allowed to grow and be strengthened, even though they are one
*  of the main groups that provides funding to Al Qaeda in that entire region. So any president
*  or politician can declare a war to be over. But when you have an enemy like these Islamist terrorist
*  groups who are still intent on their goal and their objective, which is to ultimately establish
*  their Islamic caliphate and destroy Israel and exterminate the Jewish people and basically
*  destroy, kill or convert anyone who doesn't adhere to their ideology. That continues on.
*  They will only become stronger the longer our leaders put their heads in the sand and pretend
*  like, oh no, this doesn't exist. This kind of war, this war specifically is one that has to be waged
*  militarily and ideologically. And the ideological component to this, which is defeating their
*  ideology with a superior one, is one that I pointed out in Congress during the Obama administration.
*  We, the collective we were failing at, the Obama administration was failing at because they were
*  so afraid of being labeled Islamophobes that they refused to accurately identify the ideology
*  driving these terrorist groups and instead said, oh, we are countering violent extremism,
*  was the term that the Obama administration started to use and was coined and kind of mandated across
*  the US government. Well, you have to know, again, you have to know the enemy that threatens you
*  and why they're doing what they're doing if you have any hope of actually preventing their attack,
*  both militarily and as we're seeing now with Hamas's actions, not only directly in the assault on
*  Israel, but how Hamas achieved their objectives in spreading their ideology around the world.
*  If you look at the lessons learned from the US involvement in Afghanistan and Iraq,
*  how do you fight terrorism? Clearly understanding who they are and where they are and why they're
*  doing what they're doing is essential, first of all. Obviously, there are different groups,
*  different names they have morphed and changed based on their locale and how they operate.
*  Building relationships with people in other countries, both state leaders as well as
*  religious leaders and others who share that same objective of defeating these Islamist terrorists
*  on both fronts and acting as a united front in taking that action. What exactly that action looks
*  like, details on the ground dictate that, details about these different groups will dictate that.
*  But we've seen examples of this before and I saw this in Somalia. We saw it in some cases in Iraq
*  where, for example, you have imams who recognize the threat that these terrorist groups pose to
*  their own people and their own communities and exerting their influence in defeating that
*  the terrorist Islamist ideology with their own teachings of Islam and preaching peace
*  amongst their people. War is ugly and it is messy. It is also an unfortunate reality of the world we
*  live in. So while I firmly believe that we must always pursue peace, I'm not a pacifist, I'm a
*  realist and recognize that where there are these threats, we must do what we can to work towards
*  that safety, that security, that freedom and peace that we all want.
*  LW If we look at the perspective of Israel in the Israel-Gaza war going on now,
*  what do you do with the fact that the death of a civilian
*  serves as a catalyst, gives birth to hate, potentially generational hate? So in Israel's
*  stated goal of destroying Hamas, they are creating immeasurable hate. What do you do with that?
*  From a perspective of Israel, what is the correct action to take in response to October 7th?
*  AMT It's a complex question with a complex answer. I think Israel's approach
*  has to be in recognizing that delineation as far as possible. And I know it's tough when you have
*  a terrorist group like Hamas that is so interwoven within the community of people
*  in Gaza. But to recognize that there should be and there is a shared purpose there for the
*  Palestinian people to be able to live free and in peace and not under the oppression of this terrorist
*  group, just as the people of Israel would like to live in peace and free from the threat of attack
*  from a terrorist group that wants to exterminate them. The complexities of what's going on in
*  Israeli politics is, I think, a different conversation, but also one that is directly
*  intertwined with the answer to this question. When you have some people in the Israeli government who
*  don't want the Palestinian people in Gaza at all and want them to go and repatriate in other
*  countries, I think that's a big problem and that further exacerbates this hatred and resentment
*  that continues to grow there. This is a generation's long challenge, unfortunately, of
*  the resentment and tension that exists between many Israelis and many Palestinians
*  that can only be resolved when there's strong leadership representing both peoples
*  who are able and willing to come together and recognize that the only way forward is
*  to let the past be in the past and find a way towards peace in the future.
*  How do you think, how do you hope the war in Ukraine will end?
*  The only way that this war ends is to do exactly what we're talking about.
*  There has to be a brokered dialogue and conversation about peace that has to occur
*  with representatives from Russia and Ukraine. It is really, truly heartbreaking to see both
*  how efforts that began just weeks after Russia invaded Ukraine to do exactly this were thwarted
*  by the Biden-Harris administration and other Western powers has cost so many innocent people's
*  lives. I have friends in Ukraine. I've been there more than a few times. I've enjoyed and
*  appreciated the time that I've spent there. When I hear from my friends about
*  how afraid they are of their husbands being conscripted and feeling like they have to hide
*  for fear of being yanked off the streets, their friends and family members who've been killed in
*  this war, the only way this ends is when both sides come to the table and find an agreement
*  that neither side is going to be completely happy with, both sides being forced to make some
*  concessions, but one where they will both walk away and this war can end.
*  What's the role of the US president, perhaps, to bring everybody to the table? Do you think
*  that the US president should sit down with Zelensky and Putin together?
*  Yes. Yes. In an ideal world, yes. This should have happened long ago. The question of whether or not
*  President Biden is the right person to do that at this time when all of the statements and
*  comments that they have made, the Biden-Harris administration has made from the beginning of
*  this war, essentially point to their objective being to basically destroy Russia. That's one
*  of the reasons why they have supported both the continuation of this war for as long as it's lasted
*  as well as why they have thwarted efforts towards peace. Whoever that most effective,
*  neutral broker is, that's the best person to do this. The Biden-Harris administration, I think
*  the role that they have to take is actually encouraging Zelensky to sit down and begin this
*  process. Those kinds of engagements are, to me, the most powerful exercises of diplomacy that
*  can't be matched, especially when our president's foremost role and responsibility is to serve as
*  commander in chief. I wish that we had leaders who were more willing to engage because I think we'd
*  make a lot more progress more quickly to find areas both of mutual interest as well as to help
*  de-conflict and de-escalate areas where there is tension or disagreement or adversarial interests.
*  Some of it is basic human camaraderie. People call me naive for this, but sometimes just knowing
*  that there's a human on the other side, even when it's in private, if you look at Zelensky and Putin,
*  for example, just humor. Both are very intelligent, witty, at times even funny people.
*  Yes, this is wartime. Yes, a lot of civilians and soldiers are dying. There's hate. But if you can
*  look above it all and think about the future of the countries, the flourishing of a people,
*  and the stopping of the death of civilians and soldiers, then in that place you can have that
*  basic human connection. I agree. I don't think that's naive at all. And I think there are so
*  many examples through history that point to the power of that, the real power in that.
*  The Cuban Missile Crisis, how JFK had to literally find a secret way to communicate with Khrushchev to
*  try to go around the backs of the military commanders who were urging him to take military
*  action and instead find, hey, we both ultimately want the same thing. Neither of us wants to launch
*  a catastrophic nuclear war, so let's figure this out. Of course, there's examples throughout
*  history. Leaders are complicated people. They're manipulative people. So you have
*  Hitler and Chamberlain meeting, and Chamberlain getting hoodwinked by Hitler's charisma and being
*  convinced that Hitler doesn't have any interest in invading and destroying the rest of the world.
*  Smart. Don't be hoodwinked.
*  You've been criticized for this. You've met with Syrian President Bashar al-Assad
*  and as part of the campaign, running for president got criticized for not calling him a war criminal.
*  What's the right way to meet and communicate with these kinds of leaders?
*  As I just stated, we need leaders who have the courage to meet not just with allies but
*  with adversaries in the pursuit of peace, in the pursuit of increased understanding.
*  If policies are being made through the lenses and the barriers of bureaucrats and the media
*  and others who have or may have their own interests, our president, a leader,
*  can't make, even members of Congress, can't make decisions with the kind of clarity that we,
*  the American people, need them to make. I think that these kinds of engagements are
*  weaponized and politicized as they were against me by those who have their own interests, whether
*  it be the military industrial complex or in Washington. If you're not part of the official
*  narrative of the US government, which was intent on a regime change war in Syria, then you're an
*  outcast. It was unfortunate because people levied all kinds of accusations and smears against me
*  for going and having the audacity to go and learn more, try to seek the truth in the hopes of
*  preventing more needless war and in the hopes of preventing yet another quagmire and disastrous war
*  in the Middle East. Simply for going and, yes, meeting with Assad, also meeting with religious
*  leaders in Syria, also meeting and talking with people on the streets of Damascus, talking with
*  college students, talking with people from the opposition party who would like to see Assad
*  replaced, talking with local, just a whole host of people over the course of a few days.
*  The accusation was of, oh, she loves dictators. It's a sad state of affairs when some of the most
*  influential voices in our country will label someone a lover or supporter of dictators
*  simply because you're saying, hey, we shouldn't be going to war. There is another way.
*  I'm not alone in this. People who were against the war in Iraq were given similar labels
*  until it became popular in our politics to have been against the Iraq War.
*  We see the same thing now with people like Tucker, myself, and others who are saying,
*  we should not be waging this proxy war against Russia via Ukraine and using the Ukrainian
*  people's lives in this war. Well, now all of a sudden, you're a Putin lover, a Putin puppet,
*  or whatever, the traitor, treason, all of these accusations that are used ultimately by people
*  who are not interested in having a substantive conversation about the truth, about looking at
*  these wars and conflicts with a comprehensive view on exactly all the dynamics that are at play.
*  That's what I found when I came back. I went to Syria looking forward to coming back and shedding
*  light on different perspectives, experiences, and stories that I found that would give people a more
*  broad understanding of what was happening in that country. What I found was there was zero
*  interest in the mainstream media or in Congress in hearing any other perspective other than their
*  own, which was we need to launch this regime change war through the use of arming and equipping
*  known terrorists within Syria to overthrow the regime without any idea, without them stating any
*  realistic idea of who would take control once Assad was overthrown. But the reality actually
*  being that no matter which opposition group they might try to prop up, they would not have the
*  power to withstand the terrorist groups whose stated goal it was to go and take over power from
*  Assad. They had no interest in trying to gain true understanding. It was very disheartening.
*  It was very disheartening and a big lesson learned about where their interests really were focused.
*  Yeah, it's a simplistic narrative template that's fit into every single situation.
*  A lot of stuff is not talked about in the Russian-Ukraine war. One of the things that's
*  not talked about is, okay, so Putin is overthrown, then who do you think will come into power?
*  Exactly.
*  Now, one of the things I talk about with Eric Stowage is that Putin,
*  and he gets criticized for this, that Putin, out of all the people that might take power,
*  is the most liberal, is the most dovish. In fact, every indication shows that he really hates this
*  war. Everybody that will step in, if he steps down or if he is overthrown, it's just going to
*  accelerate this war and the expansionism and the thirst for empire and all that kind of stuff that
*  the US military industrial complex will feed into. You have to think about what the future holds and
*  what the different power players are and what the level of corruption there is and the realistic
*  view of the situation versus the idealistic view of the situation.
*  Just on that note real quick, I think that was exposed in broad daylight when it appeared that
*  the former head of the Wagner Group was about to try to launch a coup and how that was so celebrated,
*  even on MSNBC and Rachel Maddow and others touting that this was somehow going to be a great thing
*  without looking at who is this guy really, what has he been doing in different countries
*  around the world and what would be his ruling philosophy and how that would differ or benefit
*  American interests or the interests of security and peace.
*  But also the interests of Ukraine and Russia and humanity overall, just the flourishing of nations,
*  which is great for everybody and collaborations with nations.
*  I agree.
*  Friendly competition. One of the things I love about the 20th century is the friendly,
*  sometimes not so friendly competition between the Soviet Union and the United States in space,
*  in the space race. It's created some incredible engineering and scientific breakthroughs and
*  all of this and also made people dream about reaching out to the stars. War destroys all of
*  that or damages it. Hopefully just damages it. Hopefully the phoenix will rise again.
*  Let me ask you about the criticism you've mentioned of this probably the most common
*  criticism of you that you love Putin. Just to linger on it, what do you think is the foundation
*  of this criticism?
*  I'll tell you when it began. My first day in Congress was January 3rd, 2013. I believe it was
*  the third, fourth, fifth, somewhere around there. My last day was January 3rd, 2021.
*  I had been given my experience of serving as a soldier in the Middle East and
*  the motivation that really drove me to run for Congress in the first place. I served on the
*  Foreign Affairs Committee and the Armed Services Committee for almost eight years, the eight years
*  that I was there with my drive and motivation to actually be in a position to challenge the influence
*  of the military industrial complex, to try to prevent us from needlessly going to war.
*  The likes of Hillary Clinton and the cabal of warmongers in Washington, they weren't fans of
*  mine to say the least. I can't say it was a total surprise, but it was disheartening nonetheless
*  that the very day that I announced my candidacy, that I was running for president, which was in
*  February 2019, the hour that I walked up onto the House of Representatives, I was in the middle of
*  that. The hour that I walked up onto that stage to announce my candidacy, it was in Hawaii, and I
*  gave my announcement speech. NBC News published a hit piece that planted the seeds of suspicion
*  in voters' minds that somehow I was a darling of Putin and Russia and whatever. It was baseless,
*  all of it baseless. That continued like a steady drumbeat throughout my candidacy,
*  but that really was escalated when in a podcast with David Axelrod, Hillary Clinton said,
*  oh, well, the Russians are grooming her. This came from a very influential person. She was
*  the former secretary of state, former US senator, former first lady, someone who
*  wielded and continues to wield a lot of power in the Democratic Party and amongst voters.
*  That took it to a whole new level. What is the basis for this? Nothing. It is a tired,
*  yet dependable playbook that is used not only by people like Hillary Clinton, but also people like
*  Mitt Romney and others to try to smear, discredit, and destroy the reputations of people who have the
*  audacity to question their objectives as they call for one war or another, or have the audacity to
*  say that this is not in the best interest of peace or in our country and our national security.
*  They keep going back to this playbook as they do today because, again, they're not willing to
*  debate the substance of one position versus another, which is what we should have.
*  If people feel so strongly that we should be going and waging this war or that war,
*  okay, great. Go make your case to the American people. Go stand on the floor of the United
*  States House and actually have this debate. Allow those who are saying, no, this is not a good idea
*  to also stand freely and make that argument. Instead, they resort to the kind of name calling
*  that tells voters, hey, you can't trust this person or anything that they say.
*  Myself and some of my other colleagues got the same treatment when we tried to pass legislation
*  in Congress that would have taken out provisions from the Patriot Act that are most egregiously
*  violating our Fourth Amendment rights and civil liberties, authorities that have allowed our
*  government to illegally surveil Americans without a warrant. As we did so, we're called traitors.
*  We had other members of Congress on the House floor saying that if you pass this legislation,
*  you will be responsible for another 9-11 style attack on our soil. These are all distraction
*  tactics to try to divert our attention away from what's actually happening and instead just tell
*  voters, hey, you can't trust these people. Obviously, this has happened to Trump. It's
*  happened to Bobby Kennedy. It's happened to people like Rand Paul and others. There's a small group,
*  but a growing number, at least on the Republican side at this point, people who are actually
*  willing to stand up and challenge the military industrial complex, challenge the warmongers in
*  both parties. Well, people on the left have challenged the warmongers as well throughout
*  the last few decades. Less so recently. I agree with you, but less so recently. This is one of
*  the reasons why I left the Democratic Party, one of the foremost reasons. I devote an entire chapter
*  to this issue in my book, For Love of Country, Leave the Democrat Party Behind, going into the
*  detail of some of the things we've talked about, about my own experiences, about what I have learned
*  along the way, but also how even in the last year, two years, certainly under this administration,
*  people who I worked with in Congress who were Democrats, dependable voices for civil liberties,
*  dependable voices speaking out against the insanity of people who wanted to wage war for the sake of
*  war. They're largely silent now. Unfortunately, within the Democratic Party in Washington,
*  there is no room for debate. If you challenge the Biden administration's position on foreign policy,
*  you're going to hear about it. What we have seen is that that's exactly what's happened. People have
*  retracted statements or just fallen silent or whatever the case may be. This debate that
*  should be existent within both parties on the Democrat side, unfortunately,
*  it just doesn't exist anymore. There seems to be some kind of mass hysteria over the war in Ukraine.
*  It was strange to watch that the nuance aspect of the discussion was lost very quickly. It was
*  Putin bad. There was a war between good and evil. In that, if you bring up any kind of
*  nuanced discussion of how do we actually achieve peace in the situation,
*  you're immediately put on the side of evil. Which is pretty sick when you think about it.
*  The cynical view is, of course, it's the military industrial complex machine. The war profiteers
*  is driving this kind of conversation. I hope they don't have that much power. I hope they
*  just have incentives and they push people and they use people's natural desire to divide the
*  world into good and evil and fight for the side of good. People just have a natural proclivity
*  for that. That's a good thing that we want to fight for the side of good, but then that gets
*  captured. And manipulated. Yes. I admire your hopefulness. I am hopeful also
*  because of the goodness in people and the naturally compassionate nature of people.
*  However, I will tell you from firsthand experience that what we talk about is the
*  national security state and the military industrial complex. This cabal of warmongers
*  that extends not only within government, but outside of government, extends to many powerful
*  media outlets. They are incredibly powerful and don't have any qualms at destroying those who try
*  to get in the way of their power. They've got a lot of tools to do that, which I think is why
*  President Eisenhower chose to include this in his farewell address as a warning because the only
*  recourse, the only real power that has the ability to destroy them and stand up against them is a
*  free people living in a free society, exercising the rights that we have enshrined in the
*  constitution and bill of rights. I just talked to Annie Jacobs and she wrote a book on nuclear war,
*  a scenario of how a nuclear war will happen second by second, minute by minute.
*  I apologize if it happens, how it would happen is terrifying. Yeah. It's terrifying how easy it is
*  to start, that one person can start it first of all, and then there's no way to stop it.
*  Even potentially with tactical nuclear weapons, that it would just, the machinery of it,
*  how clueless everybody is combined with the machinery of it, it's just impossible to stop.
*  Between the rushing, the United States especially, and then all of a sudden you have nuclear winter
*  and five billion people are dead. Yeah. And they die through just essentially torture slowly.
*  How do we avoid that? How do we avoid a nuclear war? How do we, that's something that you talk
*  about and think about, how do we avoid this kind of escalation of a hot war?
*  I think the most essential thing first of all is understanding exactly what you have just detailed
*  about. We are in this very strange and absurd time where we have talking heads and so-called
*  pundits on TV. We have politicians, we have people who are talking about a nuclear war as though it
*  is a war that can be won, period, and a war that can be waged somehow without that risk of escalation
*  to the point of destruction of human civilization. And so they talk about this as though it's just
*  another war, and especially as they talk about the use of tactical nuclear weapons. Oh, well,
*  this is small and we think it'll send a message without actually escalating to the point where
*  we're dealing with the kind of destruction that we witnessed in World War II. That's a dangerous
*  thing when it becomes normalized as, well, we've got this new missile that will go and it's targeted
*  and it's strategic and it'll only harm this quote unquote military target. Ronald Reagan was 100%
*  correct when he said a nuclear war cannot be won and should never be waged. It was true then,
*  and it's true now no matter how much these guys who are producing these weapons or those who are
*  benefiting from that industry try to tell us, oh no, it'll never happen. So to me, that's an
*  important first step to continue to inform and educate and sound the alarms to people, don't
*  buy this crap because it's not true. And I look forward to listening to your podcast,
*  but the PSA that was put out by New York City's Emergency Management Office about
*  what to do in the event of a nuclear attack, you would find it funny if it wasn't so deeply
*  disturbing how they created this public service announcement. They distributed it everywhere
*  across the city, on the internet, I think it was on the radio where you had a woman who appeared
*  to be an actor coming in and saying, hey, in the event of when the big one hits, here's what you
*  should do. Focus on doing these three things. And I'm paraphrasing, but I encourage you to watch it.
*  I'm paraphrasing, but she said, get inside, stay inside, and stay tuned.
*  That was it. And get inside, go away from the windows. Stay inside, don't go outside until
*  you get the all clear. And stay tuned. Follow our account on Instagram and Twitter. And at the very
*  end of this short PSA, she said, her closing words were, we've got this. And it was so disturbing
*  in that it was so completely out of touch with reality. It creates this false sense of security
*  that, okay, well, it's like, here's what you do when a tornado hits or when a big storm hits.
*  And categorizing the big one, a nuclear attack, within that same kind of preparedness that you
*  would want people to have in the event of a natural disaster of some sort. And it is reflective of the
*  carelessness with which people in our government, that careless attitude that people in our
*  government have towards nuclear war and a nuclear attack, even as they set us up for failure
*  in pushing us closer and closer to the brink of a nuclear war occurring, whether it be an
*  intentional attack or as we saw during the last Cold War, one that could be launched unintentionally.
*  You know, how many near misses were there during the last Cold War? I saw this documentary called
*  The Man Who Saved the World. And it was some mid-level officer who happened to be on duty
*  and who didn't do what he was told in launching the nuclear missiles because of what they thought
*  was an incoming attack. And it turned out to be a complete mistake or misread on the radar.
*  But that's what we're facing.
*  But by the way, there's so many things to say there. But one of the things that Annie Jacobson
*  details is just how organized the machinery of all of this is, where the humans involved
*  don't have to think. They just follow orders. There's a very clear set of steps you take.
*  And there's very few places where you can inject your humanity and be like, wait a minute, what's
*  the big picture of this? The only person that can think is the President of the United States.
*  The President of the United States gets six minutes after the warning. The early warning
*  system says, whether it's false or not, says that we believe that there's been a nuclear
*  weapon launched. You have six minutes before you can make the decision of launch back,
*  initiate. And to me, that's what I'm voting based on in the current situation. You really have to
*  see that as one of the most important aspects of the United States President, is who do you
*  trust in those six minutes to sit there? And I'm not really sure, looking at Biden and Trump.
*  Boy, I don't know, but I do know that I would like somebody who is thinking independently
*  and not part of the machinery of warmongers. I don't want to make it sound cynical or dramatic,
*  but sometimes in such scary situations, in such dramatic situations, you kind of follow the
*  momentum. When the right thing to do, the right thing for a leader to do is to step back and look
*  of all of human history and ignore all the people in the room that are saying stuff, because most
*  likely what they're going to be saying is warmongery type of things. That's one of the
*  things why I also get criticized for. I still think Zelensky is a hero for staying in key.
*  Everybody was telling him to flee. It was all the information was telling, basically saying
*  the world's second biggest military is like coming at Kiev. It's just dumb on all fronts
*  to stay in Kiev, but that's what a great leader does is ignores everybody and stays.
*  Screw it. I'm going to die for my country. I'm going to die as a leader. And then I'm going to
*  die for my country. I'm going to die as a leader. And that's the right thing for leaders to do.
*  It's sad that, I mean, to me, that's what we should expect of our leaders is exactly that.
*  And it's sad that having a leader in that position fulfill their responsibility and the
*  oath that they take is seen as a heroic act. That's your job. That's what we
*  elect our leaders to do. And yet so many have failed. But to your point,
*  it's not cynical at all to know that in those rooms, especially in these moments of crisis,
*  unfortunately, there are the predominant prevailing opinion
*  of this warmongering establishment that's not specific to one party is the knee-jerk reaction,
*  which is to go to war or to execute an act of war. And this is one of the biggest costs of this
*  establishment destroying the reputations of and smearing and trying to cancel and
*  censor those who are voices of peace or just those who take a contrarian position and say,
*  well, hey, why don't we just pause for a moment and actually think this through? Why don't we
*  talk through what happens if we take this course of action? What happens if we go down a different
*  path? Let's actually be thoughtful about what our options are for A, B, and C, and then make
*  the decision in a thoughtful manner based on that. Even advocating for that is seen as a kind of
*  heresy in the warmongering establishment in Washington. And the cost of their retaliation
*  against those who are reasonable voices, who look at the world as it is, not some fantasy that they
*  wish existed is in those rooms during those critical moments, people will, even if they know
*  in their heart or their mind that this could end really badly, their instinct is to self-censor
*  and not speak up because they don't want to experience the wrath and ire, whether it be
*  coming from four-star generals or the secretary of state or defense or these high-ranking people
*  in positions of power and influence. They don't want to be the one guy in the room who's just like,
*  hey, guys, let's just take a breath and actually think this through. What will happen, not just
*  in the immediate response of this action that you're advocating for, but what are all of the
*  other people, other actors, stakeholders in the world, how will they respond? And then how will
*  we respond to them? How will they respond to us? Actually go through this exercise of, in the military,
*  this is commonly referred to as, what are the second, third, fourth order of effects that will occur
*  as a result of pursuing a specific course of action? It's weird how difficult it is to be that
*  person in the room. It requires courage, which is sad, but it requires courage.
*  Why does it require, even just to ask, okay, we've been in Afghanistan and Iraq
*  for this number of years. What's the exit plan? Just bring that up every day at a meeting.
*  What's the exit plan? It's strange that that gets criticized, the war in Iraq and so on.
*  I just remember there was this pressure you can't quite criticize or ask dumb questions about, wait,
*  why are we going into Iraq again? But they're not dumb questions.
*  Right. In retrospect, you're like, oh, they're not dumb questions at all, but it actually required a
*  lot of courage to ask them while still working within the institution. It's easier if you're
*  like an activist from the outside, it's like, no war, this kind of stuff. But within the institution,
*  in the position of power, to ask the questions like, maybe let's not. It seems really difficult.
*  The same kind of thing in the war in Ukraine, just any kind of military involvement. Again,
*  I guess the cynical interpretation is that it's the military industrial complex that permeates
*  the halls of power. It does. And what is behind the military industrial complex?
*  And there are different examples of this. You can look at the pharmaceutical industry as well.
*  There's a huge amount of money and a huge amount of power that wields tremendous influence over
*  members of Congress. There are different examples of this across different sectors of our society,
*  but I think the military industrial complex over time has proven itself to be
*  the most powerful and influential. And that's what is behind it, is this is why they try to
*  destroy anyone who dares to ask the most obvious questions, is because it is about power and
*  wielding power. Well, the cool thing about United States presidents, they have the power to
*  say a few to everybody in the room. I think it just seems like they don't quite take that power.
*  People will say, yeah, the US president doesn't have that much power. I don't know about that.
*  Just like if you look at the law, especially in the military, when you're talking about war
*  and the military, they have a lot of power. So they can fire everybody. They have a lot of power.
*  They can stop wars. They can start wars. They have a lot of power.
*  The position of the presidency certainly does. Unfortunately,
*  people too often who assume the presidency from a position of weakness because they're afraid of
*  losing power. And so they make those calculated decisions, not based on what is right,
*  or for the right reasons, but instead driven by fear of loss of power. And so they're afraid of
*  fear of loss of power and loss of influence. And that's where, especially given all that we are
*  facing, we need leaders in the presidency and in Congress who have courage to be that voice
*  in the room, to ask about, to remain mindful of and rooted in the constitution. Even as we are
*  seeing this legislation being billed as the anti-TikTok bill, that's really not about TikTok.
*  It's about freedom of speech. Can you actually explain that bill?
*  Yes. This is another, I guess the bottom line up front is this is another piece of legislation
*  being expedited through Congress with strong bipartisan support in the name of national
*  security interests that is essentially a power grab and an assault on freedom and liberty.
*  And I'll just say this in, I think probably like the top three things that they're not actually
*  telling us that's in the bill. Freedom of speech. It's our ability to be able to express ourselves,
*  whether it be in person, on a podcast, on a social media platform, in a newspaper,
*  whatever the platform may be. This legislation gives the executive the power to decide which
*  platforms are acceptable for us to be able to use. TikTok itself, the words TikTok is not
*  actually in the bill, but it gives the power to the president to decide
*  who is a foreign adversary single-handedly, no consultation with or agreement from members of
*  Congress or anyone else. It actually gives the power to a cabinet secretary to designate who
*  is a foreign adversary. And if a social media platform has at least 20% ownership in a social
*  media platform, that platform may be banned from doing business in America, essentially.
*  But it's not just a foreign state actor that could be named as a foreign adversary. It also
*  includes a line in the legislation that if, let's say a person has at least 25% financial
*  interest or ownership in a social media platform, they're an American citizen who may be working
*  or living in some other country or working or living here, but doing business with other
*  countries. If the executive branch of our government decides that this individual is
*  under the influence of or controlled by someone that they deem a foreign adversary, then that
*  platform must not do business in America. And that person, obviously, even an American citizen,
*  is banned from conducting that business. They must divest, essentially.
*  So when you look at, and this is where there's been a lot of chatter around this, when you look at
*  Elon Musk, for example, well, you already have people in the Biden administration, even President
*  Biden himself, implying that Elon Musk's activities need to be investigated. Well, he is someone with
*  Tesla who does business in a lot of countries, including China, and therefore he must be
*  investigated. It is not at all a stretch of imagination to say that X could be the next
*  platform, that the executive branch decides, nope, we've designated this person to be a foreign
*  adversary and therefore his business interest cannot be allowed for the social media platform,
*  cannot be allowed to exist. We've seen this already with people accusing him and X of
*  interfering in our elections. Again, it's ironic that it's coming from the Democratic party that
*  they are claiming that a guy who has said himself he's committed to free speech and is allowing
*  free speech on his platform and is not allowing the federal government to manipulate his platform
*  by deeming which accounts are okay to post their content and which accounts are not because of
*  disinformation or whatever they claim it to be. It's not an accident that the social media
*  platforms that have been proven to take action at the behest of the federal government and the
*  White House to censor certain voices, they're not included with or being targeted at all.
*  In this legislation or outside of it, yet other platforms that are not cooperating or collaborating
*  somehow are. So the underlying issue here, this is being sold as TikTok and national security,
*  but ultimately even as Ron Paul said, this is legislation that's the greatest assault on
*  liberty since the Patriot Act was passed. It's quite dark that this is just the graph of power.
*  It is.
*  I mean, this doesn't, it's not just with Elon, it's probably with Zuck,
*  with Facebook, Instagram, WhatsApp. It puts pressure. It's not just about banning,
*  but it puts pressure for them to kind of moderate behavior, which is a slippery slope.
*  Of course, it's a beautiful dance of power because you don't want tech companies to have
*  too much power either, or individuals at the top of those tech companies have too much power.
*  But then do you want that power in the hands of government?
*  No.
*  The history of this nation is a fascinatingly effective
*  journey towards the balance of power. And it does seem like this sneaky little thing,
*  as much as I hate TikTok on all fronts, my brain rots every time I use TikTok. I know it's also
*  the national security dangers of China and so on, but it's just like TikTok, man.
*  Just, I don't know, it's so addicting. It's so addicting. So when I first saw this TikTok bill,
*  I was like, yes, no, but then they got me. The Trojan horse got me.
*  And this is like the social dilemma documentary, I think exposed a lot that there is so much,
*  there's so much that these algorithms do in these various social media platforms
*  that's problematic, to say the least. Data security and privacy is a serious issue.
*  These are serious things. And so let's have a conversation about these serious things
*  and cease these attempts to try to have our government try to tell us what we are doing.
*  What we are and aren't allowed to see, where we are and aren't allowed to say what we want to say.
*  That's really what it comes down to. Yeah, more and more trust people to,
*  whenever social media companies do bullshitty things for the people to make documentaries about
*  it, to discover it, for great journalists to do great journalism, and to find the flaws and the
*  hypocrisy and the call for transparency, all those kinds of things that don't trust, in most
*  cases, government regulation of technology companies because they seem to be really out
*  of touch. One, they want power. They're really intimidated by the power that the tech companies
*  have. And two, they don't seem to get at the technology at all. So they're hindering innovation
*  and they're just greedy for power. It's a bad combination.
*  It's a bad combination. The thing here too, though, is this extends far beyond
*  social media companies. This is a very specific example, but it's one example of many how
*  those who are greedy for power are continuing to try to find ways to tell us how to live our lives.
*  They are increasingly trying to tell us, again, what we're allowed to see and hear, whether it be
*  social media companies or what shows up in a Google search engine, for example.
*  If they're not finding a willing and compliant social media company or big tech company, then
*  they're looking for ways to reach their hand into those tech companies and force compliance.
*  But in the age of disinformation, misinformation, hate speech, all of the excuses that are given
*  for government, either directly or indirectly through big tech, to try to censor certain voices,
*  it really undermines the truth, which is the way to defeat bad speech is with better speech
*  and more speech. Whether it's hate speech or things that you might be offended by or things
*  that you might disagree with, the answer is not to have some entity with the power of censorship
*  and being the quote unquote authority to decide what is good speech and acceptable and what is
*  bad speech and unacceptable. It's what you said. Let's encourage this debate and encourage people
*  who are inspired by like, no, man, I saw this thing or this thing is happening and it's pissing me off.
*  So I'm going to bring a superior argument. I'm going to show what the right way is.
*  This is what our founders envisioned for us as a society in this country. And we would be so much
*  stronger with a more engaged people and a more informed people if we had this and had it supported.
*  Do you think what are the chances that the TikTok ban bill passes?
*  LESLIE KENDRICK The way that it passed through the House of Representatives with such an
*  overwhelming bipartisan support and so quickly and President Biden saying that if it comes across
*  his desk, he'll sign it, I thought it would pass through very quickly. I'm only slightly encouraged
*  by the fact that the Senate at least appears to be saying, hey, there are serious free speech
*  concerns around this bill, serious civil liberties concerns around this bill. We need to do our due
*  diligence. I won't say I'm cautiously optimistic because I understand how that place works,
*  but their pause at least gives people the opportunity to continue to kind of sound the alarm
*  and for people to call their senators and express their concerns with this. They're very real,
*  valid concerns.
*  Yeah, this is really messed up. Just in case we didn't make it clear, I think this is really,
*  really big danger if this thing passes. Even if you hate Elon Musk or whatever,
*  this is really, really, really dangerous. If the government gets say over the platforms
*  on which we communicate with each other, it's a huge problem.
*  LESLIE KENDRICK And there's a section in there as well, just kind of the last piece on this is
*  if you use a VPN and you try to use a VPN to access this, you could have problems with the law.
*  You take that a step further and say, well, how would they know? There's a surveillance aspect
*  to that. Once you start peeling back the layers of this really toxic onion,
*  it really leads seriously to a pretty dark and dangerous and oppressive place.
*  JARED BOWEN You were a long-time Democrat. You were the vice chair of the Democratic National
*  Committee until you resigned in 2016 to endorse Bernie. I should say I love Bernie. I loved him
*  before he was cool. Anyway, can you go through what happened in that situation?
*  LESLIE KENDRICK Yeah.
*  JARED BOWEN And with the Democratic National Committee and with Bernie and why you resigned?
*  LESLIE KENDRICK As a vice chair of the Democratic National Committee,
*  one of the things that the rules of the DNC required was that officers of the DNC, of which
*  we were as I think there were five or six of us who were vice chairs at the time,
*  you have to remain neutral in a Democratic primary. So you're not as a party supposed
*  to be tipping the scales in any direction for any candidate during a primary election.
*  And so I had no plans to get involved for any candidate or against any candidate during that
*  primary in just the hopes of like, all right, we got to make sure that this is a fair and balanced
*  primary so that voters have the best opportunity to vote for the candidate that they're choosing.
*  I saw a couple of things pretty quickly. Number one is that the chair of the DNC at the time was
*  a woman named Debbie Wasserman Schultz, a congresswoman out of Florida. And she made very
*  serious decisions unilaterally that many times we found out about via tweet or press release
*  that showed she was tilting the scales in the favor of Hillary Clinton in that 2016 primary.
*  The other thing that I saw was how the mainstream media and those who are supposed to be in a
*  position to be neutral arbiters to facilitate debates and forums and conversations so that
*  voters can be best informed in who they want to vote for were calling Hillary Clinton the most
*  qualified person ever to run for president in the history of our country because of the positions
*  that she had held as secretary of state, as a US senator, as first lady. And yet they glossed over
*  those titles without ever holding her, asking questions even, or holding her to account for
*  her record, especially in the area of foreign policy. The job she was running for was to be
*  commander in chief, to be the president of the United States. That responsibility to serve as
*  commander in chief is the foremost responsibility a president has. It's essentially the one area
*  where the president can unilaterally make decisions without education, healthcare,
*  immigration. Congress has to actually pass legislation. The president can come through
*  and say, hey, here's the policies that I want. Here's legislation that I'll propose. But those
*  changes can't be made without Congress working with Congress to pass them. So she was essentially
*  being let off the hook for her record as an American, as a soldier, as a veteran.
*  That was a big problem for me. And so I made the decision to resign as vice chair of the DNC
*  so that I could endorse Bernie Sanders, who largely at heart, I believe, is a non-interventionist.
*  He hasn't focused a lot on foreign policy. It's not at the heart of what his focus has been
*  for decades. But he was certainly far more of a non-interventionist than Hillary Clinton,
*  who has shown through her record to be the queen of warmongers in Washington.
*  I wanted to be in a position where I would have a platform to inform voters
*  about her record so that they could make that decision for themselves, so that they could see,
*  hey, in this area, on this issue, which is incredibly important, there is a clear contrast
*  between these two candidates running in the Democratic primary. And that's what drove my
*  decision to resign and to endorse Bernie Sanders. And that's what I went on to do throughout the
*  rest of that primary election. What do you like most about Bernie? The positive.
*  What I like most about him is he is who he is, unapologetically so, both in personality,
*  but also in what he advocates for and what he's advocated for for a long time. So you can agree
*  or disagree with his positions, but he is who he is. Like I said, you were a long-time Democrat
*  who were for president in 2020 as a Democrat. Now you're an independent and you're an excellent
*  book describing your journey ideologically, philosophically through that. Why did you
*  choose to leave the Democratic party? In the book, I go into a number of the central
*  reasons why I made that choice. But fundamental to them is that the Democratic party has become
*  a party that is opposed to freedom, that is opposed to the central and foundational principles
*  that exist within our founding documents and that serve as the identity of who we are as Americans
*  and what this country is supposed to be about. It has become a party that is
*  controlled by this elitist cabal of warmongers who are driving forward this quote-unquote woke
*  agenda. And we see it through their racializing of everything. We see this through their defund the
*  police mission. We see this through their open border policies. We see this through
*  how in their education policy they are failing our kids and how they are pushing
*  this narrative that ultimately is a rejection of objective truth.
*  The fact that it's a question up for debate about whether or not, well actually it's not a question
*  up for debate for them, they are actively pushing for boys who identify as girls to
*  compete against girls in sports, changing our language so that the word woman, the identity
*  of being a woman is essentially being erased from our society. And it is the height of hypocrisy
*  and frankly an act of hatred towards women that they are so intent on doing this. And ironic that
*  it's coming from the party that for so long proclaimed themselves to be the greatest feminists
*  and the most pro-woman party in the country. I go into detail around each of these issues and more
*  in the book, but you will see as we go through each of these issues, fundamental and foundational
*  to every one of them is that sadly the Democratic Party has become a party that is so consumed by
*  their desire for power, this insatiable hunger for power that they are willing to destroy
*  our republic, our democracy, our freedom just so that they can try to hold on to power and gain
*  more power. So these are just different mechanisms for power. The identity of politics and the
*  warmongering are related to each other in that they're mechanisms to attain more power.
*  You're making it sound like only the Democratic Party are full of power hungry people. So to you,
*  the Republican Party, I don't know if you've met those folks, but some of them
*  A couple of them
*  are also in love with power and are at times to some degree politicians in general are corrupt,
*  sometimes within the legal bonds, sometimes slightly outside of the legal bonds.
*  And so to what degree is sort of the Democratic Party is worse than the Republican Party? I don't
*  want to paint a picture of like this kind of beautiful vision of the Republican Party that
*  they're somehow not power hungry.
*  Yeah, I'm glad you brought this up. The book details why after 20 or so years,
*  as a member of the Democratic Party, I decided to leave. But also, and it goes through my
*  experiences and things that I have seen and learned along the way. But I also point out exactly that
*  fact in the book, but from the very beginning with the prologue is we should not be naive to
*  think that this only exists within the Democratic Party. There are very serious problems within
*  both of our political parties, specifically coming from politicians who are driven by this
*  desire for power and who are so afraid of losing that power, that they're willing to do whatever
*  they feel they need to do, which centers around taking away our freedom because the more free we
*  are to make our own decisions, even if they may end up being the wrong decisions, but to learn
*  from those things and know that we've got to live with the consequences, the beauty and messiness
*  of what a free society looks like. They're so afraid of us because they see us as the people
*  and our freedom as the central threat to their ability to remain in power.
*  I think the difference that we're seeing today is that unfortunately, we talked about this a little
*  bit, how the Democratic Party has become a party where you must walk in lockstep with the leadership
*  of that party or risk being faced with your reputation being destroyed and smeared and all
*  of these different attacks. The reason why they do that is to put people like me and Bobby Kennedy
*  and others up as an example of saying, hey, if you step out of line, if you challenge us, this is what
*  we're going to do to you. The Republican Party has also done that and they also have
*  politicians and leaders who are more interested in feeding the thriving system in the Washington
*  establishment. But we're also seeing that the Republican Party also has some voices and I
*  would say increasing voices of people, and I would put Donald Trump in this category,
*  who are challenging the quote unquote norms of the Republican Party that are represented by people
*  like Nikki Haley or Mike Pence, for example. The Republican Party is not a monolithic entity and
*  it means different things to different people. That's where I think the real challenge in this
*  next election is less, it's really less about one political party over another and it's more about
*  our opportunity as voters to select leaders, first of all, to fire those who are against freedom and
*  who are warmongers who by their essence are willing to take away our freedom in the name of national
*  security and vote for people. Nobody's perfect. We shouldn't hold anybody up on a pedestal,
*  but vote for those who are committed to the Constitution and who hold those values that
*  represent the interests of the people. I'm not a fan of this choice, but here we are, Biden versus Trump.
*  So let me ask you a sort of a challenging question of pros and cons. Can you give me pros and cons of
*  each? What's the biggest strength and biggest limitation of, let's say, Biden?
*  This is a tough question. I've known President Biden for a lot of years. I knew his son, Bo,
*  who served in the National Guard the same time that I did.
*  I consider Joe Biden a friend. He is someone over the years that I have talked to and shared
*  laughs with and spent time with in different situations. The positive characteristics that
*  drew me to Joe Biden of the past, they are not represented in how he has led as president.
*  I'll let the pundits theorize as to how that is or why that is, but the truth that I know exists,
*  which points to his weakness, is that instead of listening to his better angels, he has instead,
*  at every turn, if you go back and I look back to his inauguration speech where he promised to be
*  a president for all Americans and during his campaign promised to be the uniter in chief,
*  to bring a country together that was deeply divided. That's the Joe Biden that I've known
*  for many years, a guy who has worked with different people with different backgrounds
*  and different political views, but tried to find at different points in time a way to work together.
*  At every turn, he has done the exact opposite of what he spoke about during his inauguration
*  speech and has left us as the American people today, more divided, less secure,
*  both from an economic standpoint as well as a national security or safety and security
*  standpoint, and less free as a society and as a people.
*  So the biggest criticism would be he divided us or continued the division that's been
*  there. Who do you be the greatest uniter? To me, over the past few decades, to me, Obama.
*  You've been very critical of Obama on the foreign policy side on many fronts, but to me,
*  that guy did really good. Maybe some people say just rhetoric, but I think rhetoric matters
*  in your president. I think he was, out of all the presidents we had, is probably the most effective
*  uniter of the people. Would that be fair to say? During his 2008 campaign, yes. I think that his
*  message resonated with so many people across generations and across different views, different
*  backgrounds to where people cried on the night that he was elected because they felt so hopeful.
*  I talk to people and I know people who set aside their entire lives to work on his campaign,
*  to be a part of this hope and change mission that he laid out that would bring us together.
*  Some of the people that I know personally, they gave up their lives during the campaign,
*  and after he won, they went to Washington, D.C. because they wanted to be able to do
*  the work that he had laid out and continue to be a part of this mission that they expected would
*  extend beyond the campaign. They've expressed to me personally how heartbroken they were
*  because so quickly after he was elected, instead of bringing in a new generation of fresh leadership
*  that was not a part of the Washington establishment, he instead immediately chose to go to Washington
*  and immediately chose to surround himself with people who were more of the same old, same old,
*  who were essentially part of the problem. Many of his actions after that proved that fear and that
*  broken heartedness that they felt to be true. I'll mention one example related to civil liberties
*  that we talked about. He was someone as a U.S. Senator who gave some pretty powerful speeches on
*  the Senate floor about his concerns with the Patriot Act, his concerns with surveillance from
*  the NSA, his concerns with a violation of our Fourth Amendment rights and civil liberties.
*  But when as president, he was confronted with leaked information about the surveillance occurring
*  under those authorities in his presidency, he took the side of the national security state
*  and did not take action to right the wrongs that he correctly pointed out as Senator and during his
*  campaign for the presidency, which is unfortunate because he really did build this unifying momentum
*  throughout his campaign. What do you think that is? Why is it so hard as a president
*  to kind of act on the promises of the campaign, but also just, I mean, his speech, his basically
*  anti-war speech, that really resonated to me, the fact that he was against the war in Iraq,
*  I believe, early on. And that was a huge point of distinction between him and Hillary Clinton,
*  probably one of the biggest. Why is it so hard when you
*  step into the office of president to sort of act on your ideals?
*  I think it goes back to what we talked about a little bit, which is, you know, what are you driven
*  by and what are you afraid of? And if you are concerned for whether or not you can get reelected,
*  who's going to fund that reelection effort, who's going to fund the presidential library and your
*  legacy that will follow. There have been some documented examples around how he promised to
*  crack down on Big Pharma, but when push came to shove, his Department of Justice campaign funding
*  was threatened and they chose not to take action, even when they had a very, very strong case to make.
*  This was with regard to the opioid crisis in the country. And, you know, this just goes back to the
*  heart of why it's so essential that we have leaders who have courage and who are focused on
*  who have courage and who are focused on
*  doing what we elect them to do. And who are resistant to the love of money and power.
*  Yes. It's hard. And we are human. We are fallible. We are flawed by nature. And I'll go into kind of
*  the next one you asked about Trump, the weakness side and the lessons that I hope have been learned
*  from 2016 for him and his team is you have to be in a position where you are surrounding yourselves
*  with other people of courage who aren't just thinking about their next political job or their
*  next job, getting a cable news contract or looking for fame themselves or looking at how they can
*  monetize their position for their whatever their next financial interests might be. But people of
*  courage who know what they're up against to really seriously clean house across the federal
*  government and the corruption and rot that is so deeply entrenched in order to truly be effective.
*  And if he is reelected, that is my hope that he sees that he's learned from what went wrong in
*  2016 that he went in with a largely non-interventionist, more focused on peace
*  agenda. And yet he surrounded himself with people who are at the heart of the warmongers in Washington
*  and who directly went against the policies that he advocated for. On the strength side, I think
*  it's easy to point out because it's also what has caused him to be so
*  attacked in ways that we haven't seen before, certainly not in my lifetime,
*  by the Democrats, by the Biden administration, not only in now, but something that started back in
*  2016 when he was a candidate. He's a guy who by all measures has been successful in his own life.
*  And because of that, he's not coming in with this desire to please Washington that many other
*  politicians have. And because he is so willing to challenge the quote unquote norms,
*  and these are not norms that serve the interests of the American people, these are norms that serve
*  the interests of the most powerful, he is a direct threat. And so that attitude and that mindset of
*  not coming in with the kind of caution that too many politicians come in with of wanting to be
*  the popular one at the parties or whatever it is that they want, that is the strength that he brings.
*  Yeah. I just had a conversation with Dana White and he's good friends with Trump and he talks to
*  the fact that he seems to be resistant to the attacks. And some aspect of that is just the
*  psychology of being able to withstand the attacks that are there in the political game. And that can
*  break people. You just don't want the headaches. So to withstand the attacks is tough. And something
*  about his psychology allows for that. I guess the question for you also in your own psychology,
*  you've been attacked quite a bit. We've mentioned some of that, sort of misrepresentations and
*  how do you deal with that by yourself? How do you not become cynical or
*  overcompensate the other direction, that kind of stuff?
*  It really stems from having a clear sense of purpose. I've served in state government,
*  I've served on our city council in Honolulu and served in Congress. But at no time have I seen
*  this as a quote unquote political career. I don't have that ladder climbing ambition that a lot of
*  politicians have. My sense of purpose is deeply rooted in my dedication and my desire in my life
*  to be pleasing to God and to live a life of service. And what better way to be pleasing to
*  God than to try to do my best to work for the wellbeing of God's children. Being rooted in that
*  has made it so that as the attacks are coming from different directions, even as people who I
*  was friends with, former colleagues of mine, others, even family members, even as they have
*  turned away or become attackers against me themselves because of different reasons related
*  to politics, of course it's a sad thing, especially when it's someone that you know personally.
*  And I've had a personal friendship or relationship with, but I don't live my life trying to please
*  politicians or please the people who show up on TV or anyone else. As long as I am doing my best
*  to be pleasing to God, that is where I draw my happiness from and my fulfillment and contentment
*  and strength. So you've spoken about the value of religious faith in your life,
*  of your Hindu faith and seeing the Bhagavad Gita as a spiritual guide. So what role does faith
*  and God play in your life? It's everything. It is central to who I am, what inspires me,
*  what motivates me, where I find strength, where I find peace, where I find shelter,
*  and where I find happiness. And this has been a constant throughout times of challenge,
*  times of darkness, times of heartbreak, times of happiness in always feeling very secure
*  in knowing that God's unconditional love is ever present. And no matter what else is happening in
*  my life, that God is my best friend and remaining centered and grounded in always remembering that
*  and meditating upon that truth is everything to me.
*  The interesting thing about the Hindu God is how welcoming the religion is of other religions.
*  It's true.
*  How accepting it is. In that way, in many ways, it's one of the most beautiful religions on Earth.
*  So who do you think God is to you?
*  In specifically the texts, but also you personally, what does he represent?
*  So for Hinduism, it's also God can be many. There's also an aspect where it's a part of all of us.
*  There's a uniting thing, not a singular figure outside of us.
*  I think one of the things that's most commonly misunderstood about Hinduism
*  that people don't know is that Hinduism is truly a monotheistic religion. That there is one God,
*  and he goes by many names that describe his different qualities and characteristics.
*  And as you pointed out, Hinduism is uniquely of a non-sectarian spiritual practice,
*  essentially. It's not a quote unquote religion that you convert into or you leave behind
*  or whatever the case may be. Bhagavad Gita, a central scripture and text
*  that comes from India, literally means song of God. And the principles that are conveyed
*  throughout the Bhagavad Gita are applicable to all of us. They are timeless truths that whether
*  you consider yourself Christian or Catholic or Muslim or Jewish or Hindu, these truths
*  are eternal and relevant through all time. So for us as kids growing up,
*  we learned from and had bedtime stories that came from both the Bhagavad Gita and the New Testament.
*  My dad was raised Catholic, my mom was raised Episcopalian, and both of them were attracted
*  to the Bhagavad Gita as they were in their own lives searching for a more personal relationship
*  with God than they had been able to find elsewhere in their own spiritual journeys. And so,
*  and that's where the application of, you know, there are teachings in the Bhagavad Gita, for
*  example, that talk about bhakti yoga. Bhakti yoga essentially translates into dedicating your life,
*  striving to develop a loving relationship with God. Karma yoga, there's a chapter in the Bhagavad
*  Gita that speaks about karma yoga. Karma is a word that has become a part of the,
*  you know, both karma and yoga have become very common terms. But what it really means is
*  trying to dedicate your actions in life that have, in a way that have a positive impact on others,
*  being of service to others. And so for me growing up, I never really understood as a kid the idea
*  of sectarianism, of one religion battling against another, because I knew and understood and
*  experienced that the real meaning of religion was love for God. No matter what name you worship
*  Him by or how you worship, that is the real meaning of religion. And the application of that
*  in your life is, you know, you ask how do I see God in a personal way? I see, I know that God is
*  my best friend. God is my confidant. When I am struggling with a problem in my life or, you know,
*  during those quiet moments by myself where I am anxious or I'm sad, I turn to God for
*  that solace, for that clarity, for that strength to both know what the right thing to do is
*  and the strength to act accordingly and to constantly strive to further develop
*  that very personal loving relationship with God.
*  Tulsie, this was an honor to finally meet you, to talk to you. This was amazing. Thank you.
*  Thank you, Lex. It's so wonderful to be here. Thank you for the opportunity.
*  Thanks for listening to this conversation with Tulsie Gabbard. To support this podcast,
*  please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from
*  Dwight D. Eisenhower in his 1961 farewell address.
*  A vital element in keeping the peace is our military establishment. Our arms must be mighty,
*  ready for instant action so that no potential aggressor may be tempted to risk his own
*  destruction. American makers of plowshares could, with time and as required, make swords as well.
*  But now we can no longer risk emergency improvisation of national defense. We have
*  been compelled to create a permanent armaments industry of vast proportions.
*  This conjunction of immense military establishment and a large arms industry is new in the American
*  experience. Yet we must not fail to comprehend its grave implications. In the councils of government,
*  we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence, whether sought or unsought,
*  by the military-industrial complex. The potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists
*  and will persist. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
