---
Date Generated: September 22, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 12717s
Video Keywords: ['Vejas Liulevicius', 'alex friedman', 'lex ai', 'lex debate', 'lex freedman', 'lex fridman', 'lex friedman', 'lex interview', 'lex lecture', 'lex mit', 'lex podcast', 'lex transcript']
Video Views: 215818
Video Rating: None
Video Description: Vejas Liulevicius is a historian specializing in Germany and Eastern Europe, who has lectured extensively on Marxism and the rise, the reign, and the fall of Communism.
Thank you for listening ❤ Check out our sponsors: https://lexfridman.com/sponsors/ep444-sb
See below for timestamps, transcript, and to give feedback, submit questions, contact Lex, etc.

*Transcript:*
https://lexfridman.com/vejas-liulevicius-transcript

*CONTACT LEX:*
*Feedback* - give feedback to Lex: https://lexfridman.com/survey
*AMA* - submit questions, videos or call-in: https://lexfridman.com/ama
*Hiring* - join our team: https://lexfridman.com/hiring
*Other* - other ways to get in touch: https://lexfridman.com/contact

*EPISODE LINKS:*
Vejas's Courses: https://www.thegreatcoursesplus.com/vejas-gabriel-liulevicius
Vejas's Books: https://amzn.to/4e3R1rz
Vejas's Audible: https://adbl.co/4esRrHt

*SPONSORS:*
To support this podcast, check out our sponsors & get discounts:
*AG1:* All-in-one daily nutrition drinks.
Go to https://lexfridman.com/s/ag1-ep444-sb
*BetterHelp:* Online therapy and counseling.
Go to https://lexfridman.com/s/betterhelp-ep444-sb
*Notion:* Note-taking and team collaboration.
Go to https://lexfridman.com/s/notion-ep444-sb
*LMNT:* Zero-sugar electrolyte drink mix.
Go to https://lexfridman.com/s/lmnt-ep444-sb
*Eight Sleep:* Temp-controlled smart mattress.
Go to https://lexfridman.com/s/eight_sleep-ep444-sb

*OUTLINE:*
0:00 - Introduction
3:10 - Marxism
30:55 - Anarchism
45:52 - The Communist Manifesto
54:51 - Communism in the Soviet Union
1:14:45 - Lenin, Trotsky, and Stalin
1:24:33 - Stalin
1:31:48 - Holodomor
1:45:38 - The Great Terror
1:58:39 - Totalitarianism
2:09:40 - Response to Darryl Cooper
2:24:49 - Nazis vs Communists in Germany
2:31:11 - Mao
2:36:19 - Great Leap Forward
2:43:20 - China after Mao
2:48:52 - North Korea
2:52:56 - Communism in US
3:00:26 - Russia after Soviet Union
3:11:57 - Advice for Lex
3:19:39 - Book recommendations
3:22:38 - Advice for young people
3:29:29 - Hope

*PODCAST LINKS:*
- Podcast Website: https://lexfridman.com/podcast
- Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/2lwqZIr
- Spotify: https://spoti.fi/2nEwCF8
- RSS: https://lexfridman.com/feed/podcast/
- Podcast Playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLrAXtmErZgOdP_8GztsuKi9nrraNbKKp4
- Clips Channel: https://www.youtube.com/lexclips

*SOCIAL LINKS:*
- X: https://x.com/lexfridman
- Instagram: https://instagram.com/lexfridman
- TikTok: https://tiktok.com/@lexfridman
- LinkedIn: https://linkedin.com/in/lexfridman
- Facebook: https://facebook.com/lexfridman
- Patreon: https://patreon.com/lexfridman
- Telegram: https://t.me/lexfridman
- Reddit: https://reddit.com/r/lexfridman
---

# Vejas Liulevicius Communism, Marxism, Nazism, Stalin, Mao, and Hitler  Lex Fridman Podcast #444
**Lex Fridman:** [September 20, 2024](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s1oTH4Sjvzg)
*  And the outcome here is a horrific man-made famine, not a natural disaster, not bad harvests,
*  but a man-made famine as a result of then the compulsion that gets used by the Soviet state
*  to extract those resources, cordoning off the area, not allowing starting people to escape.
*  You put very well some of the implications of this case study in how things look in the abstract
*  versus in practice. And those phenomena were going to haunt the rest of the experience of
*  the Soviet Union. The whole notion that up and down the chain of command, everybody is falsifying or
*  tinkering with or purifying the statistics or their reports in order not to look bad and not to
*  have vengeance visited upon them reaches the point where nobody, in spite of the pretense
*  of comprehensive knowledge, there's a state planning agency that creates five-year plans
*  for the economy as a whole and which is supposed to have accurate statistics, all of this is founded
*  upon a foundation of sand. A deliberate plan to bring class conflict and bring civil war and then
*  heighten it in the countryside does damage. And not least of that is this phenomenon of a negative
*  selection. Those who have most enterprise, those who are most entrepreneurial, those who have
*  most self-discipline, those who are best organized will be winnowed again and again and again,
*  and again, sending the message that mediocrity is comparatively much safer than talent.
*  Hitler and Himmler envisioned permanent war on the Eastern Front. Not a peace treaty,
*  not a settlement, not a border, but a constant moving of the border every generation,
*  hundreds of miles east in order to keep winning more and more living space. And with analogy to
*  other frontiers, to always give more fighting experience and more training and aggression
*  to generation after generation of German soldiers. In terms of nightmarish visions,
*  this one's right up there. The following is a conversation with Wejas Ludevichas,
*  a historian specializing in Germany and Eastern Europe. He has lectured extensively on the rise,
*  the rain, and the fall of communism. Our discussion goes deep on this, the very heaviest
*  of topics, the communist ideology that has led to over 100 million deaths in the 20th century.
*  We also discuss Hitler, Nazi ideology, and World War II.
*  This is the Lex Friedman Podcast. To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description.
*  And now, dear friends, here's Wejas Ludevichas.
*  Let's start with Karl Marx. What were the central ideas of Marx that lay the foundation of communism?
*  I think there were several key ideas that Marx deployed that were destined to have such an impact.
*  And in some ways, they were actually kind of contradictory. On the one hand, Marx insisted
*  that history has a purpose, that history is not just random events, but that rather it's history,
*  we might say, with a capital H, history moving in a deliberate direction, history having a goal,
*  a direction that it was predestined to move in. At the same time, in the Communist Manifesto,
*  Karl Marx and his colleague Friedrich Engels also suggested that there was a role for special
*  individuals who might, even if history was still moving in this predetermined direction, might
*  give it an extra push, might play a heroic role in that process. And I think that these
*  two ideas added together, the notion that there is a science of revolution that suggests that you
*  can move in a deliberate and meaningful, rational way towards the end of history and the resolution
*  of all conflicts, a total liberation of the human person, and that moreover, that was inevitable,
*  that that was pre-programmed and destined in the order of things. When you add to that the notion
*  that there's also room for heroism and the individual role, this ended up being tremendously
*  powerful as a combination. Earlier thinkers who were socialists had already dreamt of or projected
*  futures where all conflict would be resolved and human life would achieve some sort of perfection.
*  Marx added these other elements that made it far more powerful than the earlier versions that he
*  decried as merely utopian socialism. So there's a million questions I could ask there, but so on
*  the utopian side, so there is a utopian component to the way he tried to conceive of his ideas.
*  Yeah, absolutely. I mean, first of all, one has to stress Marx would have gotten extremely upset at
*  this point in the conversation because to call someone a utopian was precisely to argue that
*  you're not scientific, you're not rational, you are not laying out the iron laws of history,
*  you're merely hoping for the best. And that might be laudable, but it was fundamentally unrealistic.
*  That said, hidden among Marx's insistence that there are laws and structures as history moves
*  through class conflict, modes of production towards its ultimate goal of a comprehensive
*  final revolution that will see all exploitation overthrown and people finally being freed from
*  necessity, smuggled in among those things are most definitely utopian elements. And there,
*  they come especially at the end in which Marx sketches the notion of what things will look like
*  after the revolution has resolved all problems. There vagueness sets in. It's clear that it's a
*  blessed state that's being talked about. People no longer exploiting one another, people no longer
*  subject to necessity or poverty, but instead enjoying all of the productivity of industrialization
*  that hitherto had been put to private profit, now collectively owned and deployed. The notion that
*  one will be able to work at one job in the morning and then engage in leisure activity
*  or yet another fulfilling job in the afternoon. All of this free of any contradictions, free of
*  necessity, free of the ordinary irritations that we experience in our ordinary lives.
*  That's deeply utopian. The difference was that Marx charted a route towards that outcome that
*  presented itself as cutting edge science and moreover having the full credibility that science
*  commanded so much, especially in the 19th and early 20th century. So there is a long journey
*  from capitalism to communism that includes a lot of problems. He thought once you resolve the problems,
*  all the complexities of human interactions, the friction, the problems will be gone. To the
*  extent that they were based on inequalities and on man's exploitation of man, the result was supposed
*  to be a resolution of all of this. And inevitably, when you talk about the history of communism,
*  you have to include the fact that this often tragic and dramatic history produced a lot of jokes,
*  jokes that were in part reactions sometimes to the ideological claims made by people like Marx.
*  One of the famous jokes was that, what's the difference between capitalism and communism?
*  The joke's answer was capitalism is the exploitation of man by man and communism is the
*  exact opposite. Yeah, you actually have electron humor. I love it. And you deliver in such a dry,
*  beautiful way. Okay, there's again, a million questions. So you outline a set of contradictions,
*  but it's interesting to talk about his view. For example, what was Marx's view of history?
*  Marx had been a student of Hegel. And Hegel is a German idealist philosopher, had announced very
*  definitively that history has a purpose. History is not a collection of random facts. And as an
*  idealist, he proposed that the true movement of history, the true meaning of history, what made
*  history, history with a capital H, something that's transcendent and meaningful, was that it was the
*  working out of an idea through different civilizations, different stages of historical
*  development. And that idea was the idea of human freedom. So it was not individuals or great
*  thinkers alone making history and having an impact. It was the idea itself, striving to come to
*  fruition, striving to come to an ever more perfect realization. In the case of Hegel, in this very
*  Prussian and German context, he identified the realization of freedom also with the growth of
*  the state, because he thought that governments are the ones that are going to be able to deliver on
*  laws and on the ideal of a state of the rule of law in German, the Reichstaat. That was a noble
*  dream. At the same time, as we recognize from our perspective, state power has been put to all sorts
*  of purposes besides guaranteeing the rule of law in our own times. What Marx did was to take this
*  characteristic insistence of Hegel that history is moving in a meaningful and discernible way
*  towards the realization of an idea and flipped it on its head. Marx insisted that Hegel had so much
*  that was right in his thinking, but what he had neglected to keep in mind was that in fact, history
*  is based on matter. Hence, dialectical materialism, dialectical referring to things
*  proceeding by clashes or conflict towards an ever greater realization of some essential idea.
*  Marx adapts a lot of ideas of Hegel. You can recognize entire rhetorical maneuvers that are
*  indebted to that earlier training, but now taken in a very different direction. What remained though
*  was the confidence of being on the right side of history. There are few things that are as
*  intoxicating as being convinced that your actions not only are right in the abstract, but are also
*  destined to be successful. Also that you have the rigor of science backing you in your journey
*  towards the truth. Absolutely. Engels, when he gives the great side eulogy for his beloved friend,
*  Marx, claims that Marx is essentially the Darwin of history, that he had done for the world of
*  politics and of human history what Darwin had done with this theory of evolution, understanding
*  the hidden mechanism, understanding the laws that are at work and that make that whole process
*  meaningful rather than just one damn thing after another. What about the famous line that history
*  of all existing societies is the history of class struggles? What about this conception of history
*  as a history of class struggle? This was the mode of force that Karl Marx and Engels saw
*  driving the historical process forward. It's important to keep in mind that class conflict
*  doesn't just mean revolutions, revolts, peasant uprisings. It's the totality of frictions and
*  of clashes, conflicts of interest that appear in any society. So Marx was able in this spirit that
*  he avowed was very scientific to demarcate stages of historical transformation, primitive communism
*  in the prehistoric period, then moving towards what was called state slavery, that's to say the
*  early civilizations deploying human resources and ordering them by all-powerful monarchs,
*  then private slavery in the ancient period, and then moving to feudalism in the Middle Ages
*  and then here's where Marx is able to deliver a pronouncement about his own times, seeing that
*  the present day is the penultimate, the next to last stage of this historical development
*  because the feudal system of the Middle Ages and the dominance of the aristocracy has been overcome,
*  has been displaced by the often heroic achievements, astonishing achievements in
*  commerce and in world building of the middle class, the bourgeoisie, who have taken the world
*  into their own hands and are engaged in class conflict with the class below them, which is the
*  working class or the proletariat. And so this sort of conflict also, by the way, obtains within
*  classes. So the bourgeoisie are going to be gravediggers, Marx announces, of their own
*  supremacy because they're also competing against one another. And members who don't survive that
*  competition get pressed down into the subordinate working class, which grows and grows and grows
*  to the point where at some future moment, the inevitable explosion will come and a swift
*  revolution will overturn this last, this penultimate stage of human history and usher in
*  instead the dictatorship of the working class and then the abolition of all classes because
*  with only one class remaining, everyone is finally unified and without those internal
*  contradictions that had marked class conflict before. The dictatorship of the working class
*  is an interesting term. So what is the role of revolution in history?
*  So this in particular for Marx, I think is a really key moment, which is what makes that such
*  a good question. In his vision, the epic narrative that he's presenting to us, revolution
*  is key. It's not enough to have evolutionary change. It's not a question of compromises.
*  It's not a case of bargaining or balancing interests. Revolution is necessary as part
*  of the process of a subjugated class coming to awareness of its own historical role. And when
*  we get to the proletariat, this working class in its entirety to whom Marx assigns this epic
*  Promethean role of being the ones who are going to liberate all of humanity, a class that is
*  universal in its interests and in the sort of role in salvation history that they'll be playing
*  in this secular framework, they need revolution and the experience of revolution in order to come
*  into their own because without it, you'll only have halfhearted compromise and something less than
*  the consciousness that they then need in order to rule, to administer,
*  and to play the historical role that they're fated to have.
*  How did he conceive of a revolution, potentially a violent revolution, stabilizing itself into
*  something where the working class was able to rule?
*  That's where things become a good deal less detailed in his and Engel's accounts. The answer
*  that they proposed in part was this is for the future to determine. So all of the details will
*  be settled later. I think that was allied to this was a tremendous confidence in some very
*  19th century ideas about how society could be administered and what made for orderly society
*  in a way where if the right infrastructure was in place, you might expect society to kind of
*  run itself without the need for micromanagement from above. And hence, we arrive at Marx's
*  tantalizing promise that there will be a period where it'll be necessary to have centralized
*  control and there might have to be, as he puts it, despotic inroads against property in order to
*  bring this revolution to pass. But then afterwards, the state, because it represents everybody,
*  rather than representing particular class interests that are in conflict with other classes,
*  the state will eventually wither away. So there won't be need for it. Now, that's not to say that
*  pure stasis arrives or that the stabilization equals being frozen in time. It's not as if
*  that is what things will look like, but instead, the big issues will be settled. And henceforth,
*  people will be able to enjoy lives of, as he would consider it, inauthentic freedom without
*  necessity, without poverty as a result of this blessed state that's been arrived at.
*  Despotic inroads against property. Did he elaborate on the despotic inroads?
*  Dispossession, dispossession of the middle classes and of the bourgeoisie. In his model,
*  humanity is never standing still. So you'd probably argue in this dynamic vision of how
*  history unfolds that there's always conflict and it's always propelling history forward towards
*  its predescent ending. In the way he saw this climax was that as things did not stay the same,
*  the condition of the working class was constantly getting worse and hence their revolutionary
*  potential was growing. And at the same time, the expropriators, the bourgeoisie were also facing
*  diminishing returns as they competed against one another with more and more wealth concentrated
*  in fewer and fewer hands and more and more elements of what had been the middle class
*  detached from the ruling class and being pressed down into the working class. For Marx,
*  this is really a key part. I mean, it's a key part of this whole ratchet effect that's going
*  to produce this final historical explosion. And in German, the word given to that process was
*  which is very evocative. Eiland means misery. So it's the growing misery. When this gets translated
*  into English, the results are never quite as evocative or satisfactory. The words that get
*  used are immisorization or pauperization, meaning more and more people are being turned into
*  paupers. But for Marx, that prediction is really key. And even in his own lifetime,
*  there were already hints that in fact, if you look sociologically at the really developed working
*  classes in places like Great Britain or Germany, that process was not playing out as he had expected.
*  In fact, although there have been enormous dislocations and tremendous suffering in the
*  early chaotic sort of Wild West stages of capitalism and of industrialization,
*  there had been reform movements as well. And there had been unions which had sought
*  to carve out rules and agreements with employers for how the conditions under which workers
*  labored might be ameliorated. Moreover, the middle class rather than dwindling and dwindling,
*  seemed to actually be strengthening and growing in numbers of the appearance of new kinds of people
*  like white collar workers or technical experts. So already in Marx's own lifetime, and then
*  especially in what follows Marx's lifetime, this becomes a real problem because it puts a stick
*  into the spokes of this particular historical prediction. Can you speak to this realm of
*  ideas, which is fascinating, this battle of big ideas in the 19th century? What are the ideas
*  that were swimming around here? Yeah. Well, to describe the 19th century as sort of an age of
*  ideologies is very apt because Europe is being wracked and being put through the wringer of
*  nationalism, demands for self-expression of peoples who earlier have been in empires or
*  under monarchical rule, demands to redraw the map. The tremendous transformations of the industrial
*  revolution meant that in the course of about a generation, you would have seen the world around
*  you change in ways that made it entirely unfamiliar. You'd be able to travel across the landscape at
*  speeds that have been unthinkable when you were a child. So it's enormous change and demands for
*  yet more change. And so it's a great mix of ideas, ideologies, the old and the new,
*  religious ideas, religious revivals, as well as demands for secularization.
*  And stepping into all of this are Marx and Engels together in what has been called,
*  I think with justice, one of the most important and influential intellectual partnerships
*  of history. They were very different men. They were both German by origin.
*  Marx had trained as an academic. He had married the daughter of a baron. Because of his radical
*  ideas, he had foreclosed or found himself cut off from a possible academic career and went
*  the route of radical journalism. Engels was very different. Engels was the son of an industrialist
*  and the family owned factories in Germany and in England. So he was most definitely not a member
*  of the proletariat that he and Marx were celebrating as so significant in their future historical role.
*  There were also huge differences in character between these men. Marx, when people met him,
*  they were astonished by his energy and his dynamism. They also saw him as a man who felt
*  determined to dominate arguments. He wanted to win arguments and was not one to settle for compromise
*  or a middle road. He was disorderly in his personal habits. We might mention, among other
*  things, that he impregnated the family maid and didn't accept responsibility for the child.
*  He was also not inclined to undertake regular employment in order to support his growing family.
*  That's where Engels came in. Engels essentially, from his family fortune and then from his
*  journalism afterwards, supported both himself and the Marx family for decades. And so in a sense,
*  Engels made things happen. In the mysterious way that friendships work, the very first
*  differences between these men made them formidable as a dynamic duo because they balanced off one
*  another's idiosyncrasies and turned what might have been faults into potential strengths.
*  British historian, A.J.P. Taylor, always has a lovely turn of phrase, even when he's wrong
*  about a historical issue. In this case, he was right. He said that Engels had charm and brilliance.
*  Marx was a genius. And Engels saw himself as definitely the junior partner in this relationship.
*  But here's the paradox. Without Engels, pretty clearly Marx would not have gone on to have the
*  sort of lasting historical impact in the world of ideas that he had.
*  Just to throw in the mix, there's interesting characters swimming around. So you have Darwin.
*  He has a, I mean, it's difficult to characterize the level of impact he had, even just in the
*  religious context. It challenges our conception of who we are as humans. There's Nietzsche,
*  who's also, I don't know, hanging around the area. On the Russian side, there's Dostoyevsky.
*  So it's interesting to ask maybe, from your perspective, did these people interact in any
*  in the space of ideas to where this is relevant to our discussion, or is this mostly isolated?
*  I think that it's part of a great conversation. I think that in their works, they're reacting to
*  one another. Dostoyevsky's thought ranges across the condition of modernity, and he definitely has
*  things to say about industrialization. I think that they react to one another in these oblique
*  ways, rather than always being at each other's throats in direct confrontations.
*  That's what makes the 19th century so compelling as a story, just because of the sheer vitality of
*  the arguments that are taking place in ways big and small. What we should say here, when you
*  mentioned Karl Marx, maybe the color red comes up for people, and they think the Soviet Union
*  may be China, but they don't think Germany necessarily. It's interesting that, I mean,
*  Germany is where communism was supposed to happen. That's right.
*  So can you maybe speak to that tension? Yeah, absolutely. I mean, this is definitely
*  a factor in the entire history that we're referencing. Marx and Engels never really
*  shed their identity as Germans. Many of their preconceptions, even those traces of nationalism
*  that they had within themselves, even as they were condemning nationalism as a fraud against
*  the working class, clearly their entire formation had been affected by their German background.
*  It's very true, as you point out, that Germany is intended to be the place where these predictions
*  will play out, also in Britain, also in France, also eventually in the United States.
*  But it's Germany by virtue of being its central location, and then its rapid development
*  later than Britain or France in industrialization, give it this special role in Marx's
*  worldview. And so it's a lasting irony or a central irony of this whole story, that when
*  a government establishes itself that claims to be following Marx's prescriptions and realizing his
*  vision, it happens in the wreckage of the Russian Empire, a place that did not match the requirements
*  of being industrialized, developed well on its way in this historical process.
*  Nobody knew this better than the Bolsheviks. Lenin and his colleagues had a keen sense that
*  what they were doing, exciting as it was, was a gamble. It was a risk because, in fact,
*  the revolution to really take hold had to seize power in Germany. That's why immediately after
*  taking power, they're not sure they're going to last. Their hope, their promise of salvation
*  is that a workers revolution will erupt in Germany, defeated Germany, in order to link up
*  with the one that has been launched in this unlikely Russian location, and henceforth,
*  great things will follow that do hue to Marx's historical vision. The last thing to mention
*  about this is that this predominance of Germany in the thinking of Marx had two other reflections.
*  One was that German socialists and later communists organize in order to fulfill
*  Marx's vision, and they produce something that leaves other Westerners in awe in the late 19th
*  century. That's the building of a strong German workers movement and a social democratic party.
*  That social democratic party by 1912 is the largest party in German politics by vote,
*  and there's the possibility they might even come to power without needing radical revolution,
*  which again also goes against Marx's original vision of the necessity for a revolution.
*  The workers around the world, or rather radical socialists, look with admiration and awe at what
*  the Germans have achieved, and they see themselves as trying to do what the Germans have done.
*  The final point is, growing up during the Cold War, one thought that, well, if you want to represent
*  somebody as being a communist, that person has to have a Russian accent, because Russia, after all,
*  the homeland of this form of government, the Soviet Union, that must be the point of origin.
*  Before the Bolsheviks seized power, in order to really be a serious radical socialist,
*  you needed to read German, because you needed to read Marx, and you needed to read Koutsky,
*  and you needed to read Bernstein and other thinkers in this tradition, and it's only after
*  the Soviet seizure of power that this all changes. So there's lots of marks of that phenomenon.
*  Which is why the clash between nationalism and communism in Germany is such a fascinating aspect
*  of history and all the different trajectories it could take, and we'll talk about it. But if we
*  return to the 19th century, you've said that Marx's chief rival was Russian anarchist
*  Mikhail Bakunin, who famously said in 1942, quote, the passion for destruction is also
*  a creative passion. So what kind of future did Bakunin envision? Well, Bakunin in some things
*  agreed with Marx and in many others disagreed. He was an anarchist rather than a hewing to
*  the sort of scheme of history that Marx was proposing. So he did see humanity as fighting
*  a struggle for a better way of life. He envisioned, as your quote suggests, that revolution and
*  sheer confrontation and overthrow the existing state of things, not compromise, was going to
*  be the way to get there. But his vision was very different. Rather than organizing
*  conspiratorial and hierarchical political movement, Bakunin envisioned that the ties
*  would be far looser, that both the revolutionary movement and the future state of humanity would
*  grow out of the free association, the anarchist thinking, the free association of individuals
*  who rejected hierarchical thinking in their relations with one another, rejected the state
*  as a form of organized violence, and rejected traditional religious ideas that he saw as
*  buttressing hierarchies. So Bakunin is part of a broader movement of socialists and anarchists who
*  are demanding change and envisioning really fundamental transformation. But his particular
*  anarchist vision steers him into conflict with Marx. And he makes some prophetic remarks about
*  the problems with the system that Marx is proposing. You should add to this that the very
*  fact that Marx is a German by background and Bakunin is Russian kind of adds a further
*  nationalist or element of ethnic difference there. Bakunin warned that a sort of creeping German
*  authoritarianism might insinuate its way into a movement that hewed too closely to having
*  hierarchies in the struggle to overthrow hierarchies. And his anarchist convictions
*  are not in question here. They led him into conflict with Marx and Marx railed against him,
*  denounced him, and eventually had him expelled from the international. One of the things though
*  that also makes Bakunin so significant is Bakunin is the first in a longer series of
*  approaches between anarchists and communists where they try to make common cause. And you
*  have to say that in every case it ends badly for the anarchists because the communist vision in
*  particular, especially in its Leninist version, argued for discipline and a tightly organized
*  professional revolutionary movement. The anarchists who sought to make common cause with
*  the Leninists, whether it was in the days of the Russian Revolution or the Russian Civil War
*  or whether it was then in the Spanish Civil War, the anarchists found themselves targeted by
*  the communists precisely because of their skepticism about what turned out to be an
*  absolutely key element in the Leninist prescription for a successful revolution.
*  If we can take that tangent a little bit. So I guess anarchists were less organized.
*  Yes, by definition.
*  Yeah. Why do you think anarchism hasn't been rigorously tried in the way that communism was
*  if we just take a complete sort of tangent? I mean, in one sense, we are living in an anarchy
*  today because the nations are in an anarchic state with each other. But why do you think
*  there's not been an anarchist revolution?
*  Well, I think that probably some anarchists would beg to differ, right? They would see
*  communes in Spain during the Spanish Civil War as an example of trying to put anarchist ideas into
*  place. Bakunin flitted from one area of unrest to another, hoping to be in on
*  finally the founding of the sort of free communes that he had in mind.
*  Another key point in all of this is that anarchy means something different to different people
*  as a term. And so when you point out quite correctly that we have an anarchic international
*  situation, that's kind of the Hobbesian model of the war of all against all where man is a wolf to
*  man. Generally, except if you're talking about nihilists in the Russian revolutionary tradition,
*  anarchists see anarchy as a blessed state and one where finally people will be freed from the
*  distorting influence of hierarchies, traditional beliefs, subjugation, inequalities. So for them,
*  anarchy growing out of the liberation of the human being is seen as a positive good and
*  peaceful. Now that's at odds with the prescription of someone like Bakunin for how to get there.
*  He sees overthrow as being necessary on the route to that. But as we point out,
*  it's absolutely key to this entire dynamic that to be an anarchist means that your efforts are not
*  going to be organized the way a disciplined and tightly organized revolutionary movement would be.
*  LW Yeah, it's an interesting stretch that a violent revolution will take us to a place
*  of no violence or very little violence. It's a leap.
*  AC It's a leap. And it kind of it points to a phenomenon that would have enraged Marx
*  and would have been deeply alienating to others in the tradition who followed him, but that
*  so many scholars have commented on. And that's that there is a religious element,
*  not a vowed one, but a kind of hidden religious or secular religious element to Marx's vision,
*  to the tradition that follows Marx. And just think of the correspondences, right? Marx himself
*  as kind of positioning himself as a savior figure, whether that's a Prometheus or a Moses who will
*  lead people to the promised land. The apocalypse or the end times is this final revolution that
*  will usher in a blessed final state, a utopia, which is equivalent to a secular version of heaven.
*  There's the working class playing the role of humanity in its struggle to be redeemed.
*  AC And scholar after scholar has pointed this out. Reinhold Niebuhr back in the 1930s had an
*  article in the Atlantic magazine that talked about the Soviet Union's communism as a religion.
*  Erich Vögelin, a German American scholar who fled the Nazis and relocated to Louisiana State
*  University and wrote tomes about the new phenomenon of political religions in the
*  modern period. And he saw fascism and Nazism and the so and Soviet communism as bearing the stamp
*  of political religions, meaning ideologies that promised what an earlier age would have understood
*  in religious terms. Ferdinand called this the eschaton and said that these end times,
*  the eschaton was being promised in the here and now being made imminent. And he warned against
*  that saying the results are likely to be disastrous. AC So that's actually a disagreement with this idea
*  that, you know, people sometimes say that the Soviet Union is an example of an atheistic society.
*  So when you have atheism is the primary thing that underpins the society, this is what you get.
*  So that's what you're saying is a kind of rejection of that saying that there's a
*  strong religious component to communism. Ferdinand A hidden component, one that's not
*  officially recognized. I mean, I think that, you know, I had a chance to witness this, actually.
*  When I was a child, my family, I grew up in Chicago to a Lithuanian American family.
*  And my father, who was a mathematician, got a very rare invitation to travel to Soviet
*  Lithuania to the University of Vilnius to meet with colleagues. And at this point, journeys of
*  more than a few days or a week were very rare to the Soviet Union for Americans. And the result
*  was that I had unforgettable experiences visiting the Soviet Union in Brezhnev's day. And among the
*  things I saw there was a museum of atheism that had been established in a church that had been
*  ripped apart from inside and was meant to kind of embody the official stance of atheism. And
*  I remember being baffled by the museum on the inside because you would expect exhibits, you
*  would expect something dramatic, something that will be compelling. And instead, there was some
*  folk art from the countryside showing bygone beliefs. There were some lithographs or engravings
*  of the Spanish Inquisition and its horrors. And that was pretty much it. But as a child,
*  I remember being reproved in that museum for not wearing my windbreaker, but instead carrying it on
*  my arm, which was a very disrespectful thing to do in an official museum of atheism. When I was
*  able to visit the Soviet Union later for a language course in the summer of 1989, one of the obligatory
*  tours that we took was to file reverently past the body of Lenin outside the Kremlin in the mausoleum
*  at Red Square. And communist mummies like those of Lenin, earlier Stalin had been there as well,
*  communist mummies like Mao or Ho Chi Minh really, I think, speak to a blending of earlier religious
*  sensibility, reverence for relics of great figures, almost saintly figures, so that even
*  what got proclaimed as atheism turned out to be a very demanding faith as well. And I think that's
*  a contradiction that other scholars have pointed out as well. Yeah, it's a very complicated sort
*  of discussion when you remove religion as a big component of a society, whether something like
*  a framing of political ideologies in religious ways is the natural consequence of that.
*  We hear nature abhorring a vacuum, and I think that there are places in human character that
*  long for transcendental explanations, right? That it's not all meaningless. In fact, there's a
*  larger purpose, and I think it's not a coincidence that such a significant part of resistance to
*  communist regimes has in part come from, on the one hand, religious believers, and on the other
*  hand, from disillusioned true believers in communism who find themselves undergoing an
*  internal experience of just a revulsion, finding that their ideals have not been followed through on.
*  So this topic is one of several topics that you eloquently describe as contradictions within the
*  ideas of Marx. So religious, there is a kind of religious adherence versus also the rejection
*  of religious dogma that he stood for. We've talked about some of the others, the tension between
*  nationalism that emerged when it was implemented versus what communism is supposed to be, which
*  is global, so globalism. Then there's the thing that we started talking with, is individualism.
*  So history is supposed to be defined by the large collection of humans,
*  but there does seem to be these singular figures, including Marx himself, that are really important.
*  Geography of global versus restricted to certain countries, and tradition,
*  sort of you're supposed to break with the past and communism, but then Marxism became one of
*  the strongest traditions in history. That's right. That's right. I think that the last one
*  is especially significant because it's deeply paradoxical. I mean, trying to outline these
*  contradictions, by the way, is like subjecting Marx to the sort of analysis that Marx subjected
*  other people to, which is to point out internal contradictions, things that are likely to become
*  pressure points or cracks that might open up in what's supposed to be a completely
*  set and durable and effective framework. The one about tradition,
*  Marx points out that the need for revolution is in order to break with the traditions that have
*  hemmed people in, this earlier ways of thinking, earlier social structures, and to constantly
*  renovate. What happens instead is a tradition of radical rupture emerges, and that's really tough
*  because imagine the last stages of the Soviet Union where keen observers can tell that there
*  are problems that are building in society. There are discontents and demands that are
*  going to clash, especially when someone like Gorbachev is proposing reforms and things are
*  suddenly thrown open for discussion. The very notion that you have the celebration of revolutionaries
*  and the Bolshevik legacy at a time when the state wants to enforce stability and an order that's been
*  received from the prior generation, think of Brezhnev's time, for instance, all of that is
*  an especially volatile mix and unlikely to work out very durably in the long run.
*  I would love to talk about the works of Marx, the Communist Manifesto and Das Kapital.
*  What can we say that's interesting about the manifestation of his ideas on paper?
*  Well, the first thing to note obviously is that those two works are very different. Das Kapital
*  is an enormous multi-volume work that Marx worked at and only got the first volume out because
*  Engels begged him to stop revising, please just finally get it into press. Then the rest,
*  Engels had to actually reconstruct out of notes after Marx passed away. It's a huge work. By
*  contrast, the Communist Manifesto is a brief pamphlet that ended up affecting the lives of
*  many millions worldwide in spite of its comparative brevity. The Communist Manifesto, moreover,
*  is also something of the nature of having a delayed fuse, you could say, because when it first
*  appears amid the revolutions of 1848 that sweep across Europe, the work is contrary to what people
*  often believe. That pamphlet did not cause the revolutions of 1848, many of which had national
*  or liberal demands. The voice of Marx and Engels was barely to be heard over the din of other far
*  more prominent actors. It is, however, in the aftermath that this work takes on tremendous
*  significance and becomes popularly read and popularly distributed. It's especially the episode,
*  the bloody episode of the Paris Commune in 1871, which comes to be identified with Marx, even
*  though it was not purely inspired by Marx alone, nor were all of the Communards devoted Marxists.
*  It's the identification of this famous or infamous episode in urban upheaval that really leads to
*  worldwide notoriety for Marx and attention to those works. They're very different in form.
*  Das Kapital is intended to be the origin of species of its realm of economic thought and
*  represents years and years of work of Marx laboring in the British Museum Library,
*  working through statistics, working on little bits and pieces of a larger
*  answer to big historical questions that he believes that he's arrived at.
*  Its tone is different from that of the Communist Manifesto, which is a call to arms.
*  It announces with great confidence what the scheme of history will be, but rather than urging that
*  the answer might be passivity and just waiting for history to play out in its preordained way,
*  it's also a clarion call to make the revolution happen and is intended to be a pragmatic,
*  practical statement of how this is to play out. It starts in part with those ringing words about
*  a ghost or a specter haunting Europe, the specter of communism, which wasn't true at the time,
*  but decades later most definitely is the case. Is there something you could say about the
*  difference between Marxian economics and Marxist political ideology? The political side of things
*  and the economics side of things? I think that Marx would probably have responded that,
*  in fact, those things are indivisible. The analysis as purely theoretical certainly
*  can be performed on any economic reality that you care to mention, but the imperatives that
*  grow out of that economic analysis are political. Marx and Engels emphasize the unity of theory and
*  practice, so it's not enough to dispassionately analyze. It's a call to action as well because
*  if you've delivered the answer to how history evolves and changes, it obligates you. It
*  demands certain action. You sometimes hear from undergraduates that they've heard from their
*  high school history teachers that Marxism was just a theoretical construct that was in the idle
*  production of a philosopher who was not connected to the world and was never meant to be tried in
*  practice. Marx would have been furious to hear this, and it's almost heroically wrong
*  as a historical statement because Marx insisted that all previous philosophers have theorized
*  about reality. What now is really necessary is to change it. You could say that in the abstract,
*  a Marxist economist can certainly use Marx's theoretical framework to compare to a given
*  economic reality, but Marx would have seen that as incomplete and as deeply unsatisfactory.
*  There's a footnote to all of this, which is that even though Marxist dialectical materialism
*  grounds itself in these economic realities and the political prescription is supposed to flow
*  from the economic realities and be inevitably growing out of them in the real history of
*  communist regimes, you've actually seen periods where the economics becomes detached from the
*  politics. I'm thinking in particular of the new economic period early in the history of the Soviet
*  Union when Lenin realizes that the economy is so far gone that you need to reintroduce or allow in
*  a limited way some elements of private enterprise just to start getting Russia back on course in
*  order to have the accumulation of surplus that will be necessary to build the project at all.
*  There are many Bolsheviks who see the new economic policy as a terrible compromise and a betrayal of
*  their ideas, but it's seen as necessary for a short while and then Stalin will wreck it entirely.
*  Or consider for that matter China today, where you have a dominant political class, the Communist
*  Party of China, which is allowing economic development and private enterprise as long as
*  it retains political control. Some of these elements already represent divergences from
*  what Marx would have expected and this points to a really key problem or question for all of the
*  history of communism. It has to do with it being a tradition in spite of itself and that could be
*  expressed in the following way. An original set of ideas is going to evolve, it's going to change
*  because circumstances change. What elaborations of any doctrine, whether it's communism or a
*  religious doctrine or any political ideology, what elaborations are natural stages in the evolution
*  of any living set of ideas? Or when you reach the point where some shift or some adaptation is so
*  radically different that it actually breaks with the tradition. That's an insoluble problem,
*  you probably have to take it on a case-by-case basis. It speaks to issues like the question that
*  gets raised today. Is China in a meaningful sense a communist country anymore? There's a diversity
*  of opinion on this score. If you're looking at the history of communism and you look at
*  North Korea, which now is on its third installment of a dynastic leader from the same family who
*  ruled like a god-king over a regime that calls itself communist, is that still a form of communism?
*  Is it an evolution of? Is it a complete reversal of? I tend to want to take an anthropological
*  perspective in the history of communism and to take very seriously those people who avow that
*  they are communists and this is the project that they have underway. Then, after hearing that avowal,
*  I think as a historian you have to say, well, let's look at the details. Let's see what changes
*  have been made, what continuities might still exist, whether there's a larger pattern to be
*  discerned here. It's a very, very complicated history that we're talking about. Let's step back
*  to the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century and let's
*  steel man the case for communism. Let's put ourselves in the shoes of the people there,
*  not in this way we can look back at what happened in the 20th century.
*  Why was this such a compelling notion for millions of people? Can we make the case for it?
*  Well, clearly it was a compelling case for millions of people and part of this story
*  has to do with, overall, has to do with the faith, conviction, stories of people sacrificing
*  themselves as well as their countrymen in a cause that they believed was not just legitimate but
*  demanded their total obedience. I think that throughout the early part of the 20th century,
*  the late 19th century, early part of the 20th century, so much of the compelling case for
*  communism came from the confidence that people in the West more generally placed in science.
*  The notion that science is answering problems, science is giving us solutions to how the world
*  around us works, how the world around us can be improved. Some varieties of that, and watch the
*  quotation marks, science were crazy, like phrenology, so-called scientific racism that tried to divide
*  humanity up into discrete blocks and to manipulate them in ways that were allegedly scientific or
*  rational. There were horrors that followed from those invocations of science, but its prestige was
*  enormous. That, in part, had to do with the lessening grip of religious ideas on intellectual
*  elites, more generally processes of secularization, not total secularization, but processes of
*  secularization in Western industrial societies. The sense that here's a doctrine that will allow
*  escape from wars brought on by capitalist competition, poverty and economic cycles
*  and depressions brought on by capitalist competition, the inequalities of societies
*  that remain hierarchical and class-based. This claim to being cutting edge science,
*  I think, allows people like Lenin to derive immense confidence in the prescription that they
*  have for the future. That paradoxically, the confidence that you have in broad strokes,
*  the right set of answers for how to get to the future, also allows you to take huge liberty
*  with the tactics and the strategies that you follow as long as your ultimate goal remains
*  the one sketched by this master plan. Ultimately, some of the predictions of someone like Lenin,
*  that once society has reached that stage of the dictatorship of the proletariat,
*  the notion that governments will essentially be able to run themselves. The model he had in mind,
*  oddly enough, was Swiss post offices. Being in Swiss exile must have impressed him so much with
*  the orderliness and the sheer discipline and rationality of a Swiss post office. He thought,
*  why can't you organize governments like this where you don't need political leaders,
*  you don't need grand visions, you have procedures, you have bureaucracy, which does its job in a way
*  that's not alienating but simply produces the greatest good. When you think of the experiences
*  with the bureaucracy in the 20th century, one's hair stands on end to have the comparative naiveté
*  on display with a prediction like that. But it derives from that confidence that it's all
*  going to be okay because we understand, we have the key, we have the plan to how to arrive at this
*  final configuration of humanity. Yeah, the certainty of science, in quotes,
*  and the goal of utopia gets you in trouble. But also, just on the human level, from a working
*  class person perspective, from the industrial revolution, you see the growing inequality,
*  wealth inequality, and there is a kind of, you see people getting wealthy, and combined with the
*  fact that life is difficult, life in general, life is suffering for many, for most, for all,
*  if you listen to some philosophers. And there is kind of a powerful idea in that the man is exploiting
*  me. And that's a populist message that a lot of people resonate with because to a degree it's true
*  in every system. And so, before you kind of know how these economic and political ideas manifest
*  themselves, it is really powerful to say, here, beyond the horizon, there's a world where the rich
*  man will not exploit my hard work anymore. And I think that's a really powerful idea.
*  It is. I mean, at the same time, though, it kind of points to a further problem,
*  and that's the identity of the revolutionaries. It turned out that many of these revolutionary
*  movements, and then the founding elites of communist countries in the aftermath of the
*  Soviet seizure of power, turned out to be something quite different from people who have spent their
*  lives in factories experiencing the industrial revolution firsthand. I mean, there's a special
*  role here for intellectuals. And when Marx and Engels write into the Communist Manifesto,
*  the notion that certain exceptional individuals can rise above their class origins in a way other
*  people can't and transcend their earlier role, their materially determined role, in order to
*  gain a perspective on the historical process as a whole and ally themselves with the working class
*  in its struggle for communism, this sort of special role that they carved out for themselves
*  is enormously appealing for intellectuals, because any celebration of intellectuals as world movers
*  is going to appeal to intellectuals. That gap, that frequent reality of not being in touch with
*  the very classes that the communists are aiming to represent is a very frequent theme in this story.
*  It also speaks to a crucial part of this story, which is the breaking apart or the civil war,
*  the war of brother against brother, the fraternal struggle that splits socialism and splits followers
*  of Marx. And that's in the aftermath of the First World War in particular, or during this traumatic
*  experience, the way in which Lenin encourages the foundation of radical parties that will break with
*  social democracy of the sort that had been elaborated, especially in places like Germany,
*  scorning their moderation and instead announcing a new dispensation, which was the Leninist
*  conception of a disciplined, hardcore, professional revolutionaries who will act in ways that a mere
*  trade union movement couldn't. And what this speaks to is a fundamental tension in radical movements,
*  because left to their own devices, Lenin announces, workers tend to focus on their reality,
*  their families, their workplace, want better working conditions, unionize, and then aim to
*  negotiate with employers or to agitate for reforms on the part of the state to improve
*  their living conditions. And then they're happy for the advances that they have won.
*  And for Lenin, that's not enough, because that's a half measure. That's the sort of thing that
*  leads you into an accommodation with the system rather than the overthrow of the system. So,
*  there's a constant tension in this regard that plays itself out over the long haul.
*  So, let's go to Lenin and the Russian revolution. How did communism come to power in the Soviet
*  Union? It came to power as a result of stepping into a power vacuum. And the power vacuum was
*  created by the First World War and the effect that it had as a total war, unprecedented pressure
*  placed on a regime that in many ways was a traditional, almost feudal monarchy,
*  only experiencing the beginnings of the modernization that the rest of Europe had
*  undergone. And for this reason, communism comes to power in a place that Marx probably wouldn't
*  have expected in the wreckage of the Russian empire. Lenin is absolutely vital to this equation,
*  because he's the one who presses the process forward. Ironically, given the claim of
*  communist leaders to having the key to history just a few months previous in exile in Switzerland,
*  Lenin had been despairing and had been convinced that he may not even live to see the advent of
*  that day. But then when revolution does break out in the Russian empire in February of 1917,
*  Lenin is absolutely frantic to get back. And when he does get back as a result of a deal that is
*  negotiated with the German high command, a step that they'll later live very much to regret,
*  he is able to get back and to go into action and to press for nothing less than the seizure of power
*  that brings his Bolshevik faction, the radical wing of the socialist movement,
*  to power and then to build the Soviet Union. So even he was surprised how effective and how fast
*  the revolution happened. He was, although I think that he would have agreed that what was necessary
*  was a cataclysm on the scale of the First World War to make this happen.
*  The First World War shatters so many of the certainties of the 19th century that we talked
*  about as a dynamic period with argument between ideologies. It scrambles all sorts of earlier
*  debates. It renegotiates the status of the individual versus an all-powerful state and
*  the claims of the state because to win or even just to survive in World War I, you need to
*  centralize, centralize, centralize, and to put everything onto an authoritarian wartime footing
*  in country after country. So Lenin earlier had already articulated the possibility that this
*  might happen by talking about how the entire globe already was connected and there's a chain
*  of capitalist development that is connecting different countries so that the weakest link
*  in the chain, if it breaks, if it pops open, it might actually inaugurate much bigger processes
*  and start a chain reaction. That's what he intended to do and has the chance to do in the course of
*  1917. Incidentally, just to get a sense of the sheer chaos and the human on an individual human
*  level, what the absence of established authority meant, there's few works of literature that are
*  as powerful as Boris Pasternak's Dr. Zhivago for giving the whole sweep of contending forces
*  in a power vacuum. It's an amazing testimony to that time and place.
*  So you said that Bolsheviks saw violence and terror as necessary. Can you just speak to this
*  aspect of their, because they took power and so this was a part of the way they saw the world.
*  Right. It had antecedents. Even though Lenin and his colleagues are competing amongst each other
*  for the title of most faithful disciple of Marx and most true to the received theory in practice,
*  there's other influences, earlier influences that operate in the Russian context that were not
*  operative, let's say, in the German context. Here you have to step back and think about the nature
*  of Tsarism, which had maintained still into the 20th century the notion of divine right to rule,
*  that God had ordained the Tsarist system and its hierarchies and that to question these was sinful
*  and politically not advisable. The restrictive nature of Russian society at this point,
*  dominated by the Tsarist establishment, its harshness, its reactionary nature meant that
*  people who in another context, in another country, might have been reformers could instead very
*  easily be provoked into becoming revolutionaries. Lenin is a perfect example of this because his
*  older brother was executed as a result of being in a radical revolutionary movement
*  that was arrested and executed for association with terrorism.
*  Earlier generations of Russian radicals had founded populist groups that would aim to
*  engage in terrorism and resistance against the Tsarist regime. This included people who
*  called themselves nihilists. These nihilists were materialists who saw themselves ushering in
*  a new age by absolute rejection of earlier religious traditions and aiming for material answers to
*  the challenges of the day. Among them was Nikolai Chernochevsky, who wrote what's been called the
*  worst book ever written. It was in fact one of Lenin's favorite books. In Russian it's
*  shto dielat. In English it gets translated what is to be done. It's a utopian novel about
*  revolutionaries and how revolutionaries should act with one another in open ways, new ways,
*  non-traditional ways in order to help usher in the coming revolution. Lenin loved the work
*  and said it had the great merit of showing you how to be a revolutionary. There's the Marxist
*  influence and then there's Russian populist nihilist influence, which is also a very live
*  current in Lenin's thinking. When you add these things together you get an explosive mix,
*  because Lenin as a result and part of this family trauma of his brother becomes an
*  a absolutely reconcilable enemy of the Tsarist regime and sets about turning himself into what
*  you might call a guided missile for revolution. He turns himself into a machine to produce
*  revolutionary change. I mean that with little hyperbole. Lenin at one point shared with friends
*  that he loved listening to music, but he tried not to listen to beautiful music like Beethoven,
*  because it made him feel gentle. What the revolution demanded was realism, hardness,
*  absolute steely resolve. Lenin worries even fellow revolutionaries by the intensity of his
*  single-minded focus to revolution. He spends his days thinking about the revolution. He probably
*  dreamt about the revolution. 24-7 it's an existence where he's paired off other human
*  elements quite deliberately in order to turn himself into an effective instigator of revolution.
*  When the opportunity comes in 1917, he's primed and ready for that role.
*  It's interesting that Russian nihilism had an impact on Lenin.
*  Traditionally, nihilist philosophy rejects all sorts of traditional morality. There's a kind of
*  cynical dark view. Where's the light? The light is science. The light is science
*  and materialism. Oh boy. The nihilists, some of them did a very bad job of hiding their
*  political beliefs because they were famous for wearing blue tinted spectacles, kind of the
*  sunglasses of the late 19th century, as a way of shielding their eyes from light, but also
*  having a dispassionate and realistic view of reality outside. So nihilists, as the name would
*  suggest, do reject all prior certainties, but they make an exception for science and see that
*  as the possibility for founding an entirely new mode of existence. For most people, I think,
*  nihilism is introduced in the brilliant philosophical work. I don't know if you're
*  familiar with it by the name of the Big Lebowski. Nihilists appear there. I think they summarize
*  the nihilist tradition quite well. But it is indeed fascinating. Also, it is fascinating
*  that Lenin, and I'm sure this influenced Stalin as well, that hardness was a necessary
*  human characteristics to take the revolution to its end.
*  That's right. Prior generations of nihilists or populists had resembled Lenin's single-mindedness
*  by arguing that one needed total devotion for this. To play this role in society,
*  it was not enough to be somewhat committed. Total commitment was necessary.
*  The other theme that's at work here, obviously, is if we consider Lenin affected by Marxist ideas
*  and the homegrown Russian revolutionary tradition that predates the arrival of Marxist socialism in
*  Russia, it's the theme of needing to adapt to local conditions. So, Marxism or communism
*  in Vietnam or in Cuba or in Cambodia or in Russia will be very different in its local adaptations
*  and local themes and resonance than it was in Germany where Marx would have expected all this
*  to unfold. Let's talk about Lenin, Trotsky, and Stalin, this little interplay that eventually led
*  to Stalin accumulating, grabbing, and taking a hold of power. What was that process like?
*  Lenin's supreme confidence leads the party through some really difficult steps. That involves things
*  like signing the humiliating treaty with the Germans, the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, where critics
*  of the Bolsheviks said that no one who loved their country would have agreed to a so draconian,
*  so harsh a settlement that saw the peeling off of large territories that had belonged to the Russian
*  Empire. Lenin is willing to undertake this because of the larger prize. He even says that he's not
*  going to bother to read the treaty because shortly that treaty is going to be a dead letter. His
*  expectation is revolution is going to break out everywhere, especially after we've raised the
*  standard, first of all, in the wreckage of the Russian Empire. We should probably say that that
*  treaty to some small degree, maybe you can elaborate now or later, lays the groundwork for World War II.
*  Because resentment is a thing that with time can lead to just extreme levels of destruction.
*  Right. For German sensibilities, for German nationalists, that treaty meant that Germany
*  had essentially won World War I. Only a turn of events that many of them couldn't even follow
*  or conceive of. The arrival of American troops, the tipping of the balance in the West,
*  led to that reversal. One of the many scholars and contemporaries pointed out that Germany between
*  the wars was full of people who were convinced that Germany had actually not lost the war.
*  However, that victory of theirs was defined. Most definitely, that groundwork is laid.
*  Incidentally, this is something we can talk about later, World War I and World War II have a lot of
*  linkages like that. As time goes by, I think historians are going to focus on those linkages
*  even more. Lenin also, in his leadership against the odds, leads the Bolsheviks to power
*  in the Russian Civil War, where most betting people would have given them very slight odds
*  of even surviving, given how many enemies they faced off against. Lenin's insistence upon
*  discipline and upon good organization allowed the Bolsheviks to emerge as the winners.
*  Yet, a great disappointment follows. Lenin, as we said, had expected that revolution will
*  break out soon everywhere and all it'll be necessary for the Bolsheviks to do,
*  having given the lead, is to link up with others. He considered that what would be established would
*  be a red bridge between a communist Russia and, once Germany inevitably plunged ahead into its
*  revolutionary transformation, a communist Germany. That doesn't end up happening. On the contrary,
*  what happens in Germany is an out-and-out shooting war between different kinds of socialists.
*  When Germany establishes a democracy that later goes by the name of the Weimar Republic,
*  the government is a government of social democrats, moderate social democrats,
*  who are fearful of what they see as Russian conditions of disorder and who are not necessarily
*  in sympathy with the Leninist vision of tightly organized authoritarian rule. So, communists who
*  revolt in Germany are brutally suppressed by mercenaries, hardened front fighters and
*  nationalist radicals hired by the German socialist government. The result is a wound that just won't
*  heal in the German socialist movement as a result of this fratricide. It frustrates Lenin's ambitions.
*  So too does the fact that Poland, rather than going Bolshevik, resists attempts by the Bolsheviks
*  to move forward and to connect up with Germany. The Poles, yet again, play a tremendously important
*  historical role in changing the expected course of historical events. It's in the aftermath of these
*  unexpected turns that Lenin and his colleagues realize that they're in this for the long haul.
*  It's necessary to wait longer. They don't lose hope or confidence, you might say, in the eventual
*  coming of the international workers revolution, but it's been deferred. It's been put off.
*  So the question then arises, what do you build within a state that's established called the
*  Union of Soviet Socialist Republics or the Soviet Union? Lenin, as a result of an assassination
*  attempt, is deeply affected in his health and would have loved to continue for years longer to
*  steer the regime, but he's sidelined because of his declining health and there emerges a contest,
*  a contest between a very charismatic leader, Leo Trotsky, on the one hand, who is an amazing orator,
*  who is an intellectual, who has traveled widely in the world, who has seen much of the world,
*  and who is a brilliant writer, a far-ranging intellect, and is seen as extremely radical
*  because of his demand for permanent revolution, the acceleration of revolutionary processes
*  to drive history forward, to strike while the iron is hot, and on the other hand,
*  is an extremely unlikely contender for power. And that's a man who's probably the antithesis of
*  charisma, if you were to meet him in person, a guy with a squeaky, somewhat high-pitched voice,
*  not well-suited to revolutionary oratory, his face pockmarked with the scars of youthful illness,
*  and who, moreover, doesn't speak a fine, sophisticated Russian, but speaks a Russian heavily
*  inflected with a Georgian accent from that part of the Russian Empire from which he came, and that
*  was Stalin. And I know that you already have a marvelous interview with Steven Kotkin,
*  the brilliant biographer of Stalin, who has so many insights on that subject.
*  The one thing that even after reading about Stalin, that never ceases to surprise me,
*  even in retrospect, is that Stalin gains a reputation not as a fiery radical,
*  but as a moderate, a man who's a conciliator, someone who's calm when others are excited,
*  someone who is able, because of his organizational skills, to resolve merely theoretical disputes
*  with practical solutions. Now, to fully take this aboard, we have to unknow what we know
*  from our vantage point about Stalin's leadership, Stalin's brutality in eliminating his opposition,
*  the cult of personality that, against all odds, got built up around Stalin so successfully,
*  and the absolute dominant role that led him later to be described as Genghis Khan with a telephone,
*  a brutal dictator with ancient barbarism, allied to the use of modern technology.
*  While Trotsky is delivering stirring speeches and theorizing, Stalin works behind the scenes to
*  control personnel decisions in the Bolshevik movement and in the state. And it's a cliché
*  because it's true that personnel is policy. Trotsky is increasingly sidelined and then demonized
*  and eventually expelled from the Soviet Union and later murdered in Mexico City. For Stalin,
*  eliminating his enemies turned out to be the solution that he was most comfortable with.
*  So from that perspective, there's a lot of fascinating things here. So one is that you
*  can have a wolf, a brutal dictator in moderate clothing. So just because somebody presents as
*  moderate doesn't mean they can't be one of the most destructive, not the most destructive humans
*  in history. The other aspect is using propaganda, you can construct an image of a person,
*  and even though they're uncharismatic, not attractive, their voice is no good,
*  all of those aspects, you can still have a, like, there's still to this day, a very large number
*  of people that see him as a religious type of godlike figure. So the power of propaganda there.
*  Today we would call that curating the image, right?
*  Curating the image, but to the extent to which you can do that effectively
*  is quite incredible. So in that way also, Stalin is a study of the power of propaganda.
*  Can we just talk about the ways that the power vacuum is filled by Stalin, how that manifests
*  itself? Perhaps one angle we can take is how was the secret police used? How did power manifest
*  itself under Stalin? Well, before getting to the secret police, I would just want to add the other
*  crucial element, which is Lenin's patronage. Stalin doesn't, you know, brawl his way into the
*  Bolshevik party and dominate. He's co-opted and promoted to positions of importance by Lenin,
*  who sees him as a somewhat rough around the edges, not very sophisticated, much less cosmopolitan
*  than other Bolsheviks, but dependable, reliable, and committed revolutionary. So I think that one
*  of the things that's emerged, especially after archives opened up with the fall of the Soviet
*  Union and we were able to read more and more of the communications of Lenin, is that it's not the
*  case that we're talking here about an unconnected series of careers. Rather, there are connections
*  to be made. It's true that towards the end of his life, Lenin came to be worried by complaints
*  about Stalin's rudeness towards fellow Bolsheviks, and in his testament, he warned against Stalin's
*  testimonies. Lenin fundamentally saw himself as irreplaceable, and so that doesn't really help in
*  a succession struggle, right? Stalin is able to rely on a secret police apparatus that had been
*  built up under Lenin already, and it's very early in the foundation of the Soviet state that the
*  Cheka, or the extraordinary commission, is established as a secret police to
*  terrify the enemies, beat down the opponents of the regime, and to keep an eye on society more
*  generally. The person who's chosen for that task also is an anomaly among Bolsheviks. That is a
*  man of Polish aristocratic background, Félix Zierczynski, who comes to be known by the nickname
*  Iron Felix. Here's a man about whom a cult of personality also is created. Zierczynski
*  is celebrated in the Soviet period as the model of someone who's harsh but fair.
*  An executioner but with a heart of gold. Somebody who loves children, somebody who has a tender
*  heart but forces himself to be steely-willed against the opponents of the ideological project
*  of the Bolsheviks. Zierczynski is succeeded by figures who will be absolutely instrumental
*  to Stalin's exercise of power. They're not immune either. Stalin, in his purges, takes care also to
*  purge the secret police as a way of finding others upon whom to deflect blame for earlier atrocities
*  and to produce a situation where even committed Bolsheviks are uncertain of what's going to happen
*  next and feel their own position to be precarious. Incidentally, there are other influences that
*  probably are wrought to bear here as well. It gets said about Stalin that he used to spend a lot of
*  time flipping through Machiavelli's The Prince. It seems that Stalin's personal copy of The Prince,
*  nobody knows where that is if it still exists, but historians have found annotations
*  in works by Lenin that Stalin, who is a voracious reader as it turns out, made in the back of one
*  of the books, which sounds almost like a commentary on Machiavelli's almost but not quite suggestion
*  that the ends justify the means. Stalin's own writing says that if someone is strong,
*  active, and intelligent, even if they do things that other people condemn,
*  they're still a good person. Stalin's self-conception of himself is someone who along
*  these lines and in line with Lenin's emphasis on practical results and discipline, somebody who
*  gets things done, that's the crucial ethical standard. Ultimately, in criticisms by later
*  dissidents of Bolshevik morality, this question of what is the ethical standard, what is the ethical
*  law, will bring this question into focus. This goes back to Marx as well, incidentally.
*  The notion that any ethical system, any notion of right or wrong is purely a product of class
*  identity because every class produces its distinctive ideas, its distinctive religion,
*  its distinctive art forms, its distinctive styles, means that with no one transcendent
*  or absolute morality, it's all up for grabs. Then it's a question of power and the exercise
*  of power with no limits, untrammeled by any laws whatsoever, dictatorship in its purest form,
*  something that Lenin had avowed, and then Stalin comes to practice even more fully.
*  Not that it's possible to look deep into a person's heart, but if you look at Trotsky,
*  you could say that he probably believed deeply in Marxism and communism, probably the same
*  with Lenin. What do you think Stalin believed? Was he a believer? Was he a pragmatist that used
*  communism as a way to gain power and ideology as part of propaganda, or did he in his own private
*  moments deeply believe in this utopia? That's an excellent question, and you're quite right.
*  We cannot peer into the inmost recesses of somebody's being and know for sure. My intuition,
*  though, is that this may be a false alternative, a false dichotomy. It's natural enough to see
*  somebody who does monstrous things to say, well, ideology is being used as a cover for it.
*  I think that my suspicion is that these were actually perfectly compatible in his historical
*  role. The notion that there's an ideology, it gives you a master plan for how history is going
*  to develop, and your own power, the increase of that power to unprecedented proportions,
*  your ability to torment even your own faithful followers in order just to see them squirm, which
*  Stalin was famous for, to keep people unsettled. To me, it seems that for some people, those might
*  not actually be opposed, but might even be mutually reinforcing, which is a very scary thought.
*  It's terrifying, but it's really important to understand. If we look at, once Stalin takes power,
*  at some of the policies, so the collectivization of agriculture,
*  why do you think that failed so catastrophically, especially in the 1930s with Ukraine and Polodemir?
*  I think the short answer is that the Bolsheviks in particular, but also communists more generally,
*  have had a very conflicted relationship with agriculture. Agriculture, as a very vital,
*  obviously, but also very traditional, an old form of human activity, has about it all of the smell
*  of tradition and other problematic factors as well. In a place like Russia, or the Russian Empire,
*  peasants throughout history for centuries had wanted one thing, and that was to be left alone
*  to farm their own land. That's their utopia. That, for someone like Marx, who had a vision of
*  historical development and transcendence and progress as being absolutely key, does not mesh
*  at all with that vision. For that reason, when Marx comes up with this tableau, this tremendous
*  display of historical transformation taking place over centuries and headed towards the final utopia,
*  the role of farmers there is negligible. Peasants get called conservative and dull as sacks of
*  potatoes in Marx's historical vision because they're limited in their horizon. They farm
*  their land, their plot, and don't have greater revolutionary goals beyond working the land and
*  having it free and clear. By contrast, industrialization. That's progress. Images
*  that today would be deeply disturbing to an environmentalist's sensibility. Smokestaps,
*  belching smoke, the byproducts of industry, a landscape transformed by the factory model.
*  That's what Marx and then later the Bolsheviks have in mind. Similarly, the goal, even as
*  articulated in Marx's writings, is to put agriculture and farming on a factory model so
*  that you won't need to deal with this traditional role of the independent farmer or the peasant.
*  Instead, you'll have people who benefit from progress, benefit from rationalization by
*  working factory farms. In approaching the question of collectivization, we have to keep in mind that
*  for Stalin and his comrades who are bound and determined to drag Russia kicking and screaming
*  into the modern age and not to allow it be beaten because of its backwardness, as Stalin puts it,
*  traditional forms of agriculture are not what they have in mind. In their rank of desired outcomes,
*  industrialization, especially massive heavy industry, is the sine qua non. That's their
*  envisioned future. Agriculture rates below. In that case, the crucial significance of
*  collectivization is to get a handle on the food situation in order to make it predictable and not
*  to find oneself in another crisis like during the Civil War when the cities are starving,
*  industry is robbed of labor, and the factories are at a standstill.
*  This is really the core approach to collectivization, to put the productive capacities
*  of the farmers in a regimented way, in a state-controlled way, under the control of
*  the state. This produces vast human suffering because for the farmers, their plot of land that
*  they thought they had gained as a result of the revolution is now taken away. They no longer have
*  the same incentives they had before to be successful farmers. In fact, if you're a
*  successful farmer and maybe have a cow as opposed to your neighbors who have no cow, you're defamed
*  and denounced as a kulak, a tight-fisted exploiter, even though you might be helping to develop
*  agriculture in the region that you're from. The result is human tragedy on a vast scale
*  and allied to that, incidentally, is Stalin's sense that this is a chance to also target people who are
*  opposed to the Bolshevik regime for other reasons, whether it's because of their Ukrainian identity,
*  whether it's because of a desire for a different nationalist project.
*  So for Stalin, there are many motives that roll into collectivization. And the final thing to be
*  said is you're quite right that collectivization proves to be a failure because the Soviet Union
*  never finally gets a grasp on the problems of agricultural production. By the end of the Soviet
*  Union, they're importing grain from the West in spite of having some of tremendously rich farmland
*  to be found worldwide. And the reason for that had to do in part, I think, with the incentives
*  that had been taken away. Prosperous individual farmers have a motive for working their land
*  and maximizing production. By contrast, if you are an employee of a factory-style agricultural
*  enterprise, the incentives run in very different directions. And the joke that was common for
*  decades in the Soviet Union and other communist countries with similar systems was we pretend
*  to work and they pretend to pay us. So even labor, which is rhetorically respected and valorized
*  in practice, is rewarded with very slim rewards. And the last point, immobility. The collectivization
*  reduces the mobility of the peasants who are not allowed because of internal passports
*  to move to the cities unless they have permission. They're locked in place. And I've got to say,
*  at the time and afterwards, that looked a lot like feudalism or neo-feudalism in terms of the
*  restrictions on workers in the countryside. It is a terrifying, horrific, and fascinating study
*  of how the ideal when meeting reality fails. So the idea here is to make agriculture more efficient,
*  to be more productive, so the industrialized model. But the implementation through collectivization
*  had all the elements that you've mentioned that contended with human nature. So first,
*  with the cool locks. So the successful farmers were punished. And so then the incentive is
*  not just not to be a successful farmer, but to like hide. Added to that, there's a growing quota
*  that everybody's supposed to deliver on that nobody can deliver on. And so now, because you
*  can't deliver on that quota, you're basically exporting all your food and you can't even feed
*  yourself. And then you suffer more and more and more, and there's a vicious downward spiral of
*  like, you can't possibly produce that. Now there's another human incentive where you're going to lie,
*  everybody lies on the data. And so even Stalin himself, probably as evil or incompetent as he
*  may be, he was not even getting good data about what's even happening. Even if he wanted to stop
*  the vicious downward cycle, which he certainly didn't, but he wouldn't be even able to. So
*  there's all these like dark consequences of what on paper seems like a good ideal. And it's a
*  fascinating study of like things on paper. That's right. When implemented, can go really, really bad.
*  That's right. And the outcome here is a horrific manmade famine, not a natural disaster, not bad
*  harvest, but a manmade famine as a result of then the compulsion that gets used by the Soviet state
*  to extract those resources, cordoning off the area, not allowing starving people to escape.
*  You put very well some of the implications of this case study in how things look in the abstract
*  versus in practice. And those phenomena were going to haunt the rest of the experience of the Soviet
*  Union. The whole notion that up and down the chain of command, everybody is falsifying or tinkering
*  with or purifying the statistics or their reports in order not to look bad and not to have vengeance
*  visited upon them reaches the point where nobody, in spite of the pretense of comprehensive knowledge,
*  there's a state planning agency that creates five-year plans for the economy as a whole,
*  and which is supposed to have accurate statistics. All of this is founded upon a foundation of sand.
*  That's inadvertent. That's not an intended side effect. But what you described in terms of the
*  internal dynamics of fostering conflict in a rural society was absolutely not inadvertent.
*  That was deliberate. The doctrine was you bring civil war. Now, had there been social tensions
*  before? Of course there had. Had there been envies? Had there been differentiations in wealth or
*  status? Of course there had been. But a deliberate plan to bring class conflict and bring civil war
*  and then heighten it in the countryside does damage. Not least of that is this phenomenon
*  of a negative selection. Those who have most enterprise, those who are most entrepreneurial,
*  those who have most self-discipline, those who are best organized will be winnowed again and again
*  and again, sending the message that mediocrity is comparatively much safer than talent.
*  This pattern, incidentally, gets transposed in tremendously harrowing ways also to the entire
*  group of Russian intelligentsia and intellectuals of other peoples who are in the Soviet Union.
*  They discover similarly that to be independent, to have a voice which is not compliant,
*  carries with it tremendous penalties, especially in Stalin's reigns of terror.
*  RG Again, a difficult question about a psychology
*  of one human being. But to what degree do you think Stalin was deliberately punishing
*  the farmers and the Ukrainian farmers? And to what degree was he looking the other way
*  and allowing the large-scale incompetence, the horrific incompetence of the collectivization
*  of agriculture to happen? RG Well, I think it was both things.
*  There were not only sins of omission but also sins of commission. Incidentally, one should add,
*  I don't think for Stalin it was personal. These are people who are very remote from him,
*  never coming into contact with the people who are suffering in this way. Attributed to him is the
*  quote that one death is a tragedy, a million deaths is a statistic. I think he in action
*  certainly acted in a way that would vindicate that. But the process of collectivization was
*  not just a bureaucratic snafu following an unbureaucratic snafu. There was the mobilization
*  of communist youth, of military, of party activists to go into the regions and to search for hidden
*  food, to extract the food where it could be found. We have testimony to this in the case of
*  people who later became dissidents like Lev Kopolev, who wrote in his memoirs about how he was
*  among those who were sent in to enact these policies and he saw families with the last food
*  being taken away even as signs of starvation were visible already in the present. And yet,
*  he did not go mad, he didn't kill himself, he didn't fall into despair because he believed,
*  because he had been taught and believed at least then that this was justified. This was a larger
*  historical process and a greater good would result even from these enormities. So I think that
*  this was quite deliberate.
*  What can you say about the process of collectivization?
*  Following this, as you've mentioned, there was the process of the great terror,
*  where the intellectuals, where the communist party officials, the military officers,
*  the bureaucrats, everybody. 750,000 people were executed and over a million people were sent to
*  the gulag. What can you say by way of wisdom from this process of the great terror that
*  Stalin implemented from 36 to 38? Well, the terror had a variety of victims.
*  There were people who were true believers and who were Bolsheviks, who were especially targeted by
*  Stalin because he aimed to revenge himself for all the sort of condescension that he'd experienced
*  in that movement before, and also to eliminate rivals or potential rival power centers and members
*  of their families. And then there were people who simply got caught up in a process whereby
*  the repressive organs in the provinces were sent quotas. You have to achieve your quota and maybe
*  even better yet, overachieve your quota, overperform. That would be the key to success and rising
*  in the bureaucracies in the age of the terror. What's so horrifying is the way in which a whole
*  society stood paralyzed in this process and how neighbors would be taken away in the middle of the
*  night and people would be wary of talking about it. Resistance, at least in these urban centers,
*  was entirely paralyzed by fear when, if one had somehow found a way to mobilize, somehow a way to
*  resist the process, the results might've been different. There's an astonishing book. There are
*  so many great books that have come out quite recently even on these topics. Orlando Fieges
*  has an amazing book called The Whisperers that traces several families' history in the Stalin period.
*  And it's a testimony to how a whole society and some of its most intelligent people got winnowed
*  again and again and again in that process of negative selection that we talked about,
*  the lasting dislocation and scars that this left, and the way in which how people were not able to
*  talk about these things in public because that would put you next on the list, suspected of
*  having less than total devotion to the state. I think one of the things that also is so terrifying
*  about the entire process is even total devotion wasn't enough. The process took on a life of its
*  own. And I think that it might even have surprised Stalin in some ways, not enough to short-circise
*  the process, but the notion where people were invited to denounce neighbors, co-workers,
*  maybe even family members, meant that ever larger groups of people would be brought into the orbit
*  of the secret police, tortured in order to produce confessions. Those confessions then
*  would lead to more lists of suspects of people who had to be investigated and either executed
*  or sent to the gulags. The uncertainty that this produced was enormous. Even loyalty was
*  not enough to save people. The stories, Solzhenitsyn's Gulag Archipelago is full
*  of stories of dedicated communists who find themselves in the gulag and are sure that some
*  mistake has been made. And if only comrade Stalin would hear about the terrible thing that has
*  happened to them, surely it would be corrected. And nothing like this would have everyone else,
*  by contrast, accused of terrible crimes. There must be some truth behind that.
*  Talk about ways of disaggregating a society, ways of breaking down bonds of trust.
*  This left lasting traces on an entire society that endured to this very day.
*  Yeah, again, a fascinating study of human nature. There essentially was an emergent quota
*  of confessions of treason. So even though the whole society was terrified and were through terror
*  loyal, there still needed to be a lot of confessions of people being disloyal.
*  So you're just making shit up now. At a mass scale, stuff is being made up. And it's also
*  the machine or the secret police starts eating itself because you want to be confessing on your
*  boss. And it is this weird, dark, dynamic system where human nature is just as it is at its worst.
*  Absolutely. Why, if we look at this deep discussion we had about Marxism,
*  to what degree can we understand from that lens why the implementation of communism in the Soviet
*  Union failed in such a dark way, both in the economic system with agriculture and industrialization
*  and on the human way with just violation of every possible human right and the torture
*  and the suffering and gulags and all of this? Well, I think some of it comes back to the
*  ethical grounding that we mentioned earlier, the notion that ethics are entirely situational
*  and that any ethical system is an outgrowth of a particular class reality, a particular material
*  reality, and that leaves the door wide open. So I think that that aspect was present from the
*  very beginning. I think that the expectations of Marx that the revolution would take hold and be
*  successful in a developed country played a role here as well. Russia, which compared to the rest
*  of Europe was less developed even before the First World War, is in a dire state after all of the
*  ravage and the millions of deaths that continue even after the war has ended in the West.
*  That leaves precious little in the way of structural restraints or a functioning society that would say,
*  let's not do things this way. I think that in retrospect, that special role carved out
*  for special individuals who can move this process forward and accelerate historical development
*  allowed for people to step into those roles and appoint themselves executors of this ideological
*  vision. So I think those things play a role as well. Now it's hard to do counterfactual history,
*  but to what degree is this basically that the communist ideals create a power vacuum and a
*  dictator type figure steps in and then it's a roll of the dice of what that dictator is like. So
*  can you imagine a world where the dictator was Trotsky? Would we see very similar type of things
*  or is the hardness and the brutality of somebody like Stalin manifested itself in being able to
*  look the other way as some of these dark things were happening more so than somebody like Trotsky
*  who would presumably see the realizations of these policies and be shocked?
*  Well, counterfactuals are hard, like you said, and one very quickly gets off into
*  really deep waters in speculation. There were contemporaries and there have been scholars since
*  who suggest that Trotsky by all indications might have been even more radical than Stalin
*  in the tempo that he wanted to achieve. Think of the slogan of permanent revolution.
*  Trotsky also who dabbled in so many things in his intellectual life also spoke in almost
*  utopian terms that are just astonishing to read, in utopian terms about the construction of the
*  new man and the new woman and that out of the raw material of humanity, once you really get going
*  and once you've established a system that matches your hopes for the future, it'll be possible to
*  reconfigure people and talk about ambition to create essentially the next stage in human
*  evolution, a new species growing out of humanity. Those don't sound like very modest or limited
*  approaches and I guess we just really won't know. Do some of the destructive characteristics of
*  communism have to go hand in hand? So the central planning that we talked about,
*  the censorship with the secret police, the concentration of power in one dictatorial
*  figure and let's say again with the secret police, the violent oppression.
*  What one should add to those factors that have a kind of interrelated logic of their own,
*  the sheer fact that communism comes to power in most of these instances as a result of war,
*  as a result of the destruction of what came before and a power vacuum. So think of the
*  Russian revolutions in the wake of the fall of Tsarism. Think of the expansion of Stalin's
*  puppet regimes into Eastern Europe in the wake of World War II and the Red Army moving into Occupy
*  areas in Eastern Europe, although they announced that they're coming as liberators.
*  Consider the foundation of communist China on the heels of World War II and yet more Chinese
*  Civil War. Consider cases like Korea, Vietnam. It's likely that this already is a key element in
*  setting things up for further crisis because upon seizure of power, if your expectation is,
*  well, it ought to be relatively easy to get this system rolling and put it on a basis that's,
*  after all, we have the roadmap to the future, there will follow frustrations and impediments
*  and resistance and there's a ratchet effect then there because it'll produce more repression,
*  producing even more problems that follow. What drives the whole thing forward though,
*  especially in its Leninist version but already visible with Marx and Engels, is the insistence
*  on confidence. If you have the key to the future, all of these things are possible and necessary.
*  This leads to an ethos, I think, that's very hard for historians to quantify or to study in a
*  methodical way but it's the insistence that you hear with Lenin and then especially with Stalin
*  that to be a Bolshevik means to be hard, to be realistic, to be consequential, meaning you don't
*  shy away from doing what needs to be done even if your primordial ethical remainders from whatever
*  earlier experience you have rebel against it. Under Stalin, there's a constant slogan of the
*  Bolshevik tempo. The Bolsheviks, there's no fortresses that they can't storm. They can do
*  everything and in a way, this is the assertion that it's will over everything. History
*  can be moved forward and accelerated and probably your own actions justified as a result,
*  no matter what they were, if you are sufficiently hard and determined and have the confidence to
*  follow through. And then that obviously raises the ultimate question, what happens when that
*  confidence ebbs or erodes or when it's lost? If we go to the 1920s to the home of Karl Marx,
*  fascism as implemented by the Nazi party in Germany was called the National Socialist
*  German Workers Party. So what were the similarities and differences of fascism, socialism,
*  how it was conceived of in fascism and communism? And maybe you could speak to the broader battle
*  of ideas that was happening at the time and battle of political control that was happening
*  at the time. Well, I mean, there's a whole bunch of terms that are in play here, right? And when
*  we speak of fascism, fascism in its original sense is a radical movement founded in Italy,
*  which though it had been allegedly on the winning side of World War I, is disappointed with the
*  lack of rise in national prestige and territory that leads, that comes out of the political
*  system that commences after the end of the war. So bizarrely enough, it's a socialist by the name
*  of Benito Mussolini, who crafts an ideological message of glorification of the state,
*  the people at large united in a militaristic way on the march, ready to attack, ready to expand,
*  a complete overthrow of liberal ideas of the rights of the individual
*  or of representative democracy, and instead vesting power in one leader, in his case,
*  the Duce Mussolini, in order to replicate in peacetime the ideal of total military
*  mobilization in wartime. Although the Nazis in Germany are inspired and borrow heavily from
*  fascist ideology, there also are different emphases that they include, and that includes
*  their virulent racism from the outset, which in addition to a glorification of the state,
*  glorification of the leader, and preparation for national greatness, race is absolutely core.
*  It's that racial radicalism that the Nazis espouse as a central idea, along with antisemitism,
*  the demonizing in particular of the Jews and this insane racialist cosmology that the Nazis avow.
*  It is the assertion that the Nazis will uniquely bring to pass unity in the people,
*  unity in the society, that leads them to give themselves this odd name of national socialist.
*  Some leaders like Goebbels among the Nazis accent the socialist part to begin with,
*  others put the accent firmly on the nationalist part. In part, the term they chose for their
*  movement was meant to be confusing. It was meant to take slogans or words from different parts of
*  the political spectrum to fuse them into something unfamiliar and new and claim that they'd overcome
*  all earlier political divisions. The Nazis claimed that they were a movement, not a party, even though
*  their party was called a party. What did Nazism and Bolshevism and communism share? How were they
*  opposed to one another? We need to start with making clear they were ideological arch enemies.
*  In both worldviews, the opposite side represented the ultimate expression of the evil that needed
*  to be exercised from history in order for their desired utopia to be brought about.
*  And this leads to strange and perverted beliefs about reality. From the perspective of the Nazis,
*  the Nazis claimed that because they saw the Jews as a demonic element in human history,
*  the Bolsheviks didn't really believe all of this economic dialectical materialism.
*  They were in fact a racial conspiracy, it was alleged. And so the Nazis used the term of
*  Judeo-Bolshevism to argue that communism is essentially a conspiracy steered by the Jews,
*  which was complete nonsense. For their part, the communists and from the perspective of the Soviet
*  Union, the Nazis were in essence a super capitalist conspiracy. If the cosmological enemy
*  are the capitalists and the owners, the exploiters, then all of the rigamarole about race and
*  nationalism are distractions. They're meant to fool the poor saps who enlist in that movement.
*  It's essentially steered by capitalist owners who it is claimed are reduced to this desperate
*  expedient of coming up with this thuggish party that represents the last gasp of capitalism.
*  So bizarrely enough, from the communist perspective, the rise of the Nazis
*  can be interpreted as a good sign because it means that capitalism is almost done,
*  because this is the last undisguised naked face of capitalism nearing its end.
*  Beyond this ideological total opposition in terms of their hoped-for futures,
*  the reality is that there were aspects that were shared on either side. And that included the
*  conviction that they could agree that the age of democracy was done and that the 19th century had
*  had its day with experiments with representative democracy, the claims of human rights,
*  classical liberal ideas, and all of this had been revealed as bankrupt. It had gotten you what? It
*  got you the First World War as a total conflict, leaving tens of millions dead, and then,
*  economically, the Great Depression showing that the end was not far away. This produced,
*  one in the same time, both ideological opposition and instances of vastly cynical cooperation.
*  In terms of the Weimar Republic, it's obvious, with the benefit of hindsight, that German democracy
*  had ceased to function even before Hitler comes to power. But in the process of making democracy
*  unworkable in Germany, the extremes, the Nazi stormtrooper army with their brown shirts,
*  and the communist street fighters had cooperated in heightening an atmosphere of civil war that
*  left people searching for desperate expedience in the last days of the Weimar Republic.
*  The most compelling case of their cooperation was the signing of the Nazi-Soviet
*  Pact on August 23, 1939, which enables Hitler to start World War II. A non-aggression pact,
*  in official terms, contains secret clauses whereby the Nazis and the Soviets, meeting in Moscow under
*  Stalin's wary eye, had agreed on territorial division of Eastern Europe and making common cause
*  as each claiming to be the winner of the future. So, in spite of their oppositions, these were
*  regimes that were able, very cynically, to work together to dire effect. In the course of the 1950s,
*  in particular, there arose political scientists who also crafted an explanation for ways in which
*  these regimes, although they were opposed to one another, actually bore morphological resemblances.
*  They operated in ways that, in spite of ideological differences, bore similarities.
*  Such political scientists, Hannah Arendt, chief among them, crafted a model called totalitarianism,
*  borrowing a term that the fascists had liked about themselves, to define regimes like the Nazis,
*  like Stalin's Soviet Union, for a new kind of dictatorship that was not a backwards-cast
*  revival of ancient barbarism, but was something new, a new form of dictatorship that laid total
*  claims on hearts and minds that didn't want just passive obedience, but wanted fanatical loyalty,
*  that combined fear with compulsion in order to generate belief in a system, or at the very least,
*  atomize the masses to the point where they would go along with the plans of the regime.
*  This model has often met with very strong criticism on the grounds that no regime
*  in human history has yet achieved total control of the population under its grip. That's true,
*  but that's not what Hannah Arendt was saying. Hannah Arendt was saying there will always be
*  inefficiencies, there will be resistance, there will be divergences. What was new was not the
*  alleged achievement of total control, it was the ambition, the articulation of the ambition that it
*  might be possible to exercise such fundamental and thoroughgoing control of entire populations.
*  The final frightening thought that Arendt kept before her was, what if this is not a model that
*  comes to us from benighted, uncivilized ages? What if this is what the future is going to look like?
*  That's a horrifying intuition. Let me ask you about Darrell Cooper, who is a historian and
*  podcaster, did a podcast with Tucker Carlson. He made some claims there and elsewhere about World
*  War II. There are two claims that I would love to get your perspective on. First, he stated that
*  Churchill was, quote, the chief villain of the Second World War. I think Darrell argues that
*  Churchill forced Hitler to expand the war beyond Poland into a global war. Second, the mass murder
*  of Jews, Poles, Slavs, Gypsies in death camps was an accident, a byproduct of global war,
*  and in fact, the most humane extermination of prisoners of war possible given the alternative
*  was death by starvation. I was wondering if you can respond to each of those claims.
*  Well, I think that this is a bunch of absurdity and it would be laughable if it wasn't so serious
*  in its implications. To address the points in turn, Churchill was not the chief villain of
*  the Second World War. The notion that Churchill allegedly forced Hitler to escalate and expand
*  a conflict that could have been limited to Poland, that assertion is based on a complete
*  neglect of what Nazi ideology was. The Nazi worldview and racism was not an ideology that
*  was limited in its application. It looked toward world domination. In the years since the Nazis
*  had come to power, they sponsored programs of education called geopolitics, which urged Germans
*  to think incontinence, think incontinence, to see themselves as one of the superpowers that would
*  battle for the future of the world. Now, in retrospect, we of course can see that Germany
*  was not in a position to legitimate a claim like that, but the Nazis' aims were anything but limited.
*  In particular, this sort of argument has been tried out in different ways before.
*  In previous decades, there had been attempts by historians who were actually well read and well
*  published to argue that World War II had been in part a contingent event that had been brought about
*  by accidents or miscalculations. Such explanations argued that if you put Hitler's ideology aside,
*  you actually could interpret him as a pretty traditional German politician in the stripe of
*  Bismarck. Now, when I say it like that, I think you can spot the problem immediately. When you
*  put the ideology aside, to try to analyze Hitler's acts or alleged motives in the absence of the
*  ideology that he himself subscribed to and described in hateful detail in Mein Kampf and other
*  manifestos and speeches is an enterprise that's doomed to failure justifiably. The notion that
*  the mass murder of Jews, Poles, Slavs and Gypsies was an event that simply happened as a result of
*  unforeseen events and that it was understood as somehow being humane also runs contrary to the
*  historical fact. When Poland was invaded, the Nazis unleashed a killing wave in their so-called
*  Operation Tannenberg, which sent in specially trained and ideologically pre-prepared killers
*  who were given the name of the units of the Einsatzgruppen in order to wipe out the
*  Polish leadership and also to kill Jews. This predates any of the Operation Barbarossa and the
*  Nazis' invasion of the Soviet Union. The Nazis, moreover, in many different expressions of their
*  ideology had made clear that their plans, you can read this in Mein Kampf, for Eastern Europe were
*  subjugation and ethnic cleansing on a vast scale. So I consider both of these claims absolutely
*  untenable, given the facts and documents. So do you think it was always the case that Nazi Germany
*  was going to invade the Soviet Union? I think as you can read in Mein Kampf,
*  this is what's necessary in order to bring that racial utopia to pass.
*  While the timetable might be flexible, while obviously geopolitical constellations would
*  play a role in determining when such a thing might be possible, it was most definitely on his list.
*  I would want to add that in my own scholarship, I've worked to explore some of these themes a
*  little bit further. My second book, which is entitled The German Myth of the East, which
*  appeared with Oxford University Press, examines centuries in the German encounter with Eastern
*  Europe and how Germans have thought about Eastern Europe, whether in positive ways or in negative
*  ways. One thing that emerges from this investigation is that even before the Nazis come to power in
*  Germany, there are certainly negative and dehumanizing stereotypes about Eastern Europeans,
*  some of them activated by the experiences of German occupation in some of these regions during
*  the First World War. But the Nazis take the very most destructive and most negative of all those
*  stereotypes and make them the dominant ones, making no secret of their expected future of
*  domination and annihilation in the East. The idea of Lebensraum, is it possible to implement
*  that idea without Ukraine?
*  Hitler has Ukraine in his horizon as one of the chief prizes and the Nazis then craft
*  extensive plans, a master plan that they work on in draft after draft after draft, even as the
*  balance of the war is turning against them on the Eastern front. This master plan is called the
*  Generalplan Ost, meaning the general plan for the East. It foresees things like mega highways on
*  which the Germanic master race will travel to vacation in Crimea or how their settlements will
*  be scientifically distributed in the wide open spaces of Ukraine for agriculture that will feed
*  an expanded and purified Germanic master race. So this was not peripheral to the Nazi ambitions,
*  but central. As I best understand, there is extensive and definitive evidence that the Nazis
*  always wanted to invade the Soviet Union and there was always a racial component and not just about
*  the Jews. They wanted to enslave and exterminate the Jews, yes, but the Slavic people, the Slavs.
*  And if he was successful at conquering the Soviet Union, I think the things that would be done to
*  the Slavic people would make the Holocaust seem insignificant. In my understanding, in terms of
*  the numbers and the brutality and the viciousness in which he characterized the Slavic people.
*  In their worldview, the Jews were especially demonized. And so the project of the domination
*  of Eastern Europe involves this horrific program of mechanized, systematized,
*  bureaucratically organized and horrifyingly efficient mass murder of the Jewish populations.
*  What the Nazis expected for the Slavs had a longer timeline. Himmler expected, the head of the SS,
*  SS is given a special mission to be part of the transformation of these regions ethnically.
*  And Himmler in his role of envisioning this German future in Eastern Europe gives such a chilling
*  phrase. He says that while certain Slavs will fall victim immediately, some proportion of Slavs will
*  not be shipped out or deported or annihilated, but instead they will remain as slaves for our culture.
*  And in that one phrase, Himmler managed to defile and deface everything that the word culture had
*  meant to generations of the best German thinkers and artists in the centuries before the Nazis.
*  The notion of slaves for our culture was part of his longer term expectation. And then there's
*  finally a fact that speaks volumes about what the Nazis planned for the East.
*  Hitler and Himmler envisioned permanent war on the Eastern front. Not a peace treaty,
*  not a settlement, not a border, but a constant moving of the border every generation,
*  hundreds of miles east, in order to keep winning more and more living space.
*  And with analogy to other frontiers, to always give more fighting experience and more training
*  and aggression to generation after generation of German soldiers. In terms of nightmarish visions,
*  this one's right up there. And always repopulating the land conquered with the German,
*  the Aryan race. So in terms of race, repopulating with race and enslaving the Slavic people and
*  exterminating them. Because there's so many of them, it takes a long time to exterminate.
*  And even in the case of the Germans themselves, the hidden message behind even Nazi propaganda
*  about unity and about German national identity was the Nazis envisioned relentless purges of the
*  German genetic stock as well. So among their victims are people with disabilities, people who
*  are defined as not racially pure enough for the future, even though they are clearly Germans by
*  identity. The full scale and the comprehensive ambitions of the Nazis are as breathtaking as
*  they are horrifying. One of the other things I saw, Daryl Tweet, was that what ended up happening
*  in the Second World War was the worst possible thing that could have happened. And I just also
*  wanted to comment on that, which I can imagine a very large number of possible scenarios that
*  could have happened that are much, much worse, including the successful conquering of the Soviet
*  Union, as we said, the kind of things that would be done, and the total war ever ongoing for
*  generations, which would result in hundreds of millions of deaths and torture and enslavement.
*  And not to mention the other possible trajectory of the nuclear bomb.
*  That's right. I would think that the Nazis with atomic weapons with no compunctions about deploying
*  them would rank up there as even worse than the horrors that we saw.
*  Now, let me steal a point that was also made as part of this.
*  The oversimplified narrative of, to put it crudely, Hitler bad Churchill good,
*  has been used and abused by neocons and warmongers and the military industrial complex in the years
*  since to basically say, this particular leader is just like Hitler, or maybe Hitler in the 1930s,
*  and we must invade now before he becomes the Hitler of the 1940s. And that has been applied
*  in the Middle East, in Eastern Europe, and God forbid that can be also applied in the war with
*  China in the 21st century. So yes, warmongers do sure love to use Hitler and apply that
*  template to wage war. And we should be wary of that and be careful of that.
*  Both the over application of this historical template onto the modern world and of warmongers
*  in general. Yeah. And I think that nobody should like oversimplified narratives. We need subtle
*  and accurate narratives. And also, I just would like to say that probably,
*  as we've been talking about, Stalin and Hitler are singular figures. And
*  just as we've been talking about the implementation of these totalitarian regimes,
*  they're singular in human history, that we never saw anything like it. And I hope,
*  from everything it looks like, we will never see anything like it again.
*  They're certainly striking and unique historical characters in the record. One of the things
*  that's so disturbing about Hannah Arendt's model of totalitarianism is the leader can be changed.
*  The system itself demands that there be a leader who allegedly is all powerful and all knowing
*  and prophetic and the like. But whether particular figures are interchangeable in that role
*  is a key question. Let me go back to the 1920s and ask another counterfactual question.
*  Given the battle between the Marxists and the communists and national socialists,
*  was it possible and what would that world look like if the communists indeed won in Germany,
*  as Karl Marx envisioned, and it made total sense given the industrialized expanse that
*  Germany represented? Was that possible and what would it look like if it happened?
*  I would think that the reality was probably very remote, but that was certainly their ambition.
*  German communists get quoted as saying, after Hitler, it's our turn. Their sentiment was that
*  the arrival of Nazism on the scene was a sign of how decrepit and incompetent and doomed capitalism
*  was. In hindsight, that's almost impossible to believe because what happens is the Nazis,
*  with their characteristic brutal ruthlessness, simply decapitate the party and arrest the
*  activists who were supposed to be waiting to take over. So that's forestalled. A further
*  hypothetical that gets raised a lot is, couldn't the social democrats and the communists have
*  worked together to keep Hitler out of power? That's where the prior history comes into play.
*  The very fact that the German revolution in 1919 sees socialists killing socialists produces a
*  dynamic that's so negative that it's nearly impossible to settle on cooperation, added to
*  the fact that the communists see the social democrats as rivals for the loyalty of the
*  working class. In terms of just statistical likelihood, a lot of experts at the time felt
*  surely the German army is going to step in. The most likely outcome would have been a German
*  general shutting down the democracy and producing a military dictatorship.
*  It says a lot about how dreadful and bloody the record of the Nazis was that some people
*  in retrospect would have felt that that military dictatorship would have been preferable if it had
*  obviated the need for the ordeal under the Nazis.
*  AC What do you think Marx would say about the 20th century?
*  Let's take it before we get to Mao and China, just looking at the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany.
*  AC That's a really good question. I think that Marx
*  was flexible in his expectations about tactics and strategies
*  even as he was sure that he had actually cracked a big intellectual problem of
*  what the future is going to look like. He was a man who had to deal with a lot of
*  disappointments because in revolutionary uprising after revolutionary uprising, whether it was in
*  the revolutions of 1848 across Europe, whether it was in Poland, whether it was in
*  the Paris Commune, this is it. This is the outbreak of the real thing and then it doesn't end up
*  happening. I think that he'd probably have tried to be patient about the turn of events.
*  We mentioned at the outset that Marx felt it was unlikely that a workers revolution would break out
*  in the Russian Empire because for that you needed lots of industrial workers and they didn't have a
*  lot of industry. There's a footnote to add there and it proves his flexibility. A Russian socialist
*  wrote to Marx asking, might it not be possible for Russia to escape some stages of capitalist
*  development? Do you have to rigidly follow that scheme? Marx's answer was convoluted,
*  but it wasn't a no. That suggests that Marx was willing to entertain all sorts of possible
*  scenarios. I think he would certainly have been very surprised at the course of events as it
*  unfolded because it didn't match his expectations at the outset. Not to put this on him, but would
*  he be okay with the price of Baltimore for the utopian destination of communism, meaning is it
*  okay to crack a few eggs to make an omelet? Well, we don't know what Marx would say if he
*  would pose that question deliberately, but we do know in the case of a Marxist historian,
*  Eric Hobsbawm, who was a prolific and celebrated British historian of the 19th and 20th centuries.
*  He was put this question in the 90s after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
*  And he stated forthrightly that because the Soviet Union failed, such sacrifices were
*  inordinate. But if the experiment had succeeded and a glorious future had been open for mankind
*  as a result of the Soviet Union's success, that would lead to a different reply.
*  And that is one person's perspective.
*  So that takes us to the other side of the world.
*  The side that's often in the West not considered very much when we talk about human history.
*  Chinese dynasties, empires are fascinating, complex, and there's just a history that's not
*  as deeply explored as it should be. And the same applies to the 20th century.
*  So Chinese radicals founded the Chinese Communist Party, CCP, in July 1921.
*  Among them, as you talk about, was Mao. What was the story of Mao's rise to power?
*  So Mao takes a page from the Book of Lenin by
*  adapting or seeking to adapt Marx's ideology to a context that would have surprised Marx
*  significantly. And that is not only to set the revolution in an as yet not industrialized country,
*  but moreover to make the peasants, rather than being conservative sacks of potatoes,
*  to make them into the prime movers of the success of this political venture.
*  That's a case of the phenomenon that we talked about earlier. When is an adaptation of an ideology
*  or a change to an ideology, a valid adjustment that you've made or adaptation, and when is it
*  already so different that it's something entirely distinct? Maoism was very clearly intended to
*  answer this question for the Chinese context and, by implication, other non-Western parts of the
*  world. This was in part Mao's way, whose ambition was great, to put himself at the head of a
*  successful international movement and to be the successor to Stalin, whose role he both admired
*  and resented from having to be the junior partner. To take an example of a masterwork in a major
*  milestone in the history of communism, the Polish philosopher Leszek Kowakowski,
*  who was at first a committed communist and then later became disillusioned and wrote a three-volume
*  study of Marxist thought called Currents of Marxism. In that book, when he reaches Maoism,
*  Kowakowski essentially throws up his hands and says, it's hard to even know what to do with this
*  because putting the peasantry in the vanguard role is something that is already at variance
*  with the original design, but Marx says this is an improved version. This is an adapted and truer
*  version of Marxism for the Chinese context. In case after case, in Mao's rise to power,
*  we see a really complicated relationship with Stalin. He works hard to gain Stalin's support
*  because the common turn, the international organization headquartered in Moscow,
*  working to encourage and help revolutionaries worldwide, is skeptical about the Chinese
*  communists to begin with and believes that China still has a long way to go before it's reached the
*  stage where it's ripe for communist revolution. In a way, that's more orthodox Marxism than what
*  Mao is championing. Mao chafes under Stalin's acknowledged leadership of international
*  communism as a movement. In 1950, when Mao goes to visit Stalin in Moscow in order to sign a
*  treaty of cooperation, he's left waiting for days and days and days in a snub that is meant to
*  show him that you're just not as important as you might think you are. Then when Stalin dies in 1953,
*  Mao feels the moment is ready for him to step into the leadership position surpassing the
*  Soviet Union. So many of Mao's actions, like the Great Leap Forward and the agricultural disasters
*  that follow from that, are literally attempts to outdo Stalin, to outperform Stalin, to show that
*  what Stalin was not able to do, the Chinese communist regime will be able to bring off.
*  And the toll for that hubris is vast.
*  Yeah, in the darkest of ways, he did outdo Stalin.
*  That's right, in the statistics.
*  The Great Leap Forward ended up killing approximately 40 million people from starvation
*  or murder. Can you describe the Great Leap Forward?
*  So it was modeled on the crash industrialization that Stalin had wanted to undertake in the Soviet
*  Union and to outdo it. The notion of the Great Leap Forward was that it would be possible for
*  the peasant masses, out of their conviction in the rightness of the Chinese communist cause, to
*  industrialize China overnight. That involved things like creating small smelting furnaces
*  in individual farm communes. It involved folding together farming territories into vast communes
*  of very large size that were just because of their sheer gigantism, supposed to be by definition
*  more efficient than small-scale farming. It ended up producing environmental disasters
*  and campaigns to eliminate birds or insects were supposed to demonstrate mastery over nature
*  by sheer acts of will. These included things like adopting Soviet agricultural
*  techniques that were pioneered by a crackpot biologist by the name of Trufim Lysenko
*  that produced more agricultural disaster. That involved things like plowing to depths that were
*  not practical for the seeds to germinate and grow, but were supposed to produce super plants that
*  would produce bumper harvests and outpace the capitalist countries and the Soviet Union.
*  So the context for all of this is a race to get first to the achievement of full-scale communism.
*  One of the themes that I think it's so valuable to pursue and to take seriously in the history
*  of communism is what concrete promises were made. In the case of China, Mao made promises
*  and projections for the future that were worrying even to some of his own assistants.
*  He exclaimed that perhaps by 1961, perhaps by 1973, China would be the winner in this competition
*  and it would have achieved full communism. So that which Marx had sketched as the end
*  point of humanity would be achieved first by the Chinese. Later, his own comrades,
*  when he passed from the scene, felt the need to temper that a little bit and promised that
*  they would achieve full communism by the year 2000. Such promises are helpful to a regime to
*  create enthusiasm and to hold out to people the prospect of real successes just around the corner.
*  But what happens when the date arrives and you haven't actually achieved that goal?
*  That's one ticking time bomb that played a role in the increasing erosion of confidence
*  in the Soviet Union. In the case of China, it must have been something similar.
*  So there's a lot of other elements that are similar to the Soviet Union. Maybe you could
*  speak to the Hundred Flowers campaign?
*  The Hundred Flowers campaign is a chance for Mao, who has felt that he has lost prestige and lost
*  standing in the party because of the disasters of the Great Leap Forward, to regain some of that
*  momentum. The whole Hundred Flowers campaign, officially titled the Rectification Campaign
*  to set things right, is still shrouded in mystery. Historians disagree about how to
*  interpret what Mao was actually up to. The most cynical variant is that Mao encouraged Chinese
*  thinkers and intellectuals to share ideas and to engage in constructive criticism,
*  to propose alternatives, and to let a full discussion happen. Then, after some of them
*  had ventured that, to come in and purge them, to punish them ruthlessly for having done what he
*  had invited them to do. That is the most cynical variant. Some historians argue that Mao himself
*  was not prepared for the ideas that he himself had invited into the public square, and that he grew
*  anxious and worried and angry at this without having thought this through in a cynical way
*  to begin with. The end result is the same. The end result is, once again, negative selection,
*  the decimation of those who are most venturesome, those who are most talented and intelligent,
*  are punished relentlessly for that. Just a general culture of censorship and fear
*  and all the same stuff they saw in the Soviet Union. That's right. Think of the impact on
*  officials who are loyal servants of the regime and just want to get along. The message goes out loud
*  and clear. Don't be venturesome. Do not propose reforms. Stick with the tried and true, and that
*  will be the safe route, even if it ends in, ultimately, stagnation. As the same question
*  I asked about the Soviet Union, why do you think there was so much failure of policies that Mao
*  implemented in China during his rule? Mao himself had a view of human beings as being,
*  as he put it, beautiful blank pieces of paper upon which one can write new characters.
*  And that is clearly at variance with what you and I know about the complex nature of human beings
*  as we actually encounter them in the world. I think that in the process of hatching schemes
*  that were one size fits all for a country as big and as varied in its communities as China,
*  inevitably such an imposition of one model was going to lead to serious malfunctions.
*  What other episodes in Chinese history had showed, the entrepreneurial capacity, the productive
*  capacity economically of the Chinese people was suppressed by being fitted into these rigid schemes.
*  What we've seen since, after Mao passes from the scene and with the reforms of Deng Xiaoping,
*  one sees just how much of those energies had been forcibly suppressed for so long,
*  and now we're allowed to reemerge. Mao died in 1976. You wrote that the CCP in 81, looking back
*  through the lens of historical analysis, said that he was 70% correct. Exactly 70% correct.
*  Yeah, not 69, not 71.
*  Not 71. The scientific precision, I mean, we should say that again and again.
*  The co-opting of the authority of science by the Soviet Union, by Mao, by Nazi Germany,
*  Nazi science is terrifying and should serve as a reminder that science is the thing that is one
*  of the most beautiful creations of humanity, but is also a thing that could be used by politicians
*  and dictators to do horrific things. Its essence is questing, not certainty.
*  Yeah. Constant questing.
*  Exactly. Humility, intellectual humility. So how did China evolve after Mao's death to today?
*  Well, I think that there is, without denouncing Mao, without repudiating Mao's 70% correctness,
*  the regime actually undertook a new venture, and that venture was to open up economically,
*  to gain access to world markets and to play a global role, always with a proviso that the
*  party retained political supremacy. It's been pointed out that while Khrushchev tries in the
*  Soviet Union in 1956, especially with a secret speech in which he denounces Stalin's crimes,
*  he tries to go back to the founders' intentions of Lenin. Nothing like that, it's argued, is
*  possible in the Chinese case because Mao was not the equivalent of Stalin for communist China. Mao
*  was the equivalent of Lenin. Mao was the founder, so there's no repudiating of him. They are stuck
*  with that formula of 70% and acknowledging that there were some problems, but by and large,
*  arguing that it was the correct stance of the party and its leader that was paramount.
*  The results of this wager are where we are today. China has been transformed out of all recognition
*  in terms of not all of the living standards of the country, but many places.
*  Its economic growth has been dramatic, and the new dispensation is such that people ask,
*  is this a communist country anymore? That's probably a question that haunts China's current
*  leadership as well. With Chairman Xi, we've seen a return to earlier patterns. Xi insisting that
*  Mao's achievement has to be held as equal to that of the reform period. Sometimes,
*  imitations or nostalgia for the Mao period or even the sufferings of the Cultural Revolution
*  are part of this volatile mix, but all of this is outward appearance. Statistics can also be
*  misleading. I think that very much in question is China's further revolution in our own times.
*  In the West, China is often demonized.
*  We've talked extensively today about the atrocities that result from
*  the internal and external atrocities that result from communist nations.
*  What can we say by way of hope
*  to resist the demonization? How can we avoid cold or hot war with China,
*  we being the West or the United States in the 21st century?
*  Well, you mentioned in the context of the claims of science, humility as a crucial attribute.
*  I think that humility, sobriety, realism are tremendously valuable in trying to understand
*  another society, another form of government. I think one needs to be very self-aware that
*  projection onto others of what we think they're about is no substitute for actual study
*  of the sources that a society like that produces. It's declarations of what matters most to them.
*  The leadership's own pronouncements about what the future holds,
*  I think that matters a lot more than pious hopes or versions of
*  being convinced that inevitably everyone will come to resemble us in a better future.
*  You mentioned this earlier, but just to take a small detour, what are we supposed to think about
*  North Korea and their declaration that they're supposedly a communist nation?
*  What can we say about the economic and political system of North Korea? Or is it just a hopelessly
*  simple answer that this is a complete disaster of a totalitarian state?
*  I think the answer that a historian can give is a historical answer. We have to inquire into
*  what has to happen in order to arrive at the past we are today. We have a regime that is
*  claiming to be communist or has an even better version of Marx's original ideas
*  in the form of a Korean adaptation called Yuche. How does that mesh with the reality that we're
*  talking about a dynastic government and a monarchy in all but name, but a communist
*  monarchy, if that's what it is? I think that examining as much as we can learn about a closed
*  society that goes about its everyday in ways that are inscrutable to us is very, very challenging,
*  but the only answer. When an example like this escapes your analytic categories,
*  probably there's a problem with your analytical categories rather than the example being the
*  problem in all its messiness. There's a component here in the release of China as well to bring
*  somebody like John Mearsheimer into the picture. There's a military component here too, and that
*  is ultimately how these nations interact, especially totalitarian nations interact with
*  the rest of the world. Nations interact economically, culturally, and militarily.
*  The concern with countries like North Korea is the way for them to be present on the world stage
*  in a game of geopolitics is by flexing their military might, and they invest a huge amount
*  of their GDP into the military. I guess the question there to discuss in terms of analysis is
*  how do we deal with this kind of system that claims to be a communist system,
*  and what lessons can we take from history and apply it to that? Or should we simply just ignore
*  and look the other way as we've been hoping it doesn't get out of hand?
*  Yeah. Realists see states following their own interests and prioritizing their own security,
*  and there's probably not much that can be done to change that, but conflict arising as a result of
*  misunderstanding or mixed messages or misinterpretation, those are things that
*  policymakers probably do have some control over. I think that there's internal processes that will
*  work their way out in even as opaque a place as North Korea. It's also the reality, just as we
*  saw with the divided Germanys, that it's a precarious kind of twinned existence when you
*  have countries that are across the border from one another that are derived from what used to be
*  a single unit that now are kind of a real life social science experiment in what kind of regime
*  you get with one kind of system, what sort of regime you get with another kind of system.
*  That's a very unstable setup as it turns out. Now let us jump continents
*  and in the 20th century look to North America. You also have lectured about
*  communism in America, the different communist movements in America. It was also founded in 1919
*  and evolved throughout through a couple of red scares. What was the evolution of the communist
*  party and just in general, communist in America? It's fascinating to observe this story because one
*  long-standing commonplace had been that socialism has less purchase or radical
*  socialism in the United States than in European countries. To the extent that that was true,
*  it was an uphill battle for the communists to get established in the United States, but
*  it makes it all the more interesting to follow the development of the movement.
*  There were two challenges in particular that played a role in shaping the American communist
*  experience. One was the fact that to begin with, the party was often identified with immigrants.
*  The communities that had come over across the Atlantic from Europe often had strong
*  socialist contingents. When this break happens within the socialist movement between
*  radical socialists and more moderate socialists, there were fiery individuals who saw the
*  opportunity to help shape the American communist movement. The result was that for many American
*  workers, they saw the sheer ethnic variety and difference of this movement as something that was
*  unfamiliar. It would only be with the rise to the leadership of the communist party of Earl Browder,
*  an American-born political leader with vast ambitions for creating an American communist
*  movement, that that image would start to be modified. Earl Browder had a meteoric rise
*  and then fall over the promise he made that went by the slogan,
*  communism is 20th century Americanism. The notion was that communism could find roots
*  in American political discourse and experience where Earl Browder fell afoul of other communists
*  was in his expectations during World War II that it might be possible for the Soviet Union
*  and the United States to make their current cooperation permanent and to come to some sort
*  of accommodation that would moderate their rivalry. As it turns out with the dawning already of Cold
*  War tensions that would later flower more fully, that was unacceptable and the movement divested
*  itself of Earl Browder. Another point that shaped American perceptions of the communist movement
*  in the United States involved issues of espionage. During the 1930s and the 1940s,
*  American communists, not all of them obviously, but select members of the movement were called
*  upon by Soviet intelligence to play a historical role by gathering information, winning sympathies.
*  One of the most amazing books of the 20th century is the book written by Whitaker Chambers,
*  who had served as a Soviet spy, first a committed communist, then a Soviet spy,
*  and then later a renegade from those allegiances. His book is entitled Witness, published in 1952,
*  and it's one of the most compelling books you could ever read because it's so full of both the
*  unique character of the author in all of his idiosyncrasies and a sense of huge issues being
*  at stake, ones upon which the future of humanity turns. So talk about the ethical element being of
*  importance there. Through the apparatus of the state, the Soviets managed to infiltrate spies
*  into America's military as well as government institutions. One great irony is that when
*  Senator McCarthy in the 50s made vast claims about communist infiltration of the
*  government apparatus, claims that he was unable to substantiate with details,
*  that reality had actually been closer to the reality of the 1930s and the 1940s than his own
*  time. But the association of American communists with the foreign power of the Soviet Union
*  and ultimately an adherence to its interests did a lot to undermine any kind of hearing
*  for American communists. An example, of course, was the notorious Nazi-Soviet pact in 1939.
*  The American communist movement found itself forced to turn on a dime in its propaganda.
*  Before the Nazi-Soviet pact of August 1939, they had denounced Nazi Germany as the greatest threat
*  to world peace. Just after the signing of the pact, they had to proclaim that this was a great
*  win for peace and for human harmony and to completely change their earlier relationship
*  of being mortal enemies with Nazi Germany. There were many American communists who couldn't stomach
*  this and who in disillusionment simply quit their party memberships or drifted away.
*  But it's a fascinating story of the ups and downs of a political movement with radical ambitions
*  in American political history. Yeah, the Cold War and the extensive levels of espionage
*  sort of created, combined with Hollywood, created basically firmly solidified communism
*  as the enemy of the American ideal. It was sort of embodied and not even the economic policies of
*  political policies of communism, but like the word and the color red with a hammer and sickle,
*  you know, Rocky IV, one of my favorite movies. Well, that's canonical, right? Yeah. I mean,
*  it is a bit of a meme, but meme becomes reality and then enters politics and is used by politicians
*  to do all kinds of name calling. You have spoken eloquently about modern Russia and modern Ukraine
*  and modern Eastern Europe. So how did Russia evolve after Stalin and after the collapse of
*  the Soviet Union? Well, I think the short answer is without a full historical reckoning that would
*  have been healthy about the recent past. In ways that's not very surprising because given the
*  economic misery of dislocations and the cumulative damage of all of those previous decades of this
*  experiment, it left precious little patience or leisure or surplus for introspection.
*  But after an initial period of great interest in understanding the full measure of what Russia
*  and other parts of the Soviet Union had undergone in this first initial explosion of journalism
*  and of reporting and investigations, historical investigations with new sources,
*  after an initial period marked by such interest, people instead retreated into
*  the here and now and the today. And the result is that
*  there's been less than would be healthy of a taking stock, a reckoning,
*  even in a signing of responsibility for those things that were experienced in the past.
*  No Nuremberg trial took place in order to hold responsible those who had repressed others
*  in the aftermath of the collapse of the Soviet Union. In other ex-communist countries,
*  there was also precious little in the way of legal proceedings that would have established
*  responsibility. And keep in mind, the Nuremberg trials had as one of their goals, a very important
*  one as it turns out, not even individual verdicts for individual people found guilty,
*  but to collect and publicize information to create knowledge and transparency about what
*  the reality had been in the past. In the case of the former Soviet Union, in the case of Russia
*  today, instead of a clear-eyed recognition of the vast nature of what it all cost,
*  Putin, upon replacing Yeltsin, was in a position to instead traffic in the most varied, eclectic,
*  and often mutually contradictory historical memories or packages of memories.
*  So on the one hand, in Putin's Russia, the Tsars are rehabilitated as heroes of Russian statehood.
*  Putin sees Lenin in a negative light because Lenin, by producing federalism as a model for
*  the Soviet Union, laid a time bomb at the base of that state that eventually smashed it into many
*  constituent parts as nations regained their independence, while Stalin, it's acknowledged,
*  exacted a dreadful toll, but also was effective as a representative of Russian statehood.
*  This produced where we are today. It's a commonplace that echoed by many that Russia,
*  without Ukraine, is a nation state or could be a nation state. Russia, with Ukraine,
*  has to be an empire. Putin, who is not really seeking a revival of Stalin's rule,
*  but still is nostalgic about earlier forms of greatness and of the strength of Russian statehood
*  to the exclusion of other values, has undertaken a course of aggression
*  that has produced results quite different from what he likely expected.
*  I think that timing is crucial here. It's fascinating to try to imagine what if this attempt
*  to re-digest Ukraine into an expanded Russian imperial territory had taken place earlier.
*  I think that the arrival on the scene of a new generation of Ukrainians has produced a very
*  different dynamic and a disinclination for any kind of nostalgia for the past, packaged however
*  it might be and however nostalgic it might be made to appear. There, I think that Putin's
*  expectations in the invasion of 2022 were entirely overturned. His expectation was that
*  Ukraine would be divided on this score and that some significant portion of Ukrainians would welcome
*  the advance of Russian forces and instead there has been the most amazing
*  and surprising heroic resistance that continues to this day.
*  It's interesting to consider timing and also individual leaders.
*  Zelensky, you can imagine all kinds of other figures that would have folded much easier.
*  And Zelensky, I think, surprised a lot of the world by somehow, this comedian,
*  somehow becoming essentially an effective war president.
*  Put that in the bin of singular figures that define history.
*  And surprises, yeah.
*  How do you hope the war in Ukraine ends?
*  I'm very pessimistic on this score, actually, and for the reasons we just talked about,
*  about how these things escape human management or even rationality.
*  I think that war takes on a life of its own as accumulated suffering actually eliminates possible
*  compromises or settlements that one might talk about in the abstract. I think that
*  it's one thing for people far away to propose trades of territory or complicated guarantees
*  or arrangements that sound very good in the abstract and that will just be refused by
*  people who have actually experienced what the war has been like in person and what it has meant to
*  them and their families and everyone they know in terms of lives destroyed. I think that peacemaking
*  is going to face a very daunting task here given all that's accumulated.
*  And I think in particular, just from the last days of the launching of missile attacks against
*  indiscriminate or civilian targets, that's not easy to turn the corner on.
*  So let me ask a political question. I recently talked to Donald Trump and he said,
*  if he is elected, before he is sworn into office, he will have a peace deal.
*  What would a peace deal like that look like and is it even possible, do you think? So we should
*  mention that Russia has captured four regions of Ukraine now, Donetsk, Luhansk, Zaporizhzhia, and
*  Hursan. Also, Ukraine captured a part of the Kursk region within Russia. So just like you mentioned,
*  territory is on the table. NATO, European Union is on the table. Also, funding and military help
*  from the United States directly to Ukraine is on the table. Do you think it's possible to have a
*  fair deal that from people, like you said, far away, where both people walk away, Zelensky and
*  Putin unhappy, but equally unhappy and peace is negotiated?
*  Equally unhappy is a very hard balance to strike probably. I think my concern is about
*  the part of the equation that involves people just being desperately unhappy,
*  laying the foundations for more trouble to come. I couldn't imagine what that looks like, but
*  once again, these are things that escape human control in the details.
*  Laying the foundation for worse things to come. So it's possible you have
*  a ceasefire that lays the foundation for a worse war and suffering in a year, in five years,
*  in 10 years? In a way, we may already be there because
*  ratifying the use of force to change borders in Europe was a taboo since 1945, and now look
*  where we are. If that is validated, then it sets up incentives for more of the same.
*  If you look at the 20th century, it's what we've been talking about with
*  horrendous global wars that happened then, and you look at now, it feels like just living in the
*  moment with the war in Ukraine breaking the contract of you're not supposed to do territorial
*  conquest anymore in the 21st century. That then the just intensity of hatred and military tension
*  in the Middle East with Israel, Iran, Palestine just building, and then China calmly,
*  but with a big stick talking about Taiwan. Do you think a big conflict may be on the way?
*  Do you think it's possible that another global war happens in the 21st century?
*  I hope not, but I think so many predictions reach their expiration dates and get invalidated.
*  Obviously, we're confronting a dire situation in the present.
*  As a historian, let me ask you for advice. What advice would you give on interviewing world leaders,
*  whether it's people who are no longer here, some of the people we've been talking about,
*  Hitler, Stalin, Mao, or people that are still here, Putin, Zelensky, Trump,
*  Kamala Harris, Netanyahu, Xi Jinping? As a historian, is it possible to have an
*  interesting conversation? Maybe as a thought experiment, what kind of conversation would
*  you like to have with Hitler in the 1930s or Stalin in the 1920s?
*  First of all, the answer is very clear. I would never presume to advise you about
*  interviewing world leaders and prominent people because the
*  roster that you've accumulated is just astonishing. I know what I might aim for.
*  That is, I think in historical analysis, in trying to understand the role of a particular leader,
*  the more one understands about their prior background and formative influences,
*  the better a fix I think one gets on the question of what are their expectations?
*  In German, there's a beautiful word for this. The Germans managed to mash together several words
*  into one even better word. In German, it's Erwartungshorizont, the horizon of expectation.
*  In the case of figures like Churchill or Hitler, their experience of World War I
*  shaped their actions in World War II. Their values were shaped in their childhood.
*  Is there a way of engaging with someone you're interviewing, even obliquely, that gives a view in
*  on their sense of what the future might hold? I mean that obviously such people are expert at
*  being guarded and not being pinned down, but the categories in which they're thinking,
*  a sense of what their own ethical grounding might be or their ethical code that gives hints to their
*  behavior. It gets said, and again, it's a cliche because it's true, that one of the best measures
*  of a person, especially a leader, is how they treat people from whom they don't expect anything.
*  Are they condescending? Are they, on the contrary, fundamentally interested in another person?
*  Fundamentally interested in another person, even if that person can't help them or be used in some way.
*  Speaking of prominent world leaders to interview, there's Napoleon. Napoleon psychologically must
*  have been a quite amazing person to make a bid for mastery of Europe and then already thinking
*  about the mastery of the world. But contemporaries who met Napoleon said that it was very disturbing
*  to talk with him because meeting with him one-on-one revealed that he could talk to you
*  but look like he was looking right through you, as if you were not fully real. You were more in the
*  nature of a character on a chessboard. For that reason, some of them called Napoleon the master
*  of the sightless stare. If you're talking with a world leader and he or she has a sightless stare,
*  that's probably a bad sign. But there might be other inadvertent clues or hints about
*  the moral compass or the future expectations of a leader that emerge in one of your wonderful
*  conversations. Yeah, you put it brilliantly in several ways, but the moral compass,
*  sneaking up to the full nuance and complexity of the moral compass. One of the ways of doing that
*  is looking at the various horizons in time about their vision of the future. I imagine
*  it's possible to get Hitler to talk about the future of the Third Reich
*  and to see in ways like what he actually envisions that as and similar with Stalin.
*  But of course, funny enough, I believe those leaders would be easier to talk to because
*  they have nothing to be afraid of in terms of political competition. Modern leaders are a
*  little bit more guarded because they have opposition often to contend with.
*  And constituencies.
*  And constituencies. You did a lot of amazing courses, including four of the great courses.
*  On the topic of communism, you just finished the third. So you did a series of lectures on
*  the rise of communism, then communism and power, and then decline and fall.
*  Decline of communism.
*  Decline of communism.
*  So when I was sort of listening to these lectures, I can't possibly imagine the amount of work
*  that went into it. Can you just speak wisely? What was that journey like of taking everything
*  you know, your expertise on Eastern Europe, but just bringing your lens, your wisdom,
*  your focus onto this topic and what it takes to actually bring it to life?
*  Well, journey is probably just the right word because it's this week that the third of that
*  trilogy, Decline of Communism, is being released. And it felt like something that I very much wanted
*  to do because the history that's narrated there is one that is so compelling and often so tragic
*  that it needs to be shared. The vast amount of material that one can include is probably
*  dwarfed by the amount that actually ends up on the cutting room floor.
*  One could probably do an entire lecture course on every single one of those lecture topics
*  that got broached. But one of the great satisfactions of putting together a course like this
*  is also being able to give further suggestions for study to the listeners and in some cases,
*  to introduce them to neglected classics or books that make you want to grab somebody by the lapels
*  and say, you've got to read this. There's probably few things that are as exciting as a really keen
*  and targeted reading recommendation. In addition, I've also done other courses on the history of
*  World War I, on the diplomatic history of Europe from 1500 to the present, a course on the history
*  of Eastern Europe, and also a course on dictatorships called Utopia and Terror,
*  and then also a course on explorers and a course on turning points in modern history.
*  Every single one of those is so rewarding because you learn so much in the process
*  and it's really fantastic. I should highly recommend that people sign up to the,
*  first of all, there's the great courses where you can buy the courses individually,
*  but I recommend people sign up for great courses plus things like a monthly membership
*  where you get access to all these courses and they're just incredible.
*  I recommend people watch all of yours. Since you mentioned books, this is an impossible question
*  and I apologize ahead of time, but is there books you can recommend just in your own life that
*  you've enjoyed, whether really small or some obvious recommendations that
*  recommend people read? It is a bit like asking what's your favorite band?
*  That's right. Well, would a book that got turned into a movie be acceptable as well?
*  Yes. In that case, all of us reflect on our own childhoods and that magical moment of
*  reading a book or seeing a movie that really got you launched on some particular set of things
*  that you're going to find fascinating for the rest of your life. There's a direct line to the
*  topics we were talking about today from myself in the Chicagoland area as a kid, seeing the film of
*  Dr. Zhivago and then later reading the novel on which it was based by Postanok. Even though the
*  film had to be filmed on location in Spain pretending to be revolutionary Russia, it was magical
*  for the sheer sweep and tragedy and human resilience that it showed. The very way in
*  which a work of literature or of cinematography could capture so much,
*  still I'm still amazed by that. Then there's also in the spirit of recommending neglected classics,
*  my favorite author. My favorite author is now a late Canadian author by the name of Robertson Davies
*  who wrote novel after novel in a mode that probably would get called magical realism,
*  but is so much more. Robertson Davies was heavily influenced by Carl Jung and Jungian philosophy,
*  but in literary form, he managed to create stories that blend the mythical, the mystical,
*  and the brutally real to paint a picture of Canada as he knew it, Europe as he knew it,
*  and the world as he knew it. He's most famous probably for the Depthford trilogy, three novels
*  in a series that are linked and they're just masterful. If only there were more books like
*  that. The Depthford trilogy, fifth business, the Manticore, World of Wonders, and you got a really
*  nice beard. Yes, it was an amazing beard, very 19th century. Okay, beautiful. What advice would you
*  give to young people today that have just listened to us talk about the 20th century
*  and the terrifying prospects of ideals implemented into reality? By the way, many of the revolutions
*  are carried out by young people. The good and the bad and the ugly is thanks to the young people.
*  Young people listening today, what advice would you give them? Well, it comes down to one word,
*  and that one word is read. As a college teacher, I'm concerned about what I'm seeing unfolding
*  before us, which is classes, not my classes, but classes in which students are asked to read very
*  little or maybe in some cases not at all, or snippets that they are provided digitally.
*  Those have their place and can be valuable, but the task of sitting down with a book and absorbing
*  its message, not agreeing with it necessarily, but taking in the implications, learning how to
*  think within the categories and the values of the author is going to be irreplaceable. My anxiety is
*  that with college bookstores now moving entirely to the paperless format, it changes how people
*  interact with texts. If the result is not a renaissance and a resurgence of reading,
*  but less reading, that will be dreadful because the experience of thinking your way into other
*  people's minds that sustained reading offers is so crucial to human empathy,
*  a broadening of your own sensibilities of what's possible, what's in the full range of being human,
*  and then what's best. What are the best models for what has been thought and felt
*  and how people have acted? Otherwise, we fall prey to manipulators and the ability of
*  artificial intelligence to give us versions of realities that never existed and never will
*  and the like. That's a really interesting idea. Let me give a shout out to Perplexity that I'm
*  using here to summarize and take quick notes and get little snippets of stuff, which is extremely
*  useful. Books are not just about information transfer. Just as you said, it's a journey
*  together with a set of ideas and it's a conversation. Getting a summary of the book
*  is the cliché thing. It's really getting to the destination without the journey.
*  The journey is the thing that's important, thinking through stuff. I've been surprised.
*  I've trained my brain to be able to get the same thing from audiobooks also. It's a little bit more
*  difficult because you don't control the pacing. Sometimes pausing is nice, but you can still get
*  it from audiobooks. It's an audio version of books. That allows you to also go on a journey together
*  and sometimes more convenient because you can take it to more places with you. There is a magical
*  thing. I also try to train myself mostly to use Kindle, the digital version of books.
*  There is unfortunately still a magical thing about being there with the page.
*  Audiobooks are definitely not to be scorned because, as people pointed out,
*  the original traditions of literature were oral. That's actually the 1.0 version.
*  Right? Combining these things is probably the key. I think one of the things I find so
*  wonderful about the best lectures that I've heard is it's a chance to hear someone thinking out loud,
*  not laying down the law, but taking you through a series of logical moves, imaginative leaps,
*  alternative suggestions. That's much more than data transfer.
*  The use case of AI as a companion as you read is really exciting to me. I've been using it recently
*  to basically, as you read, you can have a conversation with a system that has access
*  to a lot of things about a particular paragraph. I've been really surprised how my brain, when
*  given some extra ideas, other recommendations of books, but also just a summary of other ideas
*  from elsewhere in the universe that relates to this paragraph, it sparks your imagination and
*  thought and you see the actual richness in the thing you're reading. Now, nobody's, to my knowledge,
*  has implemented a really intuitive interaction between AI and the text, unfortunately partially
*  because the books are protected under DRM. There's a wall where you can't access the AI,
*  can't access the thing. If you want to play with that kind of thing, you have to
*  break the law a little bit, which is not a nice thing, not a good thing.
*  Just like with music, Napster came up, people started illegally sharing music.
*  And the answer to that was Spotify, which made the sharing of music, revolutionized everything
*  and made the sharing of music much easier. So there are some technological things that can
*  enrich the experience of reading, but the actual painful long process of reading is really useful,
*  just like boredom is useful. That's right. It's also called just sitting there.
*  Underrated virtue. Yeah. Yeah. And of course, you have to see the smartphone as an enemy,
*  I would say, of that special time you have to think because social media companies are
*  maximized to get your engagement. They want to grab your attention and they grab that attention
*  by making you as braindead as possible and getting you to look at more and more and more things.
*  So it's nice and fun and it's great, recommended highly, it's good for dopamine rush, but see it
*  as a counter force to the process of sitting with an idea for a prolonged period of time,
*  taking a journey through an expert, eloquently conveying that idea and growing
*  by having a conversation with that idea in a book is really, really powerful. So I agree with you
*  totally. What gives you hope about the future of humanity? We've talked about the dark past.
*  What gives you hope for the light at the end of the tunnel?
*  So we talked indeed about a lot of latent, really damaging and negative energies that are part of
*  human nature, but I find hope in another aspect of human nature and that is the sheer variety
*  of human reactions to situations. The very fact that history is full of so many stories of amazing
*  endurance, amazing resilience, the will to build up even after the horrors have passed, this to me
*  is an inexhaustible source of optimism. There are some people who condemn
*  cultural appropriation and say that borrowing from one culture to another is to be condemned.
*  The problem is a synonym for cultural appropriation is world history, trade, transfer of ideas,
*  influences, valuing that which is unlike your own culture is also a form of appropriation,
*  quite literally. That multitude of human reactions and the fact that our experience is so unlimited
*  as history testifies gives me great hope for the future.
*  Yeah, and the willingness of humans to explore all that with curiosity even when the empires
*  fall and the dreams are broken, we rise again. That's right, unceasingly.
*  Thank you so much for your incredible work, your incredible lectures, your books,
*  and thank you for talking today. Thank you for this such a fun chat.
*  Thanks for listening to this conversation with Vejas Ludovicius. To support this podcast,
*  please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from
*  Karl Marx. History repeats itself. First as a tragedy, second as a farce.
*  Thank you for listening. I hope to see you next time.
