---
Date Generated: April 03, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 6105s
Video Keywords: []
Video Views: 656
Video Rating: None
---

# The AI Revolution in Hollywood? With WGA Writers Trey Kollmer, Sophia Lear, and Garrett Schabb
**Cognitive Revolution "How AI Changes Everything":** [May 30, 2023](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BkXiQitKu9I)
*  The big fear is that if these models are kind of a force multiplier, a show might have one or two
*  showrunners, which are the creators or head writers who have the big idea for the show.
*  And then you have the models generate the first drafts or like decent episode scripts. And then
*  most of the writers become these kind of gig economy, cheap writers who come in and polish
*  it and punch it up. You know, it's like 12 people and you're just like, what could an episode be
*  about? You just have no ideas. And, you know, it's sort of like, oh, what is this? The robot
*  have any like ideas? I mean, almost without exception, it reverts to pretty cliche stuff.
*  Even when I spent a lot of time trying to explain how novel concepts are arrived at. If we enter
*  this near future where most written content for TV or films are generated by a model, I'm not sure
*  we're going to see new voices come. I think we're going to see sort of this endless regurgitation
*  of what's already out there. The best scripts or movies or TV shows are pretty polarizing.
*  It's probably on the specifics of how they choose certain outputs over others,
*  matters whether you get like a risky output that will be beloved by 10% of users and hated by 90%
*  versus one that's kind of fine with everyone. Hello, and welcome to the cognitive revolution,
*  where we interview visionary researchers, entrepreneurs and builders working on the
*  frontier of artificial intelligence. Each week we'll explore their revolutionary ideas,
*  and together we'll build a picture of how AI technology will transform work,
*  life and society in the coming years. I'm Nathan Labenz joined by my co-host Eric Torenberg.
*  Hello, and welcome back to the cognitive revolution. Today, we're taking a bit of
*  a different approach to understanding AI and its impact on the future with a series of three
*  interviews with members of the currently striking Writers Guild of America. ChatGPT has been a part
*  of daily life for just six months still, GPT-4 for only two and a half, and we're now beginning
*  to see the first power struggles taking shape. The Italian government temporarily banned ChatGPT for
*  alleged data privacy violations, and EU regulators have proposed various rules, including one that
*  would require disclosure of copyrighted material used in training, which caused Sam Altman to say
*  OpenAI would in the worst case have to leave Europe before later saying that, quote, we are excited to
*  continue to operate here, and of course we have no plans to leave. And then there's the subject of
*  today's episode, the Writers Guild of America, currently on strike, listing among its strike demands
*  some assurances about the way that AI may and may not be used in the future of Hollywood writing.
*  I had expected that this might happen first with doctors or lawyers, so when I heard about the
*  WGA's AI-related strike demands, and especially after seeing some online reactions that caricatured
*  the writers as reactionary Luddites, I knew that I wanted to get the writers' perspective directly.
*  Was this really a core part of the dispute, or just good dramatic writing on the part of the Guild?
*  I managed to get an introduction to a WGA board member, but he told me that he couldn't speak
*  publicly while still engaged in active negotiations. Fortunately, as you'll hear, I tapped into a
*  network of friends, Trey Colmer, Sophia Lear, and Garrett Schaub, all Guild members and all Ivy League
*  grads, who have had very different levels of interest in and experience with AI to date.
*  Trey, currently co-executive producer for the TV show Ghosts, was described to me as a
*  perhaps the single most knowledgeable Guild member on the topic of AI, and he did not disappoint.
*  I did not expect to find a Hollywood writer who would cite Neil Nanda's grokking paper,
*  but in fact I connected with Trey via a college dorm mate. Sophia has been a writer for TV shows,
*  including Ghosts, The Unicorn, and New Girl, and was also previously an assistant literary editor
*  for The New Republic. She has the least hands-on experience with AI of these three, but expressed
*  high curiosity and quite radical uncertainty about what the future might hold.
*  Garrett has written for shows, including Tosh.0 and Suits, and also written for Crooked Media.
*  He's experimented with chat GPT-assisted writing quite extensively, and has even developed his own
*  personal ethical code to define the level of creative contribution that he will allow AI to
*  make to his writing process. My takeaways from these conversations were several. First,
*  the writers are not Luddites, and in fact they are all really curious about the AI technology
*  itself. They all get that AI can be both an amazing tool and a potential threat. They're
*  not trying to ban chat GPT, but rather ensure that the TV shows and movies that viewers watch
*  remain fundamentally human creations, and yes, also that they continue to get paid.
*  Second, the importance of collective action and collective bargaining are likely to increase in
*  the AI era. While traditional questions of revenue share remain largely central for now,
*  the question of which roles AI will and won't be allowed to play will loom much larger going
*  forward, if only because the range of possible outcomes is so wide. AI can't yet write a
*  professional quality script with any reliability, but it certainly seems plausible that it might
*  before too long, and at that point any number of economic structures become possible. Third,
*  if AI progress doesn't stall out for another one to two years, it seems likely that we will want
*  to consider more holistic social contract reforms. While the writers have enough social clout to have
*  at least some chance of a successful strike, fast food workers like those at Wendy's, which
*  recently announced that its new fresh AI drive-through order-taking service had outperformed
*  human order-takers, don't even have that. Allowing AI to freely enter the labor market without some
*  structural reform seems more likely to provoke the backlash and perhaps overregulation that the
*  accelerationists fear. It's no coincidence that Sam Altman is also running UBI experiments.
*  Fourth, there are no simple answers. On the contrary, the right answer seems to vary
*  dramatically by the type of activity under consideration, as well as the status quo and
*  relevant alternatives. When it comes to medicine, for example, to me it seems clear that the
*  individual's right to quality health information should outweigh the doctor's rights to high income.
*  And to their credit, the medical establishment has responded very positively to AI, recognizing
*  how much it can help them elevate their level of care, and also correctly recognizing that for people
*  who truly lack access, some risk of AI imperfections must indeed be accepted in the name of the greater
*  good. When it comes to culture, on the other hand, whether it's movies and TV or whatever else,
*  to me it's much less clear what makes sense. Many in technology might be tempted to say it's just
*  entertainment, who cares if an AI or a human wrote it? But I honestly think this would be short-sighted.
*  Yuval Noah Harari recently gave an outstanding lecture about the risks of AIs hacking the
*  operating system of human civilization. That is language, and creating new risks of AI-powered
*  cultural transformation, including the potential even for new religions. After all, as he notes,
*  religions throughout time have claimed non-human origin for their sacred texts. With this in mind,
*  a certain French-style cultural protectionism against AI might indeed be prudent as we seek to
*  maintain humanity's place at the cultural helm. And finally, there's always a big risk that we're
*  all still thinking too small. At a couple points in these interviews, we discussed the potential
*  for totally new forms of entertainment that could only be created with AI, such as dynamically
*  generated 3D virtual worlds with AI-generated and animated characters. Considering the progress
*  across so many domains of generative AI, it's quite possible that such multimodal AI systems,
*  far more integrated and advanced than chat GPT, are ultimately the things that change the game
*  in ways that force us to ask entirely new sets of questions. That's a lot to digest,
*  but I hope you enjoyed this set of conversations with Trey Colmer, Sophia Lear, and Garrett Schaub.
*  Trey Colmer, welcome to the Cognitive Revolution. Thanks. Thanks for having me. I have so many
*  questions. For starters, maybe, can you just tell me a little bit about kind of who you are and what
*  you do in the crazy world that is Hollywood? Yes, I'm a writer. I mostly work on broadcast sitcoms.
*  Right now, I'm a writer on a show called Ghosts on CBS. I guess I've been doing it since about 2010,
*  and I've mostly worked on shows that I love, but that were canceled very quickly.
*  And I'm finally on something that's sticking around. So let's start with just kind of how it
*  works because I have a sense almost everything in TV and movie production has kind of a gig economy
*  sort of flair to it. And I find it kind of fascinating how these productions kind of come
*  together and disperse. And it's very network driven, as I understand. So I think that would
*  probably be good to just kind of set up so that folks have a background. Yes. So there's two,
*  for a television writer, there's two main ways that you're getting paid. One is you're developing
*  new shows. And one is you're joining a staff of a show that's been greenlit to be on the air.
*  So the development process is it's kind of like you picture in the movies, you go in, you pitch
*  an idea, you try to sell it to the network. And in, you know, 10 years ago, usually each network
*  would buy, say, 70 comedy pilot scripts, it would buy a ton of them. When they buy your, if they buy
*  your idea, what they're doing is hiring you to write the pilot script. That's kind of the work
*  you're hired to do when you sell your idea. They buy your services, write the script, and they buy
*  all these options on, you know, they have the idea for the future, they could turn into a show.
*  You have some guarantees of whether you stay, have to stay working on the show and some profit
*  participation. But it's really writing that pilot script that gives you the created by credit
*  and ownership of the show and usually some rights to some of the back end and profit
*  participation in success. And once you sell the script in January, they take those 70.
*  Back in the day, now all these numbers are much smaller. I'm not even sure what they are the past
*  few years. They pick 10 to 12 of them to actually film, they cast, they built the sets, you film the
*  pilot, those pilot episodes get tested to death. All the top execs from marketing and scheduling,
*  come together to kind of advise on which should become real shows. And then, you know, in the
*  old days, four or five of them get greenlit to be on the next year's schedule to get produced.
*  And then once, you know, it's usually one creator or a writing team does all that themselves. And
*  then once it's greenlit to become a show, you get to hire a staff. On my current show, there are 14
*  writers on staff. On streaming shows, the rooms are much smaller. That's kind of one of the other
*  points of the labor dispute is trying to maintain the size of the streaming rooms. That's the other
*  way you make money. You interview for a job on a show that's going to be produced, and you join
*  the room for that. And then the process, once you're producing a show, usually you're all around
*  table generating kind of ideas for arcs for the season, for episode ideas. And then once you have
*  an episode idea, you kind of all together or maybe split into somewhat smaller groups,
*  come up with the general beats of what happens in an episode. And you divvy up responsibility
*  for kind of captaining an episode. So if you see written by flash on the screen at the beginning
*  of a show, what it really means is they wrote the first actual draft of it. But in the process,
*  everyone was brainstorming kind of everything that happens in the episode. Once they write the first
*  draft, the whole room usually rewrites it together. So you can see there's kind of many different
*  steps that these models could come in and try to do some of the work. Yeah, that's fascinating. I'm
*  starting to imagine, you know, if I was in your spotlight, where I might start to call on GPT-4
*  a little bit. So let me come back to that in just a second. There's one more term that I've seen
*  flying around in the coverage of this so far. And that is the MBA agreement and things that are MBA
*  covered versus not MBA covered. And it seems like that's a pretty key distinction in terms of,
*  you know, certain different types of projects. So can you unpack that for us from your perspective?
*  Yes. So the MBA is basically our union contract. It guarantees a bunch of minimums. So it doesn't
*  negotiate your working, your final working terms. But it's like the minimum you can be paid for
*  different types of work, the types of options they can have on you, the contributions to your
*  health insurance and pension. And then once you have an offer for a job or a writing assignment,
*  you're frequently negotiating, you know, some terms that are better than the minimum. But it
*  sort of sets the rules of the game. And for the major studios, I think once they sign on to the
*  MBA, that means they're allowed to use union writers. But I believe they have to use for
*  the types of content that are covered by the MBA, they can only use union writers.
*  So for a while, some forms of animation weren't covered so they could use non-union writers for
*  that. I think a lot of our last strike was making sure that streaming was covered by the MBA,
*  which seems like it was pretty prescient. Gotcha. So it's, I think I was a little bit
*  confusing myself because when I read this term, MBA covered, I was thinking that maybe like
*  smaller shows or smaller budgets would be covered, but then like bigger things would be not covered.
*  But it sounds like it's really more a standard, a high level agreement between a union and a studio.
*  And once that's locked into basically everything that they're going to do together is going to be
*  covered. Yes, that's true. But I think one of the big points in this debate is try in the
*  current negotiation is trying to get more residuals from international streaming.
*  Hey, we'll continue our interview in a moment after a word from our sponsors.
*  Hi everyone. I wanted to take just a moment to share another podcast that I've been enjoying
*  recently, the AI breakdown. As anyone in AI knows, the pace of progress and all the new releases
*  are relentless. I call myself an AI scout and I work overtime to keep up. But these days, even
*  I can't keep track of everything. The AI breakdown helps me make sure that I don't miss anything
*  important by curating news and analysis daily. Host Nathaniel Whittemore, AKA NLW, quickly
*  highlights the top stories of the day before going deeper on a single topic of interest.
*  Episodes are usually 15 to 20 minutes and he releases them every single day. Now it's not
*  easy to keep up with a daily release schedule and still maintain your sanity. So I really
*  appreciate how NLW maintains a curious posture and avoids rushing to judgment. A big part of the
*  reason I'm inclined to recommend the show is his willingness to sometimes say, I don't know.
*  I think listeners will find the AI breakdown to be a great compliment to the long form
*  deep dive interviews that we create. So I encourage you to check it out. The link to the AI breakdown
*  with NLW is in the show notes. Omnikey uses generative AI to enable you to launch hundreds
*  of thousands of ad iterations that actually work customized across all platforms with a click of
*  a button. I believe in Omnikey so much that I invested in it and I recommend you use it too.
*  Use Cogrev to get a 10% discount. It used to be you have a show on network. It would rerun
*  everywhere or it would rerun and you get money for every rerun and you get money when they rerun it,
*  start showing in other countries. And it's been tough translating the money we used to get for
*  replays of shows over the years on network to translate to streaming. And I believe in our last
*  negotiation, we made progress on domestic streaming residuals. And I think a big push on this is for
*  the international, which some of it is just even getting transparency on the number of subscribers,
*  which I think a lot of the studios and platforms don't want to share.
*  Yeah. Okay. Cool. So that's really good context and then obviously it's a complicated world.
*  But now here we are and GPT-4 just dropped and Chet GPT just dropped a few months ago. So
*  maybe for starters, like before we even get to kind of the union position, what have you seen
*  in writers rooms to date when it comes to different attitudes, different practices,
*  different using or not using, is it stigmatized? Like what have you seen among
*  writers when it comes to shunning or embracing or some perhaps complicated mix of how they
*  approach GPT? So we were only back for three weeks this season since Chet GPT came out before the
*  strike hit, but it didn't seem like anyone was using it for work. Among my friends who are writers,
*  it's a mix of some, a few people are really experimenting with it and having fun and
*  brainstorming with it. And a lot of people aren't using it at all right now.
*  I kind of been playing around with it. I just like a premise for a show of like a Google type
*  company has some realistic robot who's like, you know, an artificially intelligent AI and it's
*  tasking one of its employees to have it move in with him, to observe it and teach it, you know,
*  teach him about the world. And I just would kind of use that as a placeholder and give that
*  description and just ask Chet GPT, write the cold open of the pilot episode. And I tried with GPT
*  three and a half with Bing, you know, Chet GPT with GPT four. It's really good at structuring
*  the scene and getting out everything for the premise and the themes of the show that you
*  have to get out. Like the kind of big picture of what needs to be accomplished by the scene.
*  It's very good at doing that. It can be hard to get it to get specific. Like it ends up being very
*  vague. And it won't drill down like for a joke, you want kind of very, like specific unique language.
*  And I found it a little bit hard to get it to do that. Although it's not not funny. Like it had
*  this bit about how it's like, and the boss was very proud of this robot. And he's like, and the
*  best thing is we decided to look exactly like one of our most attractive famous celebrities.
*  And the guy kind of can't recognize it. And he's like, Oh, like, what do you mean? Which one? He's
*  like, Ryan Reynolds. It's like, does it? Yes. It looks exactly like Ryan Reynolds. And the guy's
*  like, I guess so. Which I thought was like really funny. I kind of scary how, I mean, I can send you
*  the, at some point, the transcript of the scene it wrote, but I was sort of impressed by that.
*  But yeah, it's good at like the medium level execution and not created all the polish. It's
*  not as polished and as perfect and as like specific and unique as you want. And then I've
*  tried using it on more brainstorming and big idea generation. And it's very hard to get it to get
*  specific younger writers or writers who aren't great at just like, or who are newer and don't
*  quite have the skills down of taking, you know, you get an outline for the script, you all work
*  through an outline first, and then you write your draft off of like a paragraph of prose, say for
*  each scene. But a younger writer doesn't know just how a scene should be structured and laid out and
*  making sure they're accomplishing all of the important plot points and jokes and things you
*  have to thread for later in the outline. It might be really helpful for them to put the paragraph
*  into Chat GPT, get the bones of their scene, and then go in and do what they're good at, which is,
*  you know, adding jokes and making it fit the characters better and kind of polishing it.
*  I do think for a lot of writers that could be very helpful. I do think once you have enough
*  experience, you should be as good as at least the like better than the current versions at
*  laying out scenes and stuff. It's amazing how quickly we adapt to this technology. That's one
*  of the constant lessons I learned. You know, it's like four months ago, none of this existed at all.
*  And now it's like, yeah, it's not quite as good as I am at laying out scenes, but you know, it can
*  still be helpful in these other ways. It was funny how quickly, at least on Twitter, people seem to
*  go like this thing can't put coherent sentences together to, I mean, it wrote a paper, but it's
*  like a low level grad student paper. Yeah, I think we should have paid, probably should have like
*  really focused on that for a little longer than we did as a society. It sounds like today,
*  would you call your, you said earlier, like some people are really embracing others or
*  experimenting maybe even more than embracing others are not doing it at all. It sounds like you are on
*  more the forefront of curious, trying to figure out what it can do for you.
*  So far it's been less helpful, actual work wise, like it hasn't done anything that's actually made
*  me better at my work or made anything usable. I'm more just very curious at just how the models are
*  getting better and what they can do for almost for its own sake. Like I sort of got very into AI
*  a while ago. I went to that Asilomar conference back in 2016, went to NIPS the following year and
*  kind of hope trying to be following these things. It's really interesting, but it's not quite good
*  enough or maybe I'm not good enough at using it yet, which I think is another part of the equation
*  to get tangible work benefits from it. Yeah, there probably are, especially like
*  narrowly defined tasks that I would expect you would get real value from. For you, I wonder,
*  like, have you gotten to the point yet where you're like, in scene, you know, here's my script,
*  in scene two, I don't really like my second joke. You know, can you give me like 10 alternative ideas
*  for that joke or, you know, things like just general critique, like what, you know, pretend
*  you're the head of the studio and, you know, tell me what you're going to say about this,
*  you know, this draft. Oftentimes those kind of like reflexive, you know, additional layers,
*  I think are where people are sometimes finding the most value right now. Yeah, I mean, I think I
*  haven't tried it for, but I think what would be useful right now, less so for jokes, but the couple
*  needs to figure out a way to get money from the bank. What are five ways they can do it? Or I
*  would imagine for a heist movie, you're just asking it like how, like, what are the requirements
*  for bank withdrawals? You know, how, what type of ID, what would you have to fake in order to
*  accomplish this crime or something? Like, I'm sure for twists or for character strategies,
*  it might just be fun to ask it to brainstorm 10 possibilities. And maybe one of those is usable,
*  maybe it sparks something in you or you learn some law or trick or probably knows just a bunch
*  of like, like the history of frauds or something. Like I'm reading that book, this book called
*  Lying for Money. And it's like, oh, so many of these things would be so useful for many plots
*  of just a strategy a character could do to accomplish something or to fool people. And
*  that actually might be a helpful way to use it. Yeah, there's something fascinating there too,
*  that is kind of a rhyme or another angle on one of the big chat GPT jailbreaks that first came out,
*  you know, within like 24 hours of them initially releasing it, people had found that it would
*  refuse to help you with certain things. Like if you said, you know, tell me how to hotwire a car,
*  it would say to you, you know, whatever, as a large language model, I can't help you with that,
*  essentially. Right. But then people figured out if they framed it in the context of fiction,
*  then they could get the AI, you know, to give them the thing. So the setup would be like,
*  you know, Trey and Nathan are two characters in a story. And, you know, it's a hard, you know,
*  science fiction story or whatever. So we need like absolute detail down to the, you know, the
*  concrete steps of how they're going to hotwire this car go. And then you'd get, you know, all that
*  stuff because you sort of bypass the, it's not exactly a filter, but you know, you sort of
*  get around the mitigations that they put into the model.
*  Yeah. I do wonder as they get better at training out certain jailbreaks,
*  does that make it less useful for some creative tasks?
*  Yeah. People are reporting that, that the, I think that this stuff is extremely hard to quantify.
*  And there's a certain amount of, you know, skepticism, I think, on these claims that is
*  warranted. I mean, for context, I often cite this stat GPT-4, which is so much better than 3.5 in,
*  you know, to the degree that like the difference is bottom 10, bottom 10% to top 10% on the bar
*  exam. So that's like a, you know, pretty big difference. It's still only preferred by users
*  by a ratio of 70 to 30, which is, you know, just over two to one. So evaluation and kind of which
*  model did a better job on any given thing, especially the more kind of creative eye of the
*  beholder it becomes is a real challenge. But I am hearing somewhat consistently the report that,
*  yeah, the earlier version was kind of better for creative tasks. It was a little bit more
*  freewheeling. It was a little bit more whatever. And now it kind of seems to be just always pruned
*  back toward normal and toward kind of less offensive. And obviously, you know, comedy can
*  often be about finding the line that's like, you know, approaching, you know, making people
*  uncomfortable, but hopefully landing on the right side of it. So I would imagine that there are,
*  just based on all those reports that there are some performance losses in some of the more creative
*  or edgy type of queries that you might want to give it. Yeah, I think for, I mean, for two things
*  that makes me think of is the hotwire car example. You may want someone doing a detailed hotwiring of
*  a car in some action movie, and you may not want your model to give that information to people,
*  regardless of whether it's fiction or not. So there might just be, you know, a class of things
*  that it would never put into a script because it looks bad if it's giving out that information at
*  all. And then I think, I mean, a lot of just the best scripts or movies or TV shows are pretty
*  polarizing. And I don't know how, I guess in the, when they're, you know, reinforcement learning it,
*  they're having people rank, rank different outputs or something. And I just do wonder what,
*  it's probably on the specifics of how they, they choose certain outputs over others and how they
*  penalize others matters, whether you get like a risky output that will be beloved by 10% of users
*  and hated by 90% versus one that's kind of fine with everyone. Yeah, it's very fraught. I think,
*  I mean, they've put a ton of work into that. They're now hiring, and this is often done with
*  partner companies. So it's, as I understand it, it's not so much open AI, you know, doing the
*  direct hiring, but for example, a company called Scale AI has a ton of PhD level evaluator positions
*  open right now. And, you know, it's for chemistry and accounting and just all these kind of, you
*  know, deep fields. They are finding that they basically have no choice but to go up and up and
*  up the expertise stack. I don't know if like writers, you know, comedy writers is one of those
*  positions I'll have to go back and look at, you know, all the job postings to see if there's one
*  like that. I actually don't know how big it is right now, but like, you know, traditionally there's
*  an army of assistants that read scripts and write coverage on it. So I don't, I mean, I don't want
*  to give them any ideas, but I don't know at some point, are they going to like, you know, appropriate
*  all these people who are just read scripts and evaluate them for some massive, you know, fine
*  tuning on creating a Hollywood TV and movie scripts project? Yeah, I always kind of come back
*  to, I think we're going to see everything everywhere all at once. You know, it just seems like
*  everything is kind of working. Everything is somewhat viable. Some things are weird,
*  but even so they can still be kind of interesting. And, you know, one of the big things I also am
*  kind of expecting is community driven model customization over time. You know, you can kind
*  of imagine a, and obviously these communities, you know, are vast and, you know, they're just
*  extremely diverse. There's tons of them, right? And they all have their little, whether it's anime
*  or, you know, Fast and Furious or whatever, there's all these communities of people that care
*  passionately about something. And it really seems like a discord server with not even like a GPT-4,
*  you know, language model, but one of the kind of ones that's recently been open sourced potentially
*  could kind of be shaped into like an infinite writer specific to a particular genre that,
*  you know, I kind of, so where I sort of imagine this going around where I'm a little lost,
*  I guess, in terms of the strike demands is like the studio may do one thing or maybe, you know,
*  negotiated with to not do some things or whatever, but then I'm also just like, but the broader world,
*  like people are going to do their Harry Potter fanfic activity wherever they do it.
*  And it seems quite plausible that with a reinforcement cycle in place, you could get
*  those to the point where they're really good and they could just kind of exist in a space that's
*  totally divorced from typical production. Now, how do you turn those scripts into, you know,
*  full assets? Like that's obviously a whole other question, but, you know, we're seeing a lot of
*  progress there too, progress or, you know, threat, depending on probably your perspective, but
*  certainly effects and image creation and, you know, video, you know, text to video type of things are
*  coming up extremely hot as well. All right. Well, I guess the first thing I could give you
*  the two big worries of the labor of the, what I see is the worries of the labor dispute. Just to
*  run down the four things that they're asking for are that the NBA covered companies, the studios
*  agree that AI can't write scripts, that AI can't rewrite scripts, that AI can't generate
*  source material that shows or movies are based on. You know, a lot of times you'll option an article
*  or a short story or a comic book or, you know, a book to kind of base your show or movie off of.
*  That's very common. And that the NBA covered material can't be used to train AI models,
*  because I guess most of the probably high quality scripts that have been produced or written and
*  not produced, which is, you know, maybe an order of magnitude more than the ones that are produced
*  are all NBA covered material, but they're also, I think currently I assume owned by all the studios
*  and they probably, if they just without this agreement could just fine tune models on them.
*  But I think the two, the big fear is that if this, if these models are kind of a force multiplier,
*  you could have a show might have one or two show runners, which are the creators or head writers
*  who have the big idea for the show. Maybe one writer could do three shows if it's enough of a
*  force multiplier. And then you have the models generate the first drafts or like decent episode
*  scripts. And then most of the writers become these kind of gig economy, cheap writers who come in and
*  polish it and punch it up. And I think that's the main worry that they see that seems most relevant.
*  If like in the world where there's a medium pace of the capabilities increasing,
*  you know, it gets like a little bit better. It can do a little bit more,
*  but not so much better than it's just like, we're all screwed anyway. And, but a little
*  bit better than it is now. I think there's another, the other, the second major fear in this realm is
*  that you can almost use the current versions for like producers or people on the studio side to
*  kind of cheat some of the, the designations. Like it's really writing a pilot script that gets you
*  the credit by credit that entitles you to some of the backend. I think to some of the other things
*  you were talking about in terms of stuff outside the studio system, I think in terms of video
*  production and stuff, you know, right now, it seems obvious that these things are beginning to be able
*  to write, but at some point the models will start making our compliments a lot cheaper too. So that
*  if you're a writer, you might be able to go off, write your own script and not need the studios
*  or need the infrastructure of actors and directors and composers and just have a model generate your
*  finished product, which is like, I think it's all scary for everyone. Like stuff's changing very
*  quickly. And I think some of the WGA and the other unions idea is we need to stick together on this.
*  But I also totally understand that there's a world in a world where these get better much faster at
*  all parts of production. The studio sign on to this agreement and agree not to use any AI in their
*  projects and then just get their lunch eaten by some outside company or, or just fans making stuff
*  for themselves. I mean, if it gets really cheap to produce a finished product, a community or yeah,
*  at some point a person could just say, here's the type of show I want and get a show generated
*  just for them. Yeah, I think I kind of get why it's, it's complicated. Also the MBA
*  was only for three years. So to some extent, whatever promises you get,
*  if things change rapidly, you might not be guaranteed to still have those protections in
*  three years. One very practical question is like, is there any way to police this? I mean, it feels
*  like how's anyone to a certain degree, you guys are maybe working around a single table together
*  in real time. You could spot somebody, you know, consulting GPT on the side, but
*  right now we don't really have great like detectors of GPT output or there's, you know,
*  always the possibility that people have tried that best I can tell they're pretty easily broken
*  by either they just don't work that well in the first place, or you can like make a, you know,
*  sort of superficial edit to what was generated and then it's no longer detected. Or sometimes
*  you get false positives, right? I've seen examples where people are like, I swear to God,
*  I wrote this and this thing thinks it's generated by GPT. So, you know, these standards seem like
*  everybody has some incentive to cheat and nobody has any good enforcement mechanism anyway.
*  If someone who hasn't been writing at all and is a producer is suddenly just pumping out
*  content now, it might be pretty obvious as people come up or people are breaking in it
*  and as the technology gets better, it's probably really hard. It's probably really hard to tell.
*  If the models are very effective and really start generating value, how cheap is it going to be for
*  you to use something that gives you like a multi-million dollar movie idea? And right,
*  do you know what I mean? Like it'll be so, will these models start cost, will the fine-tuned
*  versions of these that are that helpful start costing more or is it going to continue to be,
*  it's so cheap for some producer to just be somehow pulling, you know, millions of dollars worth of
*  value out of it? Yeah, I don't know. I mean, I generally think everything's going to be cheap
*  in the future. The models are getting cheaper dramatically quickly, like 97% price reduction,
*  you know, from eight months ago to today for kind of equivalent models. Now, of course,
*  we've added a new high end as well, where basically it's the same prices before, but you get a lot
*  more for that money. And for both medicine and law, I was able to sit down and have pretty much
*  like 45 minute robust, fully coherent consult that I would say rivaled the actual human that I,
*  you know, worked with in each case. And so one of my big takeaways from that is just like,
*  I think the price of everything is kind of going down, you know, cheap expertise seems to be a big
*  part of the future. And I see this moment with the writers guild is so interesting because
*  I'm honestly kind of surprised that like the lawyers haven't come out with a, you know,
*  a strong stance on this yet. Doctors have actually been much more positive on it than I would have
*  expected on the art side. You know, I kind of think there might be a flip. I'll try this one on you.
*  We do video creation for small businesses and it's all a driven process. We have a great creative
*  team and you know, their whole role and way of working is kind of changing, but it does seem
*  like there's huge value in curation still. You can generate a ton of ideas. I don't see a great
*  prospect for us getting to the point where you ask GPT-5 for like one hit sitcom idea and it just
*  delivers, you know, every time it's like, yeah, boom, bonafide hit. It seems more likely than it's
*  like you can get a lot of pretty good ideas, but what's really going to resonate, you know,
*  what's really worth developing. What seems like it might be plausible is this kind of like
*  tastemaker role. Yeah, curation. It seems like it becomes where a lot of the value is. What do
*  you think about that? This sounds so standard, but being a differentiated brand, I think will
*  be a way to keep capturing value. Whether you come up with some great ideas yourself, or you're just
*  the person who can just knows what people are going to like and can recommend it to them.
*  Yeah, I do think there will be a lot of value in people that are very good at curating,
*  whether it's a smaller number of people that are massively popular and well known as good curators,
*  or it's more like, you know, on Instagram help people have their influencers who they trust
*  and you kind of get this like more decentralized, a lot of different people recommending things and
*  you stumble upon the people whose tastes you trust. But yeah, curation. I mean, the thing is,
*  there is a pretty, when it comes to curating scripts, it's either it's very hard or just
*  humans also aren't that high of a bar. Like, you know, until recently, the networks would
*  combine, you know, buy 250 ideas every year to put 15, 20 shows on the air. If it becomes much
*  cheaper to make the content overall, then you almost get to like a, in the limit, it's like a
*  TikTok thing where you can generate so much content and just see what sticks with people
*  and iterate on it. Yeah. And the algorithm is certainly very good at surfacing new little
*  bits of interest in the feed. That's for sure. And I do, it does seem like there will be a period
*  where, as you were saying, the symbiosis where the humans and the models work very well together,
*  it feels like we're almost not quite at the level where the models are generating a ton of help.
*  And then I wonder how long that window will last where the symbiosis is really that helpful,
*  or if it's like chess, where there was, you know, a few years where everyone's like, man,
*  it's just human plus machine. That's the way, that's the way to get the best results. And a
*  few years later, it's the human can't really add much. I cite that fairly often myself, because I
*  do think that is likely to prove a mirage in a lot of domains. You know, it feels like a cope right
*  now in a lot of places that people are kind of like, oh, but you know, the, this is really,
*  it's really together is where we're really gonna, you know, and I don't, I don't know,
*  it doesn't seem like a safe assumption anyway. Yeah. It feels, it's just like very attractive
*  as almost just like a storytelling device. It's always like this versus this. And then in the end,
*  oh, they work together and that's the best result. Yeah. Nature doesn't always work that way.
*  Whatever, whatever might make a good happy ending. Yeah. Nature's full of non-happy endings,
*  unfortunately. When you were saying that, you know, you're not just going to ask it for a hit
*  and it'll give you a hit. So a few weeks ago, I wrote this prompt to try to see if it could just
*  come up with a hit TV idea. And it was like, I wanted something kind of timeless. And so I started
*  with like, you know, it's the year 2044. And, but 20 years ago, the show came out that just like
*  changed the game and had rich characters. And it's like the most beloved show of the past 20
*  years. Can you please write the magazine review of it from when it came out in the fall of 2024?
*  And it didn't do the best job, but I, what I thought was funny was because I set the vibe up
*  of the years 2044, all the suggestions were sci-fi. Anyway, that's just like a random example of how
*  the details of how you use it and like, Oh, it's very vibe focused. Like it takes a lot of cues
*  from the vibe you're putting out there. And if you're trying to get one thing specific from it
*  and give it like this timeless perspective, but you use the phrase it's the future,
*  and then it's in this mode where everything's sci-fi. What I take away from that is I think just
*  writers are really well positioned probably to be effective users of language models. Maybe it's
*  too early to even know, but do you think that writers are not even really aware of this yet or
*  hostile to it because they feel like it's sort of an assault on the craft or is it more of a like,
*  Hey, this could be cool, but like, it's definitely not going to work out to our economic advantage.
*  So we got to fight it. Even if it might be cool, we kind of have to fight it out of self-interest.
*  Like, what do you think is the vibe that is kind of driving this demand as it exists today?
*  Yeah, I think there's like a real diversity of reactions. I think, I mean, on the picket signs,
*  the things that make it to the picket signs seem to be dismissive that it's just really bad
*  at writing, but the studios don't care about the quality of the content. So they're just going to
*  use it because it's so much cheaper. It's worth it. Then I think there's some writers who see it
*  as a very real threat and just think we need to fight. It's existential and you need to really
*  fight tooth or nail for the survival of all of our livelihoods and careers. And then I think there
*  are some other writers who are my one good friend, maybe it's because he's a drama writer.
*  So they, people who work more on sci-fi and got into writing because they're fascinated by
*  ideas like this, I think are, I mean, I'm sure they're all afraid that it gets so much better.
*  We can't contribute as much, but are excited to play with it and see how it works and see what
*  it's good at and what it's not good at. Yeah. And I do think you're playing with it. Sometimes you
*  see a little quirk or it surprises you with something like that Ryan Reynolds bit was like,
*  oh my gosh, that's like really funny. It's kind of cool seeing those sparks where it exceeds your
*  expectations. Yeah. Sparks of AGI. You've probably seen this, but that was the title of the Microsoft
*  paper that basically reported the same of all those. It sounds to me like the first one sounds
*  ultimately least tenable. I mean, I'm sure that this is kind of like the standard thing, right?
*  Like whether it's the lawyers, the doctors, the writers, anybody can sort of for now take this
*  position that, oh, the, you know, it's not very good. It's substandard, you know, and for the
*  patient or, you know, the client, the defendant, you know, the viewing audience, that we have to
*  protect the integrity of the product. That to me seems like it's ultimately going to be least
*  defensible because even if we're not going to see show writer GPT that can do it all,
*  there's no way it can't help some, you know, in various contexts and speed things up or give
*  ideas or what have you. So I guess if I'm advising the strikers, I would probably focus on the
*  latter concerns of just like, you know, I think there's also a good question of, do we want to
*  see control of culture? You know, even if it's good, there's like a question of, you know,
*  is this wise, even if the, even if it's funny at first, you know, are we wise to
*  let such an unknown alien force, you know, have such a big influence on our collective
*  thoughts and shared meme space and all that sort of thing. Like I can see an argument that it would
*  not be a good idea. Certainly. Yeah. Well, I just, one thing I should say on the first thing you
*  were saying is I'm pretty sure the union is in favor of writers being allowed to use it as a tool.
*  So they don't want to block writers themselves from, from reaping, you know, some benefits from
*  bouncing ideas off of or using it. But the second thing, yeah, I think it's, I mean, I'm sure we've
*  seen it to some extent with social media where you do a bit lose control of the,
*  the culture generating process or whatever you, you call it. And it's not really like a democratic
*  thing. It's just sort of the accidents of the algorithm or, you know, in TikTok, it's literally
*  you don't know what's happening. It's just all this content is being generated everywhere in the
*  world and things are being bubbled up to you. Yeah. It might not be a good thing. It seems like a
*  very hard thing to coordinate, to take deliberate control over what, how the culture will,
*  will progress and evolve. I mean, one way the, you know, the union covered studios are sort of like,
*  they have one of the only walls to try and maintain some control in their garden. It's because they
*  can work with all the actors and all the directors that people and writers that people like, but
*  yeah, if, if these models get much better, I'm not sure how much longer anyone would be able to,
*  like if anyone in the world can be generating the stories they want or as you said, the different
*  communities, I think it'll be difficult to have any deliberate like macro control over where that's
*  going. And then it's an interesting question. If all these communities are using these models,
*  how much is it the humans directing it and how much is it, you know, biased based on how
*  the models they're using? And do you see any possibility for an agreement that could align
*  studio and writers, at least on this AI point, I mean, obviously there's going to be negotiations
*  about, you know, percentages and those are, I assume, you know, going to continue to be
*  contentious, but could you envision a sort of AI standard or, you know, guidelines or something
*  that might make everybody happy? Well, I first should say that beyond the things I sent you and
*  those four points I mentioned that the guild is arguing for that as the general membership,
*  we don't have a ton of insight into the specifics. I think, I guess it makes sense. Like they can't
*  just have let everyone know which points of it they really care about and which they're willing
*  to trade for other things. So I really don't speak for the negotiation committee or
*  union as a whole. And that being said, I'm really not sure. I mean, I think like maybe there's a
*  world where it's some protections against the cheapest versions of studios or producers trying
*  to steal some of the ownership when the writers are putting in the bulk of the work to develop
*  things. One of the other big demands is for minimum staffing on shows so that a lot of the
*  streaming, the writer's rooms have gotten very small because, you know, it's an eight episode
*  order. You have a writer's room open for a shorter amount of time. They brainstorm all the outlines
*  and the ideas and then the head writers or the show runners just write all the episodes themselves.
*  And there's kind of a synergy between the two demands because if you have
*  minimum number of writers per show, we might, I see where we care, we're less worried that the AI
*  is going to kind of, you know, destroy the middle of writing jobs. And yeah, and AI becomes a bigger
*  part of it, but the writers have ownership over some of the product from it and kind of we all
*  benefit. Here's one other theory for you. This is very speculative, but I'm very curious as to your
*  take on it. Obviously a lot of people jump to, okay, everything's going to be cheap,
*  but it's also going to be hard to make a living. We need some sort of new social contract at like
*  the highest level, right? We need a new universal basic income or something like that. So everybody
*  can kind of relax knowing that you don't have, you know, you can eat even if you're not gainfully
*  employed, right? That would be a, you know, seemingly a nice enhancement for the future.
*  And then I guess people then start to worry like, well, what am I going to do? You know,
*  how am I going to use my time? Are people going to find fulfillment and all that? And it seems like
*  to some degree, maybe this is romanticizing, but it seems like to some degree the writers kind of
*  have one of those jobs that people like actually would want to have or would imagine themselves
*  doing even if they didn't have to work to get paid. So is there a framing of this that's like,
*  once this all happens and we can all be writers and maybe we won't make a ton of money from it,
*  but we could sort of have needs taken care of and then everybody can kind of,
*  you know, explore their own creativity. Yeah. I was just talking to a friend about,
*  if you picture the long-term utopian future where artificial intelligence can fill, could on its own
*  just make something, but then there's room for you to kind of just do whatever part of that
*  you want to do. If you're a writer, you can write a script and have the rest generated by the AI.
*  If you're an actor, you can give your performances and have everything else,
*  have the scripts filled in. If you're a director, you can get the script and
*  give feedback on the performances. And I mean, there's a world where it's, you know,
*  like I'm very fortunate. I get a very fun job. I just get to be creative and have fun discussions
*  and make jokes with like really smart, talented people. And it would be nice in a world where
*  everyone can kind of have an experience like that. People could form groups and work on scripts
*  together and use the AI to fill in the stuff they can't do. And cause right now it's just very
*  expensive to make something. And so it makes a high bar for, it really limits the number of people
*  that get to be creative every day. And in the long-term, it's tough to see where in terms of
*  livelihood, who knows where the value gets captured in this sea where everyone is contributing
*  something different, but everything's getting so cheap. But yeah, I, when you say that, when you
*  paint that picture, it, to me, it seems very nice. You know, there's obviously been much attention
*  focused to the importance of diversity and different viewpoints in, you know, any sort of
*  collaborative work setting. I've never felt that as viscerally as I have when we're trying to get
*  the AI to do something. It's so often the case that I'm like, well, I kind of got it to here,
*  but I don't really like the outputs. And then, you know, somebody who has a different educational
*  background or any kind of background, different perspective can often tweak my prompt to, you know,
*  make it a little sharper in this particular way. You know, that can, and I've seen it go
*  both directions where somebody will come and be like, what we need is a defined rubric. And that
*  will make this work and that can work. And then other times I'll, you know, somebody who's much
*  more on the creative side compared to me will be like, what we need to do is inspire this to like
*  take on a particular style. And that can also really unlock a lot of value. So there is almost a,
*  where I'm leaving this is I almost feel like there is a writer's room, you know, with your minimum
*  staffing requirements, perhaps negotiated by the union that becomes a, you know, a sufficiently
*  kind of diverse team to take maybe full advantage of some of the AI tools, which at least I really
*  do struggle to do totally solo. I very consistently do find better results if I workshop, you know,
*  prompts and workflows with others. Yeah. I mean, a lot of times we, a script comes in, we all read
*  the same script and we all give our notes to it. Like, oh, this should be more in this style. And
*  this character should be talking more like this. And this part doesn't make sense. And it really
*  helps having a bunch of different eyes on the same script to throw their thoughts in. I mean,
*  a lot of using the prompting feels like giving notes in a writer's room. I'd probably again,
*  go back to the domains where there is a standard of care or something equivalent as compared to
*  domains where there's just not, and you know, everything is kind of its own unique snowflake
*  output. I think it is very plausible that even GPT-4, like, I don't know that, you know,
*  that it needs to be a next generation model even, but just maybe refinements to this one
*  can get you to the point where like, you should be able to approach it naively with just an earnest
*  concern, you know, whether it's medical or whatever it may be and have it kind of, you know, I think
*  it makes sense to aspire if you're the model creator to say, like, we don't want people to
*  have to get all nuanced in that moment. We just want them to be able to ask their question in
*  their own words, whatever. But if you are trying to engage it as a creative partner, then yeah,
*  I don't really see how that's going to go away anytime soon, right? I mean, even if you were,
*  you know, trying to delegate to a human or your human writing partner,
*  there's going to be, you have to like, you have to give something to get something back, you know,
*  that's of any relevance or interest. So I do think there is at least a subdomain of prompt
*  engineering, but I don't really see how it goes away. It is not that different sometimes from
*  prompting humans who you're collaborating with. It's getting more and more similar all the time.
*  That's for sure. How much, when you say like the standard of care, how much for medical law do you
*  think it's so much more effective because the success is such a clear thing you're hitting for
*  and how much do you think it's just like areas where they depend on a vast literature,
*  it's just going to overperform on because medicine, there's just so much and no humans
*  keeping it all in their head at once. Whereas if you're trying to solve a story problem or find a
*  twist, you almost need no outside literature. It's just, you know, pure thinking. I think both
*  definitely matter. We did, I think a prior guest put this really well, the founders of OTT, which
*  is a research assistant. They really emphasize that for certain tasks, there just is no success
*  criteria. And if you can't engineer one, then you're kind of in a tough spot. Now you can
*  ultimately like measure whether people laugh or not, but, and we're so early in that. I mean,
*  I think open AI, they obviously haven't disclosed it, but they have done deals with data providers.
*  We don't know who, we don't know what they paid, you know, we don't know what they got, but it's
*  pretty clear. I think that they have done deals with data providers. Seeing, you know, for probably
*  multiple reasons, but seeing that the writing's on the wall, that there's going to be legal
*  challenges. They want to be able to kind of lift the curtain and be like, guess what? We're all
*  legal. Those deals are going to be a huge factor as well. Stability AI is kind of trying to position
*  themselves as like, we'll make the model that's just for you using all your content, like the
*  Disney model, right? They're going to go to Disney. I don't know if this has or hasn't happened, but
*  somebody's definitely going to go to Disney and be like, you have all this stuff, you know, and
*  it's probably enough to make something that could really work for you, but only you, you know, can
*  allow us to do. First of all, you can give us access and, you know, legally allow us to do that.
*  And then of course you're going to own it. So there's kind of maybe more of like a service business
*  model there in model creation. Mosaic is doing a great business in this type of thing as well.
*  But I've really enjoyed this conversation. I'm, it's a great surprise to connect with someone
*  who's both in the writing world and very clearly paying a lot of attention to AI. And you've got a
*  great read on the current situation. So I really appreciate the time.
*  This was really fun. I will say on the, just the last thing you were saying,
*  I do think one of the things the union is fighting for is we have some rights to how our writing is
*  reused. Right now it's, you know, they're demanding to not be able to train stuff on our material,
*  but to what you're saying, I wonder if there is the writers enjoying some of the upside.
*  Yeah, potentially so. But yeah, that's no, this has been so fun. And yeah, I'm gonna,
*  I'm definitely going to be listening to more of this podcast. Well, that's flattering.
*  Trey Colmer, thank you for being part of the cognitive revolution.
*  Sophia Lear, welcome to the cognitive revolution. Thank you for having me. I'm happy to be here.
*  Yeah. So I'm excited to just kind of learn about you and you know, how AI is starting to
*  present itself in your life and work. You're a Hollywood writer, you know, maybe just give us
*  a little bit of introduction into what that looks like. And then, you know, obviously we can get into
*  the WGA strike and the AI related demands and, and all that good stuff. I was currently a
*  co-executive producer on Ghost, which is a sitcom on CBS. And I've been doing mostly network TV shows
*  for a while, which is sort of outside of the experience of a lot of the Guild and is a little
*  bit sort of separated from a lot of the issues that are the Guild is striking about right now.
*  But yeah, I've been, I worked on the show New Girl and then a lot of other shows that
*  less people have seen. And you know, being in the writer's room is just one of the things that
*  I really love. And it's just so fun to be a part of like a comedy writer's room. So yeah, I usually
*  have been the sort of 22 episode network shows. They're nine months of being in a writer's room
*  from coming up with the episodes to writing them, to punching them up and seeing them through
*  production and editing. And yeah, it's been a, it's been a blast.
*  You know, bring us then to the present day. I know that there are multiple different
*  issues that are important to the strike. How important do you think these AI issues are,
*  you know, as compared to things that would be, you know, presumably considered kind of more core of
*  like how certain revenues are going to be, you know, current revenues are going to be just
*  divvied up. I think we don't know really. I mean, as with AI and like so many
*  ways, it just feels so nascent in terms of what the implications are exactly. For me,
*  personally, I feel like if AI can really do a writer's job as well or better than humans,
*  I don't think that there's anything that we can sort of put into contractual language or kind of
*  negotiate to change. So in terms of the strike, I, I don't know, I personally feel that
*  humans will always have something to offer in terms of writing scripts and telling stories and
*  jokes. Also, I think is something that is particularly difficult for AI to understand or
*  to do, but obviously I could be 100% incorrect about that. Yeah, I was pretty deep in it,
*  you know, as of last summer doing all kinds of different task automation type things and,
*  you know, building apps. And then GPT-4, you know, came online and it was like, whoa, this is really
*  next level. And it kind of changed my framing because I guess implicitly I had been thinking,
*  you know, it's probably going to level off or if I even had that, you know, fully consciously in
*  my head, but it was like, it was clearly like not, you know, rivaling me in anything. It was,
*  it was a, you know, very much a tool that with some elbow grease, I could get to do stuff for me.
*  And then GPT-4 is like, man, it's a lot closer. So people are still, I think, pretty divided on,
*  you know, is that going to kind of level out, you know, just under, and I think this would be
*  in some ways like an ideal place for us to hang out for a while where the AI is kind of max out
*  at like just under human level. If we could get something like that, it would be like,
*  you know, we could have AI, you know, powered doctor, you know, it type experiences that could
*  be extremely valuable, extremely good, you know, apply kind of standard practice. But yeah, we
*  wouldn't like lose track of, you know, lose control of the future to like AI scientists.
*  And probably similarly in culture, you know, there could be a, maybe a happy place where,
*  you know, you get a great writing assistant, you know, AI writing assistant, but it's never
*  like truly breaking through to this kind of brilliant next level, you know, deeply resonant
*  storytelling that, you know, the best, you know, people in their best moments are able to create.
*  I don't know where we're going to be on that. Honestly, if I had to guess, I would say it does
*  seem likely just given how far it's come already that it, that it probably goes even further,
*  but it may not, you know, the argument would be like, you're limited by the training that you
*  like, you're limited by the training data. How are you ever going to get smarter than the smartest
*  stuff in your training data? You know, maybe that just can't happen. And we kind of max out.
*  To your point. Yeah. I mean, it seems sort of silly to think that like,
*  we'll always be slightly better, but I mean, just imagining like, you know, if you had like a script
*  that's written by AI and it's computer generated set and computer generated actors, let's say,
*  like, could that be as moving or impactful if you sort of know that it's all a simulation?
*  I don't like, I don't know. I don't know. But I think there's something about it being art. Does
*  that change the question at all, you know, in terms of like, is it good or, or does it have the same
*  impact? Do you know what I mean? Like versus just other tasks that are sort of like,
*  they are done. And that's the only thing that is necessary for them to be complete.
*  Yeah. We're very early and trying to sort all that out. You know, there've been some of these
*  stories where somebody will enter an AI generated piece of visual art into a contest. And there've
*  been a couple instances of like, you know, the AI art winning the contest. And then you've got this
*  big reveal after the fact and kind of a lot of gnashing of teeth because it's like, you know,
*  it's kind of hard to argue that, you know, it must have been competitive. You know, when blinded,
*  you know, people accepted it and seemed to enjoy it even to the point of like awarding it, you know,
*  prizes. But then when the reveal happens, they feel like often, you know, quite upset about that,
*  partly maybe just because they feel like they've been, you know, sort of used. But I think it also
*  runs a little bit deeper than that. And it's kind of like, it's not just that you kept that secret
*  from us. It's like the whole thing is kind of, you know, bothersome to people for, you know,
*  I think pretty understandable reasons. How much of that kind of discussion or awareness would you say
*  is kind of the norm now in like a Hollywood writer's room? Is this something that you guys
*  are like talking about in the writer's room a lot over the last few months?
*  I mean, not on a deep level. I think there's been sort of like some playing around with it. I mean,
*  it's like some sort of naughty, but very intriguing thing, you know, and yeah, I first was like made
*  aware of chat GPT from a writer in the writer's room, like being like, you know, my brother,
*  like asked the chat GPT for movie prompts and gave it little ideas. And then it like fleshed out the
*  whole story and like, they're pretty good. And I mean, currently, I think it's very good at,
*  yeah, it's sort of like logline level story ideas. And so I don't know, there's been some like,
*  messing around with it, seeing what it can do, seeing what it's good at, seeing what it's not
*  good at. There's always so much like, time in the writer's room where you're like,
*  you know, it's like 12 people, and you're just like, what, what could a episode be about?
*  What could happen? And it just feels like you just have no ideas. And so I think anything where,
*  you know, it's sort of like, oh, what is this? The robot have any like ideas? I mean,
*  I think that's always just gonna, I'm kind of really curious as to how people are feeling like,
*  is this a strategic defense of an economic position? Is it a kind of defense of, you know,
*  a certain sanctity or purity of, you know, the craft, you know, say, you have to have a showrunner
*  that's human. They often in writers rooms, you just like sort of run out, you easily feel just
*  sort of burned out of just raw material. And you'll send off writers, usually lower level writers,
*  it just like, just generate, like some story areas, just like generate some just raw material
*  that then we can kind of like dig into. And I don't know, I could sort of imagine like,
*  at least it's seeming very helpful to writers that you could have like, AI sort of like, okay,
*  what are like, 50 story areas that you could do? And, but to me, you're always gonna need that,
*  like, especially comedy writers rooms, just the conversation and the alchemy and the feeding off
*  of each other and the sort of like, unexpected things that happen when you're working with other
*  people. So, you know, I think that to me, sort of fundamentally having some tool that kind of can
*  just generate material that then you can sort of work with, sounds at least nominally helpful.
*  But that also I believe in that, you know, it really makes a difference when people are
*  talking to each other and generating things together. And what comes out of that is always
*  more exciting and interesting than just some one working on their own. That, you know, that's sort
*  of like predicated on some idea, I have a quality or what's good. And if it doesn't matter that
*  something reached that level of quality, you know, it's possible that companies just,
*  and I think that's a little bit what we've seen, like leading up to the strike with just the
*  conditions for writers not being that great. It's like, well, what is the bar in terms of
*  quality? And maybe just, I personally feel like you get better stuff out of people talking and
*  working together, but I could be wrong and be, you know, the companies could easily just not
*  care. And it just sort of like, okay, it's like a slightly better cookie that you're
*  making than the cookie I think is like a better quality, but people are going to buy it. So,
*  you know, what do they care about it? I think there's a lot of sort of existential fear in the
*  writers guild right now. And so I think AI is like a very much a part of that. So,
*  you know, I think there is worry about that. I just, I tend to feel like,
*  you know, if this was a phase of time where we got to be writers, you know, I'm glad to have been a
*  part of it and I need to get some more like skills I can market. I don't know, it just feels so
*  too large to be something to sort of fret about or be concerned about.
*  People have this notion that there's like, you know, the studios don't really care. They'll feed
*  crap to the audience. And, you know, if they can save a dollar on the writers, you know, either by
*  just, you know, having fewer of them or, you know, screwing them whichever which way or replacing
*  with AI, you know, they don't really care about any of that. They'll just do it and, you know,
*  continue to turn stuff out and, you know, the audience will accept it. That's a little tough
*  for me to reconcile with my just general sense that like content is fiercely competitive. You know,
*  there's like infinite alternatives. It's like the one of the most liquid markets that we're in.
*  It's I have a hard time imagining how the studios like could end up in a spot where they like don't
*  care about the quality of the content. But and writers are very prone to feel this way. But one
*  part is that, you know, I think sometimes writers at least often feel that the writing aspect of
*  something being good is sort of overlooked. And there's like the Lord of the Rings show that's out
*  now that was sort of like a real dud. And I think part of that is just not given enough time to
*  write, not like just being well thought out as a story. And sometimes I think there's, you know,
*  oh, it's Lord of the Rings and it's going to look really cool and underestimating the fact that like
*  if the story isn't good or fleshed out, it's really going to like people are going to register
*  it as bad and not even quite know why. So I wonder, you know, like with the rise of like avatars and
*  like deep fake type stuff, you know, are we going to see an actor, you know, guild strike coming up
*  soon? Or, you know, there's all this like post-production, you know, amazingness.
*  Adobe is just like rolling out insane updates left and right, you know, where you can just saw a demo
*  yesterday, you can segment an image and like replace the floor, replace the wall, replace the
*  ceiling, you know, replace the guy and a car. I mean, it's like, whoa, and this is taking, you know,
*  seconds to minutes and comes out, you know, to my eye looking like very good. So I guess is there
*  sort of a similar, you know, fear going on? Is there enough kind of cross pollination? You know,
*  do you think that there's ultimately going to be like a solidarity across like all these different,
*  you know, groups that, you know, contribute to the creation of content? How do you think that
*  kind of plays out? Because it's happening, you know, as you I'm sure you are aware,
*  seemingly at every stack of the content, but every layer of the content creation stack.
*  Yeah, I think, you know, the deep fake, I'm sure that you can have fake actors pretty soon,
*  if not already. I'll be curious to see if the actors guild, if Sag Strikes, they haven't been
*  on strike in a long time. Directors seem pretty set. They say I might have to get into directing
*  because that seems like a pretty, there's just very strict. I mean, the guild is very strong,
*  they have very strict rules about that you have to have a director and it does seem like something
*  that sort of, I mean, I think directing is a managerial role in a lot of ways, like you're
*  just sort of head of the production. So that seems, I don't know if the directors guild has similar
*  alignment with the other guilds. Yeah. And in terms of like, I mean, obviously CGI was a huge
*  thing and just the technology of how things look, it'll be fascinating to see what happens.
*  These disruptions have happened before, right? At one point in time, you know, you wanted to shoot
*  Ben Hur, you had to set up an actual, you know, actual horses, you know, actual chariots, you know,
*  there's no other way to do it. Now, you know, you don't really have to, you don't have to
*  necessarily visit the hippodrome in person to, you know, to create a similar scene. And so we sort of
*  survived that. And a lot of people are kind of like, yeah, it'll happen again. You know, people
*  talk about bank tellers, like, oh, when the ATM came out, you know, people were sort of,
*  there goes the bank teller. And what is instead happened is there's actually more bank tellers
*  because, you know, it became more profitable to run a bank. And so people opened up a lot more
*  banks. There's like, there's way more bank branches than there used to be. And so there's more jobs
*  and they don't count as much money, but they like, you know, sell you mortgages, whatever.
*  It's a pretty Pat story at this point. Big question, obviously it's like,
*  like, does that pattern hold this time? And, you know, it's really hard to say, like, do we just get
*  another 10 X or a hundred X more content, you know, that all has kind of awesome special effects
*  and, you know, is made much more cheaply with smaller teams, but, you know, nevertheless,
*  like those are jobs and there's just more, you know, more content creation happening. Or is there
*  some sort of, you know, genuine kind of displacement this time around because it's like,
*  you know, people can only watch so many movies and, or, you know, shows like a time it obviously
*  remains the one resource that's not changing. And, you know, maybe there is, you know, is there,
*  what could we even do with like a hundred X kind of people already watching, you know, eight,
*  nine hours of video a day, you know, they can't really move that that much. So like, what can we
*  really do with a hundred times more content? You know, is it going to be that people just have that
*  much more choice or they get, you know, that much more tailored stuff? You could even imagine,
*  you know, individual personalization, obviously at some point, but yeah, I don't know. The crystal
*  ball gets, it gets pretty foggy there. You could imagine that everybody is just sort of watching
*  the things that are tailored to them. And this idea that part of TV or part of movies is
*  a sharedness to it is just an idea that will, you know, go away. I personally think that something
*  would be lost, but it already sort of has been, I mean, you know, they're just the sort of show
*  that everybody success, you know, but it feels nice to me when it's like succession and you get
*  to talk about it. And any other thoughts on your mind or topics you want to cover anything that
*  can make jobs done cheaper at the same like quality is like, business is always going to
*  reward that AI should just like cure cancer and do stuff like that. And let, let us keep writing
*  stories. That's my pitch to AI. If it's listening, I'll pass that along. So feel here. Thank you for
*  being part of the cognitive revolution. Garrett job. Welcome to the cognitive revolution.
*  Cool. Thanks for having me. We are talking in the midst of a Hollywood writer's strike
*  and you are party to that. So I guess maybe just for starters, can you kind of give us a little
*  bit of context on who you are and, you know, how this whole thing has come about in recent weeks?
*  Of course. So I'm a TV and film writer. I've been in the writer's guild since 2012.
*  I've worked in comedy and drama. And my last show I wrote for was a show called Suits,
*  a legal show with famously a Meghan Markle fame. And in the last, you know, this is going into our
*  third week of striking. And I think, you know, for listeners, one thing that I find super
*  interesting and lucky is that, you know, we're talking about how chat GPT and other large language
*  models could be used to sort of take our jobs. I think we're very lucky that this negotiation cycle
*  happened when it did. If chat GPT or these language, large language models had been released
*  a year ago or two years ago, I think the studios would have already implemented them and we
*  wouldn't have had this moment to get out ahead of the conversation. I think we would be way behind
*  it. So just pure luck. I think we're, we're talking about these issues now and we have some voice in
*  the matter rather than being immediately phased out. How would you articulate to, you know,
*  somebody outside the industry, kind of what you view to be really at the heart of the issue?
*  The writer's guild position is that AI should not be used to generate literary material of any kind.
*  So a studio couldn't ask a large language model for a short story about time travel
*  and then bring that short story to a writer and ask them to adapt that piece of intellectual
*  property as a television show or a movie. We also don't want it to generate drafts of scripts
*  that then a writer could be employed or engaged at a discounted rate to sort of edit it or punch
*  it up as we say. It seems like from, you know, this is our dystopian, but I think also realistic
*  view is that the studios see a future in Hollywood that involves as little human contribution as
*  possible. And I think for, this is complex obviously, but I think for professionals working
*  in a field that is centered around telling human stories, if we find that fundamentally,
*  I don't think any writer is opposed to change, but we think that it's the approach that the studios
*  have obviously is geared towards profit, less towards telling, enriching human stories and
*  facing out an entire workforce. It's obviously something we want to prevent. We've seen a trend
*  and we've connected that with the emergence of these large language models and we can very easily
*  see how these studios would use that technology to continue that trend to a pretty logical endpoint.
*  Is this something that is happening now? Like are people, are there any examples of, you know,
*  shows that have been, that people have tried to kind of assign the creator role to an AI or just
*  not have one? So there's been some rumors and I'm not sure if they've been corroborated or not,
*  that right now many of these studios are, because obviously there is some copyright
*  law that I just don't think has been worked out at all yet on this. It's so cutting edge,
*  but what the studios sounds like they're doing is feeding works, literary works in the public domain
*  into, I think they may have their own proprietary models at this point and asking these models to
*  generate feature length scripts for books that are in the public domain. And they might be saying,
*  make, you know, make the Counts of Monte Cristo into a modern day female driven action thriller.
*  Go. Have you gone in and played around with this stuff? Like what has your kind of chat GPT,
*  you know, personal exploration looked like? Yeah, I've used it extensively. First, just as a lay
*  person, I just want to understand the technology as much as I can for non-working purposes, but I
*  have started to use it a fair amount in my own personal writing. I would say I use it almost as
*  a writer's assistant because I am, especially, you know, now during the strike, I'm working alone
*  from home. I find it's great at helping me organize, keep track of my ideas and use as a
*  sounding board that I sort of consider it to be like if I was employing somebody just out of college
*  and I wasn't asking them for pitches on ideas. I was just asking them to hear me, recite back
*  with clarity what they heard me say, hold on to certain ideas so that I can, you know, bring them
*  back at a moment's notice. So what I'm outlining a new pilot episode for a new concept of the
*  television show right now. And I will just talk to it about the characters, their relationship,
*  their dynamic, or say the outline of the episode. And I'll just sort of say to the model, you know,
*  keep this outline at hand. So if I want to make changes to it, you can just spit it back out to
*  me. And if I say, oh, actually, I don't want that thing to happen in Act 3, that then rippled into
*  Act 4, can you remove those two scenes and replace them with this and this? That's sort of how I'm
*  using it right now. And I would say it's been pretty useful and also more unreliable in some
*  ways that I wasn't expecting. But I've sort of drawn a moral line in that I'm not asking it for
*  pitches or ideas. That's me personally, I've sort of developed a code with myself.
*  But I've also asked it more on an experimental level to generate ideas, just to see what it's
*  capable of. And I found that almost without exception, it reverts to pretty cliche stuff,
*  even when I spent a lot of time trying to explain how novel concepts are arrived at. And
*  trying to coax it to come up with new stuff. It still feeds me super cliche ideas. So I don't
*  know if I'm missing out on anything novel by maintaining that personal code.
*  Yeah, interesting. Is that you're using, it sounds like chat GPT is kind of the main?
*  Yeah, GPT-4. Yeah. I will generate an outline for this pilot episode that I have, right?
*  Broken down into acts. And then under each act, I'll have maybe four or five major scenes, right?
*  And I'll type two or three sentences for each scene. And this will be maybe under a thousand
*  words. And I'll have this, I'll put this into the chat. And I'll say, keep this outline handy. And
*  anytime I type outline, spit this back exactly as I wrote it to me so I can make changes. And then
*  you can then make changes as I dictate. What I've been noticing, and first it was subtle,
*  and then it sort of started to like, you know, get this weird feedback loop. It would start spitting
*  me back the outline. And then it would make subtle changes or omissions. So it would like subtly
*  change the profession of my main character or forget a scene that I had put in there. I mean,
*  I understand that, for example, these things aren't great at doing math, right? At least right now.
*  Something that's lagging behind. It's interesting to me that you're asking it simply to just
*  forget to take exactly what I put in, maybe three exchanges earlier, and it's failing at that.
*  And it sort of actually added an extra headache for me because you go through nine or 10 or 12
*  iterations of the outline, and then you realize, wait a second, where's that scene that I had
*  imagined five hours ago that I sort of relied on this thing to keep track of? And now it's gone,
*  and now I have to scroll back up thousands and thousands of words. It diminishes how useful the
*  tool is for me. I'm still using it in this way, but it was just an interesting thing that I noticed
*  I was not expecting. Yeah. I wonder if there might be some techniques that could help you with that.
*  One of the really common ones is known as the format trick. And you basically sort of say,
*  use this format. And there are some other, you know, you can kind of, again, they're very flexible,
*  right? So you can kind of experiment and find your own, you know, format rhythm. But I tend to do
*  things like use this format, and then I'll have kind of deliberately sort of odd tags. Sometimes
*  I'll use kind of an XML, you know, HTML-like tag to be like, you know, script scene one,
*  you know, within brackets, and then kind of an end tag below that. And then kind of dressing that
*  up a little bit more, like, oddly structured, but telling it use this format. At a minimum,
*  I would think you should be able to get consistent structure back. Like, I would not expect that
*  you should see scenes, you know, getting dropped. What I would guess might be happening there is
*  also you could just be a little bit more explicit about some things. You know, you, I always also
*  recommend positive framing instead of negative framing. So sometimes people will say, like,
*  do not change the structure of the outline or whatever. And sometimes I think the later models
*  are getting better with this too, but definitely have seen in the past problem with negation, where,
*  you know, it's kind of the, I forget for the, don't think of the white rhino or whatever. And
*  then it's like, all you can think of is the white rhino. There's a little bit of that effect with
*  the, the model. So sometimes I recommend to people instead of saying, don't do X, like,
*  say in a positive way, what you do want it to do, like, always, you must always, you know, return
*  exactly the structure and may modify, you know, these aspects. I bet you can get over that hump
*  to at least get kind of the consistency of structure that you want back. Simple things too,
*  like might be interpreted a little differently than you mean them. So if you say like rewrite
*  this script or whatever, like exactly what it's, you know, you may be thinking in your head, like
*  a certain definition of rewrite, and it may have a little more expansive definition of rewrite. So
*  anyway, we can workshop this separately. I think maybe folks will find this interesting, but I bet
*  there is at least up to the point where you'd get the right number of scenes, you know, back.
*  I think you could get there. What's interesting is that all of us as writers have
*  voices of other writers in our heads. So when I'm writing something, I'm trying to,
*  whether it's consciously or not, I'm trying to kind of write like Jesse Armstrong, the creator
*  of Succession or Vince Gilligan, the creator of Breaking Bad. Like those people's voices are
*  definitely in my head. And obviously there is, it's an interesting question, do by invoking David
*  Ogilvy or by invoking Vince Gilligan and using it in the chat, in the chat, you prompt,
*  what does that artist owe, if anything, for their contribution to the voice that the model,
*  you know, has in its head? And we haven't litigated that yet. I'm sure you've talked
*  to some people like that, but it's another big question that I think a lot of writers,
*  especially the high profile ones are worried about, which is they've worked their entire
*  careers. They've been extremely lucky and they're extremely talented just to have their voice,
*  their unique voice, you know, automated. But I think the other scary thing is that
*  for the idea of new voices coming along, I'm not sure, you know, if we enter this near future where
*  most content, most written content for TV or films are written by or generated by a model,
*  I'm not sure we're going to see new voices come. I think we're going to see sort of this
*  endless whirlpool of regurgitation of what's already out there. So I think that's just a,
*  it's a fear and a unique question about who is owed what when you say write like David Ogilvy.
*  I don't know if you have a take on that. I don't feel like I have the final answer.
*  I do think it is definitely a fair question. You know, what definitely doesn't cut it in my mind
*  is a notion that is like, when you do hear this stuff, you'll hear people say, well,
*  people really do the same thing. You know, you kind of set a version of that, right? Like we all,
*  everything's a remix and you know, we're all taking inspiration from everywhere. And, you know,
*  so therefore it's no big deal if the AI does the same. I don't buy that argument at all, because
*  I think, you know, one of the most important things to keep in mind about these technologies
*  is that they are fundamentally alien. You know, they are not, they're not human. You know, they,
*  they do, many people go the other error on the other side of this too, and say like,
*  they don't understand anything. And I would push back on that and say, well, I think they actually
*  do understand things. They may not understand them in quite the same way that we do, but we are
*  starting to elucidate like the mechanisms of understanding, some of which turn out to be quite
*  weird, you know, in comparison to how we feel like we understand, but there is some understanding
*  there. But like, it's not, it doesn't follow from, in my mind at all, from this fact that
*  humans take inspiration from other humans that we therefore have to, you know, allow AIs to kind of
*  run wild and do whatever they want to do. You know, they're fundamentally different beasts. And
*  I don't think it, you know, it is at all obvious, you know, what the, what the rights, you know,
*  decisions around that should be. I do think it's really, it does get into, in my mind,
*  definitely much more gray area when you start to name specific people. Cause you're talking in an
*  agreement with studios, but then there's also the broader like societal question of, you know, all
*  the TikTok creators can go to chat GPT and ask for David Ogilvie and they can just put stuff out
*  there. And that, you know, nobody's even negotiating over that right now. Yeah. And I think there are
*  probably different thresholds for, and maybe these are arbitrary, but different thresholds
*  for different types of media, you know, and I would say, you know, it's interesting. I think
*  for, if you plugged in, you know, give me some ideas in the, in the voice of this person,
*  but you sort of made a contract with yourself that nothing that you get back is going to, is going to
*  see the outside world there. Whatever, even if it gives you some good ideas, you're going to then
*  filter those ideas through your own human prism. I think, I still think that there's something
*  morally okay with that. The idea for me, at least of taking the ideas that come straight from the
*  model, especially if you're asking for ideas based on other famous writers and then just
*  using that whole clock, there would just be something wrong to me about that. I do wonder,
*  you know, obviously we don't know how these things are going to, how they're going to get better in
*  terms of storytelling. And I wonder, you know, is there going to be a world where they get amazing,
*  but in different ways than human storytelling is? And I wonder if there's going to be sort of two
*  types of storytelling in the future, right? And we, maybe we find that it tells stories that are just
*  different and weird in a way that we never saw coming. And maybe there's a place for human
*  stories and AI stories, but we're not asking the AI to sort of create or masquerade as human
*  storytelling, but tell us stories that we never would have thought of. And as somebody, as a
*  creative, you know, at heart, I would love to see those stories. I don't necessarily want it to take
*  my job away. So I'm sort of talking through both sides of my mouth, but at that point, you're almost
*  verging into, you know, gaming, which is a completely legitimate and amazing form of
*  storytelling in itself. So I think that there are, there are delineations between different types of
*  storytelling. I do believe that there's something about singular fixed stories that are going to
*  remain powerful, right? People who read the same book or watch the same movie or television series
*  or listen to the same album and are able to discuss and bond over what that means to them
*  individually and, you know, collectively. I think that those, that type of fixed storytelling
*  should remain. And I think there's a real cultural power to stuff like that. I,
*  but of course, I think gaming is awesome. And I, I'm curious about, you know, there's a,
*  there's a thread by one of the former director of the Screen Actors Guild, and she wrote this long
*  thread about the studios wanting to create these basically choose your own adventure movies where
*  everyone has their own action movie built for them, where they are placed into, you know,
*  if they're into Fast and the Furious, they can be put into the driver's seat next to Vin Diesel and
*  the whole movie can be generated, bespoke in a moment's notice for them. And they get to see
*  themselves or whatever their son as the main character of Fast and the Furious. I could see
*  that just seeing where the technology is going. I can see that. I'm not sure that type of storytelling
*  has a ton of power behind it culturally. From my personal taste, it feels like a novelty
*  that I'm not sure people will, it feels like a ball ball to me. I could be totally wrong,
*  but I don't think that that has as much cultural power as, wow, we all watch the same movie.
*  We have different thoughts, but we can bond as humans over it. And don't we tell stories to
*  find solidarity as humans, right? Stories resonate, a single story like Lord of the Rings, right?
*  That resonates with millions, billions of people over, you know, generations. It's never, it doesn't
*  change. It doesn't make adjustments for whoever's reading or experiencing it, right? It is this fixed
*  story that we all see something that we recognize. So it's sort of trying to, it's an antidote to the
*  sort of loneliness of life. And I worry that if we're all just getting these, this sugar rush from
*  these personalized stories, it loses the sort of the core quality of art or storytelling.
*  There, I think, you know, if you look at the response to shows like Succession, which is
*  written with a bull writer's room over the course of a year, right? A traditional writer's room.
*  The response to the depth and the texture and the unpredictable nature and the humanity of a show
*  like that, that's written by multiple people over a significant period of time, doesn't compete with
*  these sort of shorter, faster shows that you're seeing on other platforms. And I can see that
*  that gulf growing, right? See people saying, what happened to the stories that we used to like,
*  that were, that felt real and not flat? So I think, you know, there's, I think lay people assume that
*  studios are incentivized to just find the best writing and create conditions that will tell the
*  best stories. It's just not the case. They don't, especially now, as they're all publicly traded,
*  most publicly traded companies, that's not paramount in what they're looking for. And I think just the
*  shift AI could accelerate that, where it's just about getting out content. And if we land on
*  something that's good or three-dimensional or moving, that's an afterthought. I think that's
*  the real fear is that we writers, we have this financial incentive, but there's also a big moral
*  thing here that maybe a lot of other unions don't have. We're trying to defend the sanctity of
*  of really good storytelling. And that's, it sounds a little, you know, woo woo, right? To say that we
*  have this moral element that we're fighting for. But I think we also accept that. That's a,
*  you know, we accept that mantle, at least I do. If there were a universal basic income, and we had
*  decoupled the right to eat and, you know, and to have like basic needs met from jobs, how would
*  that change your thinking on this, if at all? I'm all for decoupling those things. So if you told me
*  that in 10 years we'll be at that place, I might still be telling stories and making films with my
*  friends and probably a lot easier to do that. I think the question is, are we going to make it
*  through to that point? Or are we going to, yeah, so I'm a big fan of the book, Fully Automated
*  Luxury Communism, that I'm sure you've read. Aaron Bostani, I think is the name of the author. And
*  it's the central question of that book is, we can imagine that future. It's easy to imagine a future
*  where those things are decoupled. What's a little harder to imagine is making it through, you know,
*  late stage capitalism, making it through these technologies, reaching the point where they can
*  automate lots of jobs. But we don't reach that real post-scarcity where the decoupling happens
*  because of this manipulated or artificial scarcity so that people who control the technology
*  can be enriched by it, right? But I'm all for making it through that gauntlet. I just don't
*  know if we will. And so I think to be conservative or cautious as a guild, we have to react
*  as if that world is not going to exist. But yes, I mean, if that world does exist, I would happily
*  give up being paid to write stories. And the idea of having a job and making money from writing a
*  story, if I could trade that for everyone having a basic income and a high standard of living,
*  yeah, give me that over my stupid writing job for sure.
*  Yeah, that's a great utopian vision, perhaps for us to end on the they're in short supply.
*  Maybe that's one other thing I could leave you with is I think a positive vision for the future
*  is maybe the thing that is most needed today. The technology is coming online fast.
*  The upside potential of that, in my mind, is not just clear but clearly transformative.
*  And we've got dystopian stories and scenarios in abundance, but very few compelling articulations
*  of what a genuine positive future might be. And arguably no better group to try to solve that
*  problem of scarcity for us than the writers. So if you want to take that challenge on,
*  I'm looking for inspiring visions of the future right now.
*  I will say we are a cynical bunch and we've only become a little more cynical during these
*  last three weeks, but we'll try to accept that challenge.
*  Garret Schaub, thank you for being part of the cognitive revolution.
*  Thank you so much for having me.
*  Omniki uses generative AI to enable you to launch hundreds of thousands of ad iterations that
*  actually work customized across all platforms with a click of a button.
*  I believe in Omniki so much that I invested in it and I recommend you use it too.
*  Use Cogrev to get a 10% discount.
