---
Date Generated: May 30, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 261s
Video Keywords: ['healthcare', 'machine learning', 'AI']
Video Views: 13936
Video Rating: None
---

# When Machine Learning Becomes AI
**a16z Bio:** [July 28, 2017](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=knazJ9_mRzE)
*  So what is machine learning?
*  Well, you know, we've all heard the term, but even amongst the experts, it can mean
*  a lot of different things.
*  I gave you a bunch of data with an X axis and Y axis.
*  This could be anything like a patient's amount of cholesterol and the probability that they'll
*  get heart disease.
*  The simplest form of machine learning is something we would call curve fitting, where you might
*  be able to come up with a model, like a straight line that you put between these curves such
*  that if you had a new patient with a new value of cholesterol that you'd never seen before,
*  you can therefore determine what the impact would be, whether it be low or high.
*  This form of machine learning is very old and some people might not even call it machine
*  learning, might call it curve fitting or regression.
*  But this and more sophisticated versions of this are at the heart of so many advances
*  in data science right now, because just understanding a huge sea of data is itself a challenge.
*  But there's been a sea change in machine learning in that what we're seeing now is a new generation
*  of machine learning algorithms.
*  Here we needed to know what X and Y are.
*  We needed to know that cholesterol was important for heart disease.
*  That's a determining factor that somewhere a human being figured out and then could put
*  this into machine learning.
*  What if you just don't know?
*  What if you need to figure out what these features are?
*  This is at the heart of modern machine learning, where the computer not just builds a model
*  of what's going on, but actually itself learns the features.
*  For example, if we want to understand features in DNA, the traditional way is that you'd
*  have researchers study the particular gene or part of a gene in detail.
*  So far, advances we've seen in machine learning have come from the fact that these features
*  could be learned.
*  That you could have a genomic sequence of DNA with a series of A, Gs, Cs, and Ts.
*  And you may never have seen the sequence before, but by having enough sets of data, without
*  understanding the fundamental nature of the gene involved, we can still infer predictions
*  for higher level effects.
*  Effects such as whether this person has cancer and even in particular, what stage of cancer.
*  If we don't know the features, we have to learn them or infer them.
*  One of the key areas right now that's been very powerful is to take machine learning
*  models and stack them on top of each other in a deep way.
*  Where the lowest level models would take these direct symbols in the DNA bases, the fundamental
*  parts of biology, and then we'd build models on top of that.
*  And as you get up higher and higher in this deep hierarchy, a motif from parts of patterns
*  of sequences can be aggregated into combinations of motifs, which could be aggregated into
*  the key parts that give us the signal that this person has cancer or this person doesn't.
*  This is really only possible due to two advances.
*  First is we finally have enough compute power that we can train these types of models as
*  such that they can learn.
*  And the second advance is that we finally have enough data such that we can train these
*  models in a very rich way, such that they can be predicted with high accuracy.
*  So when we compare old school machine learning to the newer techniques, what we're seeing
*  is the difference where before these features had to come from a human intelligence.
*  A person had to figure out this causal connection and then these models could basically give
*  quantitative predictions of its relevance.
*  What is different now is that instead of the human intelligence figuring out what are the
*  salient details, we have computers being able to figure out these features and actually
*  identifying features that human beings would never come up with.
*  Through that we're able to make much more accurate predictions, to be able to have more
*  accurate diagnostics, to be able to save lives such as an early cancer detection.
*  From a data science driven by human features, we're starting to see computational features
*  driving this much more towards an artificial intelligence, where computers are figuring
*  out the key salient elements.
*  And we expect to see more of this push more and more into this sort of sense of artificial
*  intelligence of the computer learning in ways and frankly discovering things about biology
*  that we never knew.
