---
Date Generated: May 30, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 1334s
Video Keywords: ['healthcare', 'disruption', 'innovation']
Video Views: 14980
Video Rating: None
---

# Challenges in Healthcare Innovation
**a16z Bio:** [December 15, 2017](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Np3QGECvl9A)
*  Let's talk about the challenges that we see in healthcare, and let's talk a little bit
*  about where we can see room for improvement and disruption.
*  So imagine for a second if we could begin to design our medicines as opposed to just
*  discover them.
*  What would happen if we could develop a fundamental understanding of what drives disease?
*  Can we transform the way we ensure that medicines are safe and effective?
*  And perhaps most importantly, are there ways to accelerate how we take innovations from
*  the lab bench all the way to the patient bedside?
*  If we could do these things, imagine the impact that we could have on our healthcare system.
*  So as we all know, healthcare is an enormous and growing part of our economy.
*  Today it accounts for about 20% of our GDP, and that number is going to double over the
*  course of the next three decades.
*  This is a trillion dollar challenge that's ripe for disruption.
*  And we're already seeing ways that software is eating healthcare in a broad range of
*  verticals from data analytics to patient engagement, and even insurance and other services.
*  And we also know that the large incumbents are recognizing the importance of this space.
*  Increasingly Apple is going to make health a center use case for the Apple Watch.
*  Facebook is looking for ways to use the power of social networks to help us identify and
*  recruit patients for clinical trials.
*  And Google is making a broad range of investments across healthcare and life sciences.
*  As we move beyond software, we're at this point where we're seeing this incredible convergence
*  between biology, computer science, and engineering.
*  And it's this convergence that's going to give us broad new superpowers to understand
*  and manipulate biology.
*  Essentially we're finding ourselves at the cusp of being able to shift biology from being
*  primarily an experimental science to an engineered discipline.
*  And that's going to have major impacts across the healthcare industry.
*  So let's take the case of medicine, for example.
*  The US biopharmaceutical industry spends about $75 billion every single year in research
*  and development.
*  And they're making those investments in R&D to chase very large markets.
*  The market for drug sales in the United States alone is about a half a trillion dollars annually.
*  But despite that large market, most diseases still have incredible unmet medical needs.
*  So the bottom line is that we need better technologies to help us diagnose, treat, and
*  manage most diseases.
*  But here's the curious thing.
*  Drug development, in a lot of ways, is the antithesis of what we've experienced in technology.
*  We actually suffer from something we call E-rooms law in this space.
*  E-rooms is just more spelled backwards, where we've actually seen the cost of drug discovery
*  and development increase exponentially over the last several decades.
*  So what accounts for this?
*  What accounts for the E-rooms phenomenon?
*  Why is making medicines such a long and expensive and risky process?
*  Well, first of all, it's because you have to make a fundamental discovery that is meaningful
*  for understanding and managing disease.
*  And once you make that discovery, you have to prove that it's going to be safe and effective
*  in human beings.
*  And once you do that, you have to convince the people that matter to use your innovation.
*  And so when you add all of this up, it takes an incredible $2.5 billion and 10 to 15 years
*  of investment to get the average drug to market when you account for all of the failures along
*  the way.
*  So to put this in context, venture capital, our business is considered a risky business.
*  We're hoping one in 10 of our investments becomes a hit.
*  In this world, it's one in 10,000 becomes a product.
*  And assuming you can even get a drug discovered, the path to getting that drug or a diagnostic
*  to a patient historically has been a very challenging one.
*  There are lots of stakeholders involved.
*  As we already alluded to, your discovery has to go through a regulator.
*  The regulator has to allow you to commercialize a drug.
*  And usually the way we do that is by proving that it's safe and effective, certainly in
*  the case of medicines.
*  So once you've gotten through that hoop, you still have to convince payers that there's
*  fundamental value here that's worth paying for.
*  And once you've gone through that, you've got to ensure you work with partners across
*  the channel, whether they're distributors or pharmacy benefit managers and ultimately
*  pharmacies to make sure in the case of drugs that your drug gets to where it needs to go.
*  And once you've done that, you've got to educate the providers, whether it's doctors or the
*  healthcare systems or the hospital systems, that there's a benefit here for your patients.
*  So as you can see, there's a lot of challenges getting any drug to a patient.
*  And so if you think about it, if the enterprise is B2B and consumers B2C, then the traditional
*  biopharma is B2B to the R2C to P2C to C. So it's complicated.
*  Now this is a fundamental question we always ask ourselves.
*  Why is innovation in healthcare so hard?
*  Ben Horowitz wrote this incredibly insightful book about the trials and the tribulations
*  of innovation and entrepreneurship and sales.
*  And I would say to Ben, with all due respect, given the unique challenges that we experience
*  in the healthcare space, I think we deserve a revised edition of this book.
*  So let's talk about some really hard things.
*  Discovery.
*  It's hard.
*  We see this every day.
*  But why?
*  Why is it so hard?
*  What's so hard about making a new medicine?
*  Well, the first thing is, this is going to sound pretty obvious, but you actually have
*  to understand what outcome you're trying to achieve.
*  What are you trying to solve for in terms of deriving a benefit for a patient?
*  Assuming you know that, you have to have a pretty good understanding of what the underlying
*  disease biology is that's going to enable you to achieve that patient benefit.
*  And assuming you know that, you need to have a very good idea of where specifically you're
*  going to target to get that desired outcome.
*  And assuming you know that, you've got to be pretty comfortable that you're going to
*  make a medicine that will allow you to hit that target effectively.
*  So let's take two examples of diseases just to put some of this in context.
*  Sickle cell anemia.
*  Sickle cell is an inherited disease that results in horrible painful crises for patients.
*  So the benefit that you're trying to achieve for them is pretty well known.
*  We also know why these patients have painful crises, because they have an error in their
*  hemoglobin gene that causes their cells to fold or sickle.
*  That's the cause of the painful crisis.
*  So because we understand that, we also know that the best way to address that is to find
*  ways to either repair or replace the faulty hemoglobin.
*  And because we understand the disease at these fundamental layers, there are many groups
*  and scientists and companies that are actually focused on coming up with a medicine for sickle
*  that will probably be gene therapy based.
*  And so if I had to bet, I would bet that in the next 10 years, we will have solved sickle
*  cell anemia, much like we've solved cystic fibrosis that had a very similar profile in
*  terms of what we understood about the disease.
*  But now let's take another disease.
*  Let's look at Alzheimer's.
*  This is an area that has incredible unmet medical need, that has devastating impacts
*  on families, devastating impact on society, and devastating impacts on our economy.
*  And so as a result, it's not surprising that lots of people have looked to find ways to
*  develop new drugs for this horrible, horrible disease.
*  But the problem is we don't fundamentally understand much about Alzheimer's disease.
*  We don't really understand what benefit we're trying to look for.
*  Are we trying to reverse the disease, stop progression?
*  Are we trying to improve memory recall?
*  Are we trying to improve daily function?
*  We also don't know what causes the disease.
*  Is it plaques in the brain?
*  Is it these neural tangles?
*  Or are those just symptoms of some other underlying cause?
*  And because we don't know that, we obviously don't know what to target.
*  So it's not surprising that the various medicines that have come through over the last several
*  decades have had failures.
*  And in fact, just a few months ago, we had a very high profile failure with Axivan that
*  had a failure in phase three trial after years and years and years of development and hundreds
*  of millions of dollars invested.
*  And it's not that these companies don't know what they're doing.
*  It's that we don't know what Alzheimer's is doing.
*  And that's what makes discovery so hard.
*  So the real truth is the vast majority of drugs fail and are found ineffective or toxic
*  because we don't understand the underlying disease biology.
*  And unfortunately, even when drugs are approved and are found to be effective, there's usually
*  a fair bit amount of luck or serendipity involved.
*  But why are we still so bad at this?
*  What happened to all of these advances that we're going to bring cures closer?
*  And if you've been following this space for a very long time, you've no doubt seen the
*  breathless headlines that come where Discovery X is going to cure disease Y, where the next
*  new thing is our new hope.
*  But unfortunately, more often than not, not so much.
*  In fact, more often than not in our world, we find that when expectation meets reality,
*  we've been time and time again disappointed.
*  So what's different this time?
*  This time is different for two fundamental reasons.
*  One, we now have an unprecedented ability to understand biology at a very foundational level.
*  And there have been three primary factors that are really accelerating our ability here.
*  One is we can now do biology at incredible speed and scale.
*  Just look at what's happened in the genomics industry in terms of the ability to sequence
*  a genome better, faster and cheaper.
*  We can also now increasingly understand biology at the fundamental unit of disease.
*  So scientists at the Broad Institute at Harvard and MIT, they've created an atlas of various
*  different cell types so we can understand how different cells function and dysfunction.
*  So understanding disease at a single cell resolution is transformative for our ability
*  to understand disease biology.
*  And thirdly, all of this technology generates incredible amounts of complex data.
*  And most of it is simply beyond our human mind.
*  And so the ability to use artificial intelligence and machine learning is actually allowing
*  us to derive real fundamental insights from all of this data that we're generating.
*  And these new powerful tools and platforms are also driving our ability to fundamentally
*  rethink how we can engineer biology.
*  And so we're seeing this happening at many levels as well.
*  So we're seeing gene therapies emerging from our ability to edit and write and print DNA.
*  We're seeing new curative treatments for diseases like cancer because of our ability to engineer cells.
*  And because we can now engineer biology, we can develop and design entire human biological systems.
*  So let's put this a little bit in context.
*  If you go back 50 years ago, the vast majority of our drugs were chemicals.
*  And this was known as the era of the small molecule medicine.
*  If you fast forward to 25 years ago, the emergence of the biotechnology industry gave us the
*  ability to coax organisms to make proteins for us.
*  And as a result, seven of the top 10 selling drugs today are protein-based drugs.
*  This is the era of the large molecule medicine.
*  Flash forward to just where we're standing right now.
*  We've just seen recent approvals for cell therapies, for gene therapies, and we've firmly
*  entered the era of the living medicine, where the cell, where the gene is the therapeutic.
*  So what's on the horizon?
*  Well, if we get really good at understanding biology and we get really good at engineering biology,
*  on the horizon, we have the ability to begin to program cells so that we can imbue them with logic.
*  So we can take a cell and have it understand how to find disease, what to do when it encounters disease,
*  and how to terminate itself once it's beat the disease.
*  So we are on the cusp of not having not only living medicines, but intelligent medicines.
*  So this is an extraordinary advancement.
*  But it doesn't change the fact that we still need to rethink how we prove that these medicines
*  are safe and effective.
*  So testing continues to be very difficult.
*  So let's go through the paradigm really quickly.
*  So the first thing we do when we want to test if a drug is safe or effective is we ask the
*  question, can this work?
*  And up until now, for the most part, the way we determine if something can work is we test
*  it in mice and in cells sitting in a petri dish.
*  And once we've gotten some comfort that it can work, we, of course, have to ask the question
*  if it, in fact, does work.
*  And the way we do this is by recruiting human volunteers to determine if a drug is, in fact,
*  safe and effective when tested in human beings.
*  So how has this paradigm played out for us?
*  For the most part, not very well.
*  So unfortunately, the story of biotech, the story of pharmaceuticals, is a story of failing
*  big and failing late.
*  Up to 40% of drugs that go through a phase three trial fail.
*  40%.
*  This is after 10 years, a decade, and hundreds of millions of dollars invested.
*  And usually they fail because they don't work or they're toxic.
*  So we really don't understand what we're doing when we go into clinical trials for the most
*  part.
*  Ideally, we would shift this paradigm.
*  We would make this look much more tech-like, where we could actually reduce the risk of
*  failure predictably over time and increase our investment in a specific solution as we
*  get more comfortable that risk has been reduced.
*  But what would that paradigm actually look like?
*  Well, the first thing we'd need to do is change the way we think about preclinical testing.
*  It turns out that mice and petri dishes are not the best ways to figure out if something's
*  going to work in a human being.
*  So what if we could actually test drugs in humans before we test them in humans?
*  What you're looking at here is an engineered lung on a chip.
*  What engineers have done here is they've taken the cells that form the structure and function
*  of a lung and put them in a micro-engineered environment.
*  This chip breathes like a regular lung, oxygenates blood like a regular lung, and in fact under
*  a microscope looks nearly identical to human lung tissue.
*  And so you can test drugs here to see if they're having any damage in lungs.
*  And scientists are developing other models, other chips for other organs.
*  So we're not too far from being at a time and place where we have an entire human being
*  or human system on a chip.
*  So this technology is really going to give us the power to actually have preclinical
*  testing be predictive.
*  But that doesn't change the fact that we're still going to have to test drugs in human
*  beings.
*  But we have three or four things going for us here that are going to help us disrupt
*  this paradigm as well.
*  The first one is powerful new medicines are emerging that are having outsized impact in
*  our ability to impact disease.
*  And when you combine that with the fact that we're on the precipice of being able to have
*  more predictive preclinical testing models and you combine that with the fact that as
*  we understand disease biology more fundamentally, we're going to get much better at predicting
*  who will or won't respond to a clinical trial, we're entering the era of really effective
*  high signal to noise trials where excellent drugs reveal themselves early and hopefully
*  where drugs that won't work are filtered out early as well.
*  And we're also getting a very big assist from the entire technology industry.
*  So Facebook, for example, as I mentioned earlier, is using their social network to help us identify
*  and recruit patients for clinical trials.
*  And in fact, they did a pilot project with the Michael J. Fox Foundation where they were
*  able to reduce the cost and time associated with finding volunteers by 96%.
*  96%.
*  And the cost to enroll and find patients for clinical trials is one of the biggest drivers
*  of timelines and cost associated with drug development.
*  So this is going to have a very fundamental impact in how we think about clinical trials.
*  So even assuming we improve that, go to market is still hard, as we talked about at the beginning.
*  Now the good news is that not every innovation that emerges from this convergence between
*  biology and computer science and engineering necessarily needs to be a drug or a diagnostic.
*  In fact, a lot of these powerful tools that emerge have a very large home market in terms
*  of the $75 billion annual spend that happens in R&D.
*  And perhaps the most illustrative example of the potential of these kinds of companies
*  is Illumina.
*  Illumina essentially invented next generation sequencing, became the dominant force in it,
*  and has created a $30 billion market cap company as a result.
*  And every other logo on this slide has fundamentally changed the way we engineer a slice of R&D,
*  whether it's mRNA or DNA synthesis or monoclonal antibodies, and as a result have been rewarded
*  with incredible valuations and incredible opportunities to partner with pharmaceutical
*  players in the R&D industry.
*  And for those companies that are looking to develop transformative medicines or transformative
*  diagnostics, we also see countless examples of new modalities emerging.
*  We've also seen in the news how Kite Pharma and Spark Therapeutics are bringing us cell
*  therapies and gene therapies.
*  They're now available for patients.
*  And so this is already happening.
*  And as a result, this question of regulatory risk is largely being addressed by more powerful
*  medicines.
*  In fact, people tend to think that FDA risk is this huge roadblock to getting a drug approved.
*  But FDA risk or regulatory risk is really just another way of saying scientific risk,
*  we're going to conduct an experiment and we are not quite sure what's going to happen.
*  In some ways, it's like blaming the referee when your team loses a game.
*  And I think that's what's been happening.
*  I'm a Miami Dolphins fan, so I totally understand that instinct.
*  But it's essentially what's been happening.
*  But if we look at the scoreboard of what's happening as these new therapies emerge, the
*  FDA has become an incredible ally for the industry.
*  This year, we'll see more generics approved.
*  This year, we saw the first gene therapy approved.
*  We saw the first cell therapy approved.
*  We saw the first digital therapeutic approved.
*  Just this week, I saw that there's a digital pill approved that has a sensor on it so doctors
*  can ensure that there's compliance.
*  That's the first of its kind, also approved.
*  And so we're seeing more and more wins like this happening from the regulatory body.
*  So I think, if anything, the FDA has become an incredible collaborator to industry.
*  What about payers?
*  Well, same thing.
*  Historically, the big question is, well, who's going to pay for this?
*  Payers, payers are looking to cut costs.
*  But the reality is payers aren't cost cutters.
*  They're assessors of value.
*  And if you have transformative drugs or if you can transform how we think about diagnosing
*  and screening disease, the payers are willing to pay for that value.
*  In fact, there is a new drug therapy that's referred to in this top headline for helping
*  reverse an inherited form of blindness.
*  If you can cure blindness, payers are willing to pay for that value.
*  I had a conversation with the head of a large New England based payer network.
*  And he said, well, the headline's a bit misleading because it says it's a million dollar drug.
*  No, it's for blindness.
*  It's a million dollars per eye.
*  And most people have two.
*  So this is a $2 million drug.
*  But we'll still pay for it.
*  Why?
*  Because it works.
*  What about the channel?
*  What about the distributors?
*  This historically has been a space that has captured a significant amount of margin across
*  the value chain.
*  And for various reasons.
*  Drugs are complex.
*  There's a complex supply chain, et cetera, et cetera.
*  But what's also true is, as Jeff Bezos famously said, when there's big margin, there's opportunity.
*  And that hasn't escaped Amazon.
*  So Amazon is looking to find ways to disrupt this space.
*  So watch this space.
*  I'm sure interesting things will happen.
*  And finally, providers.
*  Providers are, of course, the front line for making sure patients are treated well and
*  diseases managed and detected early and so on and so on.
*  And providers, for the most part, are very similar to payers.
*  They're looking for ways to ensure that their patients derive value from new therapies or
*  derive value from new diagnostics.
*  And in fact, as there's a shift to value takes place, the ability to emerge with powerful
*  new tools and technologies is very firmly aligned with that in terms of providing customized,
*  safe, transformative care for patients.
*  And ultimately, the patient is, of course, the beneficiary of all of this innovation.
*  And we're finally getting to the point where innovation cycles are happening more quickly.
*  We're seeing time from innovation, bench top to bedside accelerate.
*  We're seeing that finally we're getting the promise of precision medicine where the right
*  therapy is going to the right patient at the right time, at the right dose.
*  And we're also seeing that as we understand disease biology more fundamentally and as
*  there's a shift to value based care, that the ability to use prevention as a form of
*  therapy is finally becoming a reality.
*  And so really for the first time, we're seeing alignment across the entire value chain.
*  And this is a very, very exciting time to be in healthcare as a result.
*  But what's also very exciting is that bio is not an industry in and of itself.
*  It's primarily thought of as a healthcare industry, but it's increasingly becoming
*  a part of every industry.
*  We're already seeing this convergence of biology and computer science and engineering impacting
*  industries as diverse as food, what appeals trying to do to disrupt food waste, to consumer
*  products.
*  Bolt threads and modern meadows are actually using bacteria and other organisms to make
*  silk and leather for us to what's been happening in energy.
*  And companies like Asimov are rethinking how we can design cells to have it impact a broad
*  range of industries that are based on manufacturing.
*  So we're living at this incredible point in time where biology is going to look a lot
*  like information technology and that it's going to be able to tackle and transform and
*  perhaps even disrupt multiple industries.
*  And in some ways, biology is having us rethink information technology itself.
*  So what you're seeing here on the left is Edward Muybridge's famous set of photographs
*  of a galloping horse.
*  On the right, what scientists were able to do is they were able to take this video, the
*  pixels from this video, and using CRISPR can coax a bacterial cell to ingest the information
*  and store it in its DNA.
*  And on the right, what you're seeing is scientists' ability to retrieve that video from the cells
*  and replay it.
*  And so in some ways, we've come full circle.
*  Biology is the original information technology.
*  DNA is our software.
*  Cells are our original hardware.
*  And so I'm going to leave you here with this very curious case of biology eating software.
