---
Date Generated: May 30, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 791s
Video Keywords: []
Video Views: 1965
Video Rating: None
---

# On Machine Learning in Medicine and More
**a16z Bio:** [July 15, 2017](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UfHerP2b9zU)
*  So I'm delighted to be joined today by Vijay Pandey, a general partner at Andreessen Horowitz.
*  Vijay joined the firm full-time as a general partner last year to manage the new bio-phones
*  that Andreessen Horowitz raised.
*  So I'm interested, Vijay, what's a biotech guy like you who has had a long and distinguished
*  career on the academic side doing joining forces with Marc Andreessen, who basically
*  invented the internet browser.
*  It seems an unlikely combination.
*  Yeah, it's a natural question to think about what is the role of bio in this space.
*  And first off, I want to emphasize that we really are doing something that I think is
*  distinct from biotech.
*  Biotech has a lot of things I don't like.
*  It has a lot of risk.
*  It has a requirement of a lot of money before you get to some answer, and the answer is
*  very stochastic.
*  What I love about software is that at software we can de-risk at every stage of investment,
*  and we can see greater and greater revenue and help the company get bigger and bigger.
*  And so the opportunity here is really to take the software approach and see where software,
*  machine learning, compute can have impacts in biology.
*  And this is something I'm very familiar with.
*  So I founded the Folding Home Distributed Computing Project in 2000, and this is something
*  where we were running in web browsers to do biology.
*  What we could do 15 years ago required almost all the computers on the planet.
*  Now that's something that we can do easily on something like Amazon.
*  So Vijay, the sectors that you've mentioned there, are some of those more relevant for
*  venture funding than others?
*  So where are you spending your time specifically at the minute?
*  Yeah, absolutely.
*  So I think the areas that we've talked about are the areas digital therapeutics, cloud
*  biology and computational medicine.
*  And let me take them each one by one really briefly.
*  So the area of digital therapeutics lies in the fact that for many areas, such as type
*  anxiety, depression, PTSD, I think our go-to for a cure for this is a pill.
*  But actually these are behavioral problems, and it's much more natural to have a behavioral
*  solution for this from the point of view of toxicity, but even just from the point of
*  view of efficacy.
*  And the amazing thing is that there are existing behavioral therapies.
*  They just don't scale.
*  And so what digital therapeutics do is that they take these existing behavioral therapies
*  and they let them scale from tens of people to tens of millions of people.
*  And Imada Health is a great example of this.
*  A second area we talked about is computational medicine, and this is, for example, applying
*  machine learning and medicine broadly.
*  And this is where we're already seeing advances in this in the area of clinical tests.
*  So a company like Freenome will use machine learning and deep learning with genomics to
*  be able to tell whether you have cancer early enough, such that the cure rate, success rate
*  could be 80%, 100%.
*  The area of cloud biology is still very nascent, and what we're seeing is that companies are
*  trying to take advantage of it or build it inside.
*  It's very, very reminiscent of the early days of Google, where Google built their own data
*  centers with their own machines, and that later led to AWS.
*  And so some companies are building internally, and we're looking at investing those companies
*  for various applications.
*  Other ones are providing to others.
*  And so that market is very early, but what we're seeing is that the ability to make biology
*  look like programming.
*  And I say look like programming, really it's literally programming.
*  You write a program and it gets done.
*  And that is actually already having impact as well.
*  We've seen a number of VCs invest in healthcare technology over the last five or ten years,
*  and the results have been fine, but they haven't been outstanding.
*  What do you think is different today?
*  Why is the time right now for this sort of approach?
*  Yeah, I think we've talked about the machine learning aspect, and I think the machine learning
*  aspect really is what makes today different.
*  But it's not just that.
*  The fact that mobile is here also makes a difference.
*  So for instance, a company like Omada, which is one of our investments, heavily uses mobile
*  in the area of behavioural therapies to help people avoid getting type 2 diabetes.
*  And having that intrinsic network is just such a fundamentally different world than
*  say five or ten years ago.
*  So long term VG, how do you think this impacts the way that healthcare is going to be delivered
*  and the sort of healthcare research that happens over the next five to ten years?
*  What is different in managing something like diabetes today is that there are programmes
*  for all these behavioural issues, whether it's type 2 diabetes or anxiety or PTSD.
*  And the intriguing thing is these programmes work, often using things like cognitive behavioural
*  therapy.
*  The challenge is that they're often sitting in universities and they serve maybe ten or
*  fifty people, and they cost maybe $5,000.
*  And compute can allow these programmes to scale, that there can still be human element
*  with human coaches, but the coaching can be handled in a much more efficient way and in
*  a much better matched way.
*  In addition to curricula, that would be online, as well as monitoring and data analytics to
*  see how patients are doing and how they're responding to various things.
*  And so it's really not any one thing there, but it's a combination of data science and
*  mobile and leveraging existing therapies and technologies to be able to just do it bigger.
*  So VG, this feels like a really multidisciplinary approach, taking the best bits of technology
*  and the best bits of life science.
*  Where are the entrepreneurs coming from?
*  Are they coming from a traditional tech background, a traditional life sciences background, or
*  is it a real sort of combination of the two areas?
*  I think this is a particularly important issue, that we're seeing a new brand of entrepreneur.
*  An entrepreneur that is not just the...
*  Often we would see before the A plus team would have the A plus biologist or doctor
*  and the A plus computer scientist.
*  And what we're seeing now is this individual founder that can do both.
*  So a great example of this is the Freenome co-founder, Gabe, who has a PhD in biology.
*  And I asked him what deep learning code he's using, as of all the many variances, I'm
*  using the one I wrote.
*  And his ability to go deep into the computer science and the biology has offered him technological
*  insights that just wouldn't be there, because when you have it in two separate people, there's
*  what Donald Wormswell would call the unknown unknowns.
*  They don't know what the other person doesn't know and what they need to know to inform
*  them.
*  If someone's doing everything, he can, in a computer science sense, go close to the
*  metal on the genomic sense.
*  And that's an opportunity that really is relatively new.
*  And that's another key part of this, is that these founders are emerging.
*  And I would say all of the investments I've made have founders of this character, that
*  I could have a deep discussion with them in the computer science as well as the biology.
*  And that will create this culture within the company.
*  And I think that's a unique opportunity that we only have today.
*  The healthcare industry itself is clearly a massive industry.
*  There's a huge amount of capital every year that gets spent in there.
*  I'm assuming there's a lot of vested interests in that industry that want to keep the industry
*  the way it is, because they're doing very nicely out of it.
*  How have you found coming in trying to disrupt a sector like that?
*  Yeah, I think there's challenges, because you have to work within the system.
*  So to make an analogy, it probably would be a lot easier for self-driving cars to exist
*  if we could get rid of all the roads or add a whole new set of roads that are just for
*  self-driving cars with no people on it and with sensors and all these things.
*  That would work.
*  And we could have self-driving cars probably today, except think about what a whole new
*  road system would cost.
*  I mean, it would be trillions of dollars.
*  Similarly, we could toss out the healthcare system and maybe start fresh.
*  And that would be an intriguing sort of thought discussion.
*  But in reality, we can't do that either.
*  And so what we're going to see is people working within the system.
*  So let's say even though there's machine learning at the heart, it's a clinical test.
*  Your doctor orders the test and gets results.
*  And from the doctor perspective, it's very much like anything else.
*  Or it's a prescribed therapy.
*  Instead of being a drug, it is something like a model, a so-called digital therapeutic.
*  But it's within the system.
*  And I think the system has seen innovation in some ways.
*  You think about like Genentech in the early days of biologics.
*  In the early days there, people may have said a protein can't be a drug.
*  But now that's something that's well recognized.
*  I think some people might say software can't be a drug.
*  But similarly, I think, and certainly there was a revolution then.
*  I think we're seeing that revolution now and there's similar opportunities.
*  What else do you think are the main challenges that either you or your portfolio companies
*  are going to face as you look to develop this investment thesis?
*  One of the things that will be different here is that I think we'll have to work with regulatory
*  agencies more than maybe some.
*  So with that said, companies like Airbnb and Lyft certainly have regulatory issues
*  as well.
*  One of the things that I feel is that people often think regulation is a challenge.
*  And in some ways it is, but it's also a huge opportunity.
*  In that, especially in this new space, you can work with regulators and get there first.
*  You can actually have an opportunity where you can help define what the best practices
*  are.
*  And that can build big companies by building barriers to entry.
*  Now of course, you have to have the goods.
*  You have to have the highly accurate test and something that really deserves that high
*  level.
*  But with that, that can be a huge advantage for these companies.
*  And there's basically things like this.
*  A lot of people view certain challenges of incumbents or regulatory, but these are huge
*  opportunities in terms of barrier to entry or M&A or other acquisition possibilities
*  that the partnerships at the end.
*  I think part of the challenge then will be is how to view what people might think as
*  challenges but really as opportunities.
*  How do you think about exits for companies in these areas?
*  Is it likely that they're going to be acquired by the traditional technology companies, by
*  the traditional life science companies?
*  And how do you think the IPO market is going to react?
*  Yeah, you could take a company like Omada, which has this therapy for prediabetics, or
*  a company like Freenome, which has the cancer therapy.
*  I could see a Pfizer buying Omada and maybe coupling with a drug or maybe not.
*  I could see Google buying a company like Omada.
*  I could see Freenome being bought either by a therapeutics company that wants a diagnostic
*  or by, let's say, a sequencing company that sees the value of this.
*  I think the intriguing thing here now is that the M&A possibilities are very broad, especially
*  if you look at the big incumbents on the software side, Google being a great example.
*  If you look at the alphabet restructuring, it puts Verily and Calico and these other
*  elements that are very much medical-centric much more in the forefront.
*  The search and the core business is just another one of those verticals.
*  And so I think we'll see a lot of interesting opportunities from there as well.
*  One of the things we've seen with traditional life science investing, when we look at our
*  database, is that there's very much a limit on the sort of multiples that you can achieve
*  on a single investment.
*  The best we see consistently is around the 10X.
*  And it's very difficult to make it work at a fund level, given the loss ratio that you
*  have there.
*  Do you think that the multiples that you're targeting here are going to look like traditional
*  life science multiples?
*  Or do you think they're going to look more like technology multiples, which can be 100X,
*  even 1000X if everything goes right?
*  The return multiples in this space, I think, will look like software multiples because
*  these are software companies.
*  These are companies that have software in their heart.
*  They have high margins.
*  They have all the things we like about software.
*  We de-risk them the way we would de-risk software companies.
*  They really are software companies in this new space.
*  What surprised you about being a VC, Vijay?
*  Actually, I had the expectation that it would be similar to what I've done before.
*  And maybe one of the bigger surprises is just how similar it is.
*  And that in the past, either when starting up a company or in managing things at Stanford,
*  my goals there were to find the very best people, fund them, and then help them and
*  mentor them and work with them for a big picture strategy to do grand things.
*  And that's basically what I'm doing now.
*  In some ways, it's the same people.
*  It's the 20-something, 30-somethings at Stanford or something like that.
*  So it's been very enjoyable.
*  And the big surprise for me is just how similar it is and how the same things I've been doing
*  I had done in the past, I basically am doing now as well.
*  Tell us about a company that no one will have heard of today that you think everybody could
*  be talking about in the next five to 10 years.
*  Yeah, I am very excited about this recent investment we've done in Freenome.
*  I think that's a great example.
*  This is something where it's going to catch people off guard because people will think
*  that curative cancer is a pill.
*  And what's going to happen is curative cancer is going to think about us changing how we
*  think about cancer, that cancer is more about going to the dentist.
*  I know that will sound strange, but let's say if you never went to the dentist for 40
*  years, 50 years, and then you went to the dentist and said, heal me, and you have tons
*  of cavities, what could be done versus going to the dentist twice a year?
*  Freenome's test, that's something that you could do once a year, you could do twice a
*  year, it's comparable to the cost of the dentist.
*  And something where one could catch cancer immediately, like catching a cavity at a very
*  early stage, and it gets cured.
*  And such that in that sense, cancer could easily just not exist in 10 years.
*  And that's due to this change in how we think about things.
*  And there's all these things on the back end.
*  You have to have the machine learning to make the tests accurate, you have to have the advanced
*  genomics to make the tests inexpensive, you have the team to put all this stuff together
*  There's all these ifs, but I think this is an example of something where we're just going
*  to think about the world differently, and companies like Freenome that really are going
*  to push it forward.
