---
Date Generated: May 30, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 993s
Video Keywords: ['biology', 'medicine', 'health', 'healthcare', 'gene therapy', 'technology', 'a16z']
Video Views: 7672
Video Rating: None
---

# Programming Medicine
**a16z Bio:** [December 21, 2018](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KjhXFLA_OlQ)
*  So one of the fundamental aspects of what makes us human is a desire to heal, to manage
*  our pain, to care for our loved ones.
*  And so what I want to talk about today is the history of humankind's ability to make
*  medicines to achieve those ends.
*  I want to talk about where we've been, where we are, and most importantly, where we're going.
*  And specifically, I want to talk about our increasing ability to program living things
*  to serve as medicines for us.
*  So let's start at the very beginning.
*  Our first medicines were discovered in nature.
*  The healing arts are as old as humanity.
*  And what we found is if you go back in time, as early as 2500 years ago, ancient Egyptians
*  were using the bark of the willow tree to treat pain.
*  We know that nature is filled with examples, countless examples of tools and tricks that
*  it uses to ward off invasive species.
*  And so our first medicines are discovered in nature, and they remain relevant today.
*  So the bark of the willow tree is the active ingredient in aspirin.
*  And we all know the story of how an absent-minded scientist can leave a Petri dish on a lab
*  bench and give us penicillin.
*  But beyond discovering medicines in nature, we also learned that we could use man-made
*  tools to develop our own medicines.
*  And the most important tool to that end was, of course, chemistry.
*  So going back in time, centuries, we see the early apothecaries developing novel molecules,
*  molecules that don't necessarily exist in nature, but that have a beneficial and therapeutic
*  effect.
*  And you can actually draw a line from these early apothecaries to the modern pharmaceutical
*  industry as it exists today.
*  And so those chemistry-based medicines have served us in countless ways to treat and manage
*  disease.
*  But there's a limitation to what we can do with chemistry.
*  So beyond developing our own medicines, we had to find ways to produce medicines that
*  we couldn't make or synthesize with chemistry alone.
*  So let's take insulin, for example.
*  As we all know, insulin is a critical, lifesaving medicine for diabetics.
*  But the problem is that it's also a very large and complex molecule.
*  And so it's very difficult, if not impossible, to synthesize insulin using chemistry.
*  And so we had to go back to nature for this one.
*  So we would source insulin from places like pigs, which is not ideal because pig insulin
*  doesn't look exactly like human insulin.
*  And so you could have negative effects from being treated with pig insulin.
*  And if we wanted human insulin, we had to go to cadavers, which, of course, represents
*  its own challenges.
*  But almost exactly 40 years ago, not too far from where we are right here, scientists discovered
*  a new tool, recombinant DNA, that would allow us to produce complex molecules like insulin.
*  And the way they did it is they introduced the human insulin gene into a bacteria and
*  coaxed that bacteria to make and produce insulin on our behalf.
*  And it was that discovery that gives rise to the modern biotechnology industry.
*  And so there's no question that by discovering medicines in nature, by developing them using
*  tools like chemistry, by producing complex molecules with biotechnology-based tools,
*  it's given us a very valuable arsenal and way to treat and manage disease.
*  But what's also very interesting is that we're on the cusp of something new.
*  All through history, most of our medicines have acted on disease cells or the errant
*  proteins that come from mutated genes and DNA or an invasive microbe.
*  But with advances in synthetic biology, advances in our ability to use things like gene and
*  cell engineering, we're increasingly finding ways to make those same cells and genes and
*  microbes, not the target of medicines, but the medicines themselves.
*  And so now we're entering into the era of programming medicine.
*  Now what does that look like?
*  Well, in the case of a cell, it looks like engineering a cell to recognize cancer, activate
*  the immune system to kill cancer.
*  In the case of a gene, it's introducing machinery that could spot a mutation and repair it.
*  And in the case of a microbe, it's re-engineering a microbe to produce a molecule, a therapeutic
*  molecule that can be delivered inside of the body.
*  Okay, so how do we do this?
*  How do we actually turn cells and genes and microbes into medicine?
*  Well, let's go back to the beginning.
*  So the way most medicines are made is to first have a theory on how a medicine would work.
*  What is its mechanism of action?
*  What is the specific biochemical processes that a molecule will impact and affect to
*  have a therapeutic benefit?
*  So how does it work?
*  But the second one is have a very clear understanding on what a medicine does when it's inside
*  of your body.
*  And to that aim, drug developers have developed a framework to think about all of the various
*  knobs and dials that you have to optimize for for a drug to be a good medicine.
*  So the first one is absorption.
*  How is it absorbed inside of the body?
*  The second one is once it's inside the body, how does it get distributed throughout?
*  How does it get to the side of disease?
*  Third one is metabolism.
*  How is it broken down by the body?
*  And this is critical to understand how a drug is dosed.
*  And then, of course, how is it excreted?
*  How does it eliminate, how is it eliminated or removed from the body?
*  How do you ensure you don't have a toxic buildup?
*  And then, of course, having a very clear understanding of how medicine could be toxic to healthy cells.
*  So these are two very important and fundamental frameworks for understanding how a medicine
*  is designed and developed.
*  So how does that apply to living things?
*  What are the programming imperatives that you would need to ensure that cells and genes
*  and microbes can serve as good medicines?
*  So there are four fundamental things that these living things need to be able to do
*  well to act as therapeutics.
*  First one is they need to be able to sense their environment.
*  They need to be able to look and search for the presence of disease.
*  The second thing is they need to be able to run a predetermined program.
*  They need to execute a specific course of action that they undertake when they encounter
*  disease.
*  Next, these are living things, so they can move around, they can replicate.
*  So there needs to be a mechanism to contain them to the site of disease and to ensure
*  that these living things don't go out of bounds.
*  And finally, they have to have an ability to sense when the disease state has been
*  alleviated and terminate their function.
*  And ideally, given that these are living things, terminate themselves if necessary.
*  So programming cells and genes and microbes to sense, execute programs, to contain their
*  actions and to terminate themselves all sounds really futuristic, but it's really happening
*  already.
*  So I want to walk through a couple of examples of that.
*  So let's take cancer.
*  In the case of cancer, it's unfortunate that 40% of the men and women in this room will
*  likely be diagnosed with a form of cancer somewhere in their lives, sometime in their
*  lives.
*  And so a long-standing goal of cancer therapy has been to trigger the immune system to fight
*  it off.
*  This is what the immune system does already.
*  And so what scientists have developed is a therapy known as CAR-T therapy, and the first
*  one was approved last year, that essentially takes out a cancer patient's immune cells,
*  engineers those cells to react to the patient's own tumor, reintroduces those cells into the
*  patient's body, and now those CAR-T cells circulate throughout the body, find cancer,
*  attack it, and recruit the immune cells to kill it off.
*  This is an extraordinary advance in how we treat cancer.
*  We've seen incredible results in terms of remission rates and even cures, but for the
*  most part today, this is limited to leukemias.
*  And the reason for that is because we need to be able to design more sophisticated methods
*  so that we can sense and execute programs for these T cells.
*  What does that look like?
*  Well, one of our portfolio companies and others are working on this very problem.
*  So in the case of sensing, you can engineer cells to have very sophisticated sensors like
*  receptors and other tools that will allow them to search for signals of disease throughout
*  the body.
*  You could also have them search for specific cell types if you know the origin of the cancer.
*  Once the cell receives those signals, Asimov, our portfolio company, is developing gene
*  circuits that actually can function as logic circuits that will allow them to compute the
*  inputs and determine the best course of action.
*  And in that case, it could be recruiting the immune system to kill, it could be releasing
*  anti-cancer drugs, it could be any number of things and ultimately terminating itself
*  once the disease state has been alleviated.
*  So the future of cell therapy will depend on our ability to program with increasing
*  sophistication cells to go after a broad range of cancers.
*  Now moving on to gene therapy.
*  So gene therapy has been the holy grail for treating the approximately 5,000 known diseases
*  that are caused by a single gene mutation.
*  But gene therapy has been in the winter for about 20 years.
*  And the reason why it's been in the winter is because 20 years ago at the University
*  of Pennsylvania, a young man by the name of Jesse Gelsinger was the first person to die
*  in a clinical trial for gene therapy.
*  And what killed him was essentially a containment problem.
*  The gene therapy was introduced, it went everywhere in the body and it resulted in a catastrophic
*  immune response and that led to his death.
*  And so appropriately, scientists gave pause to think about, well, how can we address this
*  question of containment before we advance new gene therapies?
*  And last year saw the approval of the first gene therapy for a treatment of a rare form
*  of blindness.
*  Now what's especially interesting about this is that it's not a coincidence that blindness
*  is the first therapy that they went after for gene therapy.
*  And that's because the eye is actually a pretty well contained organ.
*  You can inject the DNA directly into the eye and the risk of leakiness is actually quite
*  low.
*  But there are countless diseases, genetic diseases, that aren't limited to the eye.
*  So what does the future of gene therapy look like?
*  Well, gene therapy actually consists of two components.
*  The first one is the vehicle for delivering the therapy and the second one is the machinery
*  for actually doing the repair or the replacement of the mutations.
*  So the cargo, so to speak.
*  And so both of those are engineering, engineerable components.
*  So in the case of the vehicle, scientists are working on redesigning and reengineering
*  viruses that are going to have very low immune response so you don't have that catastrophic
*  event and can be very specifically targeted to a specific cell type.
*  And to that end, they will contain the risk of gene therapy going where it's not supposed
*  to go, in the body.
*  Now the second component, and I'm sure you've seen this in the news, is producing the machinery
*  to with very, very high precision edit genes and mutations as necessary.
*  So CRISPR is of course the best known example of advancements in this space.
*  So as we advance our ability to deliver gene therapy, as we advance our ability to actually
*  very precisely edit the genes, and only the genes that we need to edit, gene therapy will
*  become applicable to a far broader range of diseases, not just limited to those that are
*  easily contained biologically.
*  So let's move over to microbes.
*  So as folks know, the microbiome is increasingly understood to be involved in a very broad
*  range of diseases.
*  And it's also known to be very central and critical for maintaining and regulating our
*  health.
*  And in fact, the microbiome has been associated with diseases ranging from inflammatory conditions,
*  autoimmune diseases, all the way to neurological disorders.
*  And so it's not surprising that scientists are looking for ways to use the microbiome
*  as a therapeutic strategy, or as they call it, bugs as drugs.
*  The first clinical trial to do this is already ongoing.
*  Company called Synlogic has engineered a microbe that allows it to break down an amino acid
*  in a disease called Phenoketaluria, PKU, in patients that are unfortunately not able to
*  break down that amino acid themselves.
*  The result of not being able to do that means toxic amounts of amino acid build up, and
*  that can have devastating effects.
*  So this bug, the Synlogic's bug, goes into the body and basically does that work for
*  these patients.
*  Now the problem with the microbiome therapies is that it's largely a termination question.
*  How do you ensure that this microbe that you've introduced to the body doesn't run amok, doesn't
*  go out of control?
*  And the way they've addressed that is they have found a methodology to use a bug that
*  has a very short half-life.
*  And so it essentially eliminates itself after a few days.
*  But we can do better.
*  So the future is to engineer microbes that are much more sophisticated in their ability
*  to terminate their own function.
*  So imagine for a second you have a disease like Crohn's, you take a pill, the engineered
*  bugs go into your system, they sense the inflammatory condition, they release an anti-inflammatory
*  and they alleviate the condition.
*  You could program these cells so that they do that in such a way that they stay inactive
*  when there's no inflammatory markers in the system, in this case in the gut.
*  Or if you want it to be doubly sure, you could engineer in a kill switch where once the flare
*  or the episode has been contained, you take the red pill and you eliminate the bug.
*  So the future of microbiome therapy is also incredibly promising.
*  And so what I want to end on is just to give you a sense of where we are going.
*  This is an extraordinary moment in time for medicine.
*  With these advances, every time that we build and engineer the building blocks for living
*  things to sense their environment and execute programs, contain themselves and learn how
*  to terminate their function, like programming, every successive generation of these medicines
*  will get increasingly more sophisticated, increasingly more effective and more broadly
*  applicable to a broader and broader range of diseases.
*  And what's particularly exciting about this moment in time is that when we program these
*  living medicines, they essentially become a part of us.
*  And so in their own way, we're reprogramming them so that they can in turn reprogram us.
*  And as we can see in leukemia, as we can see in inherited forms of blindness, as we can
*  see in PKU, these living medicines are finally leading us to where we've always wanted to
*  be, which is to find cures.
*  Thank you.
