---
Date Generated: May 30, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 1318s
Video Keywords: ['biology', 'engineering', 'innovation', 'science', 'startups']
Video Views: 3038
Video Rating: None
---

# Pande & Conde: When (and How) Biology Becomes Engineering
**a16z Bio:** [March 23, 2018](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=waY2Fn1lV2s)
*  Hi, I'm Vijay Pandey, a general partner on the BioFund.
*  Hi, I'm Jorge Conde, also general partner on the BioFund.
*  And so today we've got one of my favorite topics to go into.
*  So we've seen companies that are built with science risk and companies, especially tech
*  companies that are engineering companies, how can we take things from the science curve,
*  which is stochastic and high risk, towards something that's more like engineering, more
*  like grind it out, get it done methodical, a great deal less risk.
*  Yeah, it's funny because we talk about this concept all the time and reading a children's
*  book to my kid, it was really interesting because science was defined as this concept.
*  You have a hypothesis and then you test it and then you revise your hypothesis.
*  That's some children's book actually.
*  Yeah.
*  And then I picked up an engineering book at the Museum of Science and they defined engineering
*  as this concept of you design something, then you build it and then you test it and then
*  you refine it and refine it and refine it.
*  So is that what you have in mind when you talk about these differences?
*  Yeah, I think so.
*  I mean, I think there's different ways to get there.
*  So it's not going to be like a magic silver bullet.
*  So let me just start with one and see what you think.
*  So like one of the things I think we've been seeing a lot in biology is what I would call
*  Legos that you biology is big and complicated and you got but you got a natural hierarchy
*  there.
*  You got atoms, you got molecules, you got proteins, you got membranes, you got cells,
*  you got tissues, you got organs, got people, you got organisms, you got ecosystems.
*  We keep on going to the universes if we need to.
*  Then the question is can we find the parts?
*  And if you can find the parts, then you can actually maybe mix and match.
*  But do we have an example where that's already working in biology?
*  The other thing with Legos is you can line up the squares to the circles and make them
*  click.
*  Yep, yep, yep.
*  That's actually a really important part.
*  And so you can think of Cartier is like a simple example, right?
*  You've got two different pieces that you're putting together.
*  Companies like Asimov is developing first the Legos and then putting those Legos, helping
*  you put the Lego pieces together.
*  And I think we're going to see more of that.
*  It's hard though, I mean, because it's not always obvious what the Legos are.
*  And so that might be the science part of it.
*  And then once you actually have the Legos, then you get to build stuff.
*  Almost like when people build a bridge, they're not researching steel.
*  They're given the girders and all the materials and then they put a bridge together.
*  So I think if people can come up with parts, people can engineer from the parts.
*  Do you think that so much of what has driven the industry and specifically the sort of
*  the biotech industry, if we look at traditional space, is so much money and spend and therefore
*  risk goes into trying to discover Legos?
*  Is that?
*  Yeah, I don't even know if they're thinking about it that way, right?
*  I mean, because they're just trying to come up with a small molecule for the disease.
*  And maybe what we're starting to see is like this shifting and it's something you've thought
*  a lot about is what is a drug here and as drugs become cells, now the Legos become really
*  important.
*  Before if drugs are molecules, your Legos are like phenol rings and things like that.
*  And so there's not a lot to do there.
*  But now you have this big complexity.
*  I think now maybe it starts to become more important.
*  Yeah, because I agree with you.
*  I think I think one of the things that's interesting is if we want to take this lens and I'd love
*  to get your take on this, we want to take this lens of sort of science shifting to engineering.
*  How do we think about high throughput biology within that context?
*  Because one could make the argument that if you were going to do biology at massive scale,
*  at some point, do you sort of stumble into engineering?
*  Yeah.
*  Yeah, I think that's an interesting point.
*  And so one version of it is actually you could imagine two extremes or one that say, no,
*  we're not going to do that at all because you don't do massive screening of bridges,
*  right?
*  You design your bridge and then you're done.
*  So on the other hand, I mean, in coming up with the parts, there's probably a lot of
*  experimentation.
*  And so I could see roles for that.
*  I think in this sort of parts analogy, I think the exciting thing is just once we've had
*  the once we've gotten there of what we can do with it and that in many cases, actually
*  we've kind of gotten there.
*  Yeah, I think that's right.
*  And so if we look at engineering, you know, one of the neat things about this space as
*  it's applied to bio, and I know you spent a lot of time thinking about this and the
*  firm and the fund increasingly spending more and more time looking at opportunities here
*  is what disciplines in engineering are applicable to biology?
*  Yeah, that's actually something really cool because I think it's a great point that, you
*  know, when you typically think about mechanical engineering, you're thinking about literally
*  bridges.
*  But I think mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, material science, computer science,
*  all these disciplines are pushing into biology.
*  And so instead of steel, it's bone or it's muscle.
*  But the same principles actually carry over really nicely.
*  And if you look at on the academic side, academic departments and there are really reimagining
*  themselves into these areas.
*  And then the fruit of that's becoming interesting fodder for these companies.
*  Actually if we could pause on that point for a second, how is academia responding to this
*  world, this sort of shift in the world?
*  Because industry will follow, presumably.
*  Yeah, I think one of the interesting things is that you don't have new departments created
*  very frequently, like physics departments are thousands of years old or something like
*  it.
*  At least the Cambridge one is probably at least a thousand, something like that.
*  So it's interesting that there is a new department that was created in the last 10-ish years,
*  the Department of Bioengineering, sometimes called biological engineering.
*  And the creation of these departments, I think, has really accelerated this because you could
*  have sort of inject people that are both engineers and biologists into engineering schools.
*  And from there, I think it nucleates out.
*  And that bioengineers sort of are having so much fun that I think other disciplines don't
*  want to be left out.
*  And that it kind of makes it easier to facilitate a straight mechanical engineering, to engineer
*  to get into this space.
*  It's funny because I think one of the areas that I've been long interested in has been
*  genetic engineering.
*  And if you look at genetic engineering as a field and as a practice, and I want to get
*  your take on this, it was historically almost like it was genetic sciences, right?
*  Because you weren't actually designing.
*  What was the engineering in genetic engineering?
*  It was kind of like playing boggle, right?
*  You would just mix up all the letters and see what worked, when a word actually came
*  out.
*  And now I think with the advent of things like CRISPR and things that companies like
*  Asimov are doing, where they're actually making DNA a design medium, I think we're actually
*  starting to make genetic engineering be an engineer discipline.
*  But I think that's a relatively recent...
*  Yeah, there's an interesting point in that, which is basically just because you put the
*  word engineering there doesn't make it engineering.
*  It's an aspiration more than a success.
*  But actually, it's just even interesting that we have long had this aspiration and that
*  we're starting to see it.
*  I mean, we've talked about these disciplines.
*  I think we talk about computer science.
*  I think machine learning itself is becoming its own thing.
*  And it's maybe a third way to connect up with engineering in that so much of science, when
*  I think about it, is very bespoke.
*  That you come up with a biomarker, you've got some team of scientists spending years,
*  or maybe sometimes decades, to find this one marker.
*  And to repeat that would be to repeat all that process and its stochasticity.
*  Whereas something like machine learning is that you sort of engineer a process and then
*  you just put new data and you roll through it.
*  So I think that might be sort of yet another avenue towards taking something that's normally
*  in the science world and shifting it towards engineering.
*  That's actually a really interesting point because if I'm thinking about this from the
*  perspective of industry and I'm at a biotech drug company and I look at my pipeline of
*  drugs, historically at least, the most advanced program is the most valuable one because that's
*  the one that's closest to hitting an inflection point, whether it's proof of concept or having
*  data in a human clinical trial.
*  And then the second one is the second most valuable one and so on and so forth.
*  So chronology determines value.
*  And a big part of that I think was because of this concept of bespoke-ness.
*  That you develop this first drug and it doesn't necessarily educate you on what you're going
*  to do with the second drug.
*  Unless you're going after the same target or the same biological pathway.
*  But in your world, in the world you're describing, this engineering world, it's actually the
*  reverse is true.
*  That the second drug is more valuable in the first if you're using engineering principles
*  you learn from example one, sort of imbues value to example two and so on and so forth.
*  On top of that, it's commonly asked why pharma doesn't look at their failures.
*  And I think the common answer is that, well, the feeling is that there would not be value
*  in doing that.
*  And that's why they don't put money into it and be very expensive and so on.
*  But if you're in this engineering curve, the false positives are actually as important
*  to learning as the true positives.
*  And so I think both of those get integrated in, which is just a new way of thinking about
*  things.
*  And I think we're seeing this more and more where pharma companies will start to view
*  themselves more as data generating companies and data science companies as machine learning
*  gets in.
*  And machine learning often is scary with AI and all this stuff.
*  But if you think of it as just the best statistical use of the data, I mean, that's what pharma
*  has been wanting to do and trying to do for years.
*  If you were to roll forward, maybe we'll pick a number, 10 years from now, do you think
*  a pharma company will have as big a dry lab, people on computers as they do a wet lab,
*  by people at lab bench with pipettes?
*  Yes, that's a really interesting thought.
*  And in question, I think we're already seeing a little bit of that and with just the shift
*  to CROs where there's not a purely medicinal chemist job, a sort of drug designer job.
*  And medicinal chemists have so much great intuition and experience designing drugs that
*  they've been sort of at the tip of the spear of that.
*  But as ML starts being competitive and hopefully really helping them forward, there may be
*  a new sort of job which is not doing the synthesis themselves, but actually just being
*  a drug designer or a drug engineer, throwing that aspirational term in there.
*  And so that may be what's happening, especially if synthesis is done at a CRO somewhere else,
*  then that design job, that engineering job actually becomes the real one.
*  And it sort of shifts the tools you look for.
*  In the end though, the ML has to work, right?
*  I mean, if it doesn't work, then that future doesn't exist or is in a different timeline.
*  So it's interesting because it occurs to me as you're talking that a lot of times when
*  we talk about a company that has a platform technology, oftentimes that platform technology
*  really is a combination of some technology, but really a lot of just know-how and expertise
*  around a specific area of biology.
*  But what you're describing in terms of the shift to engineering is platforms then can
*  increasingly become companies, or companies that have platforms I should say, increasingly
*  become companies that have the ability to move drug discovery and development from being
*  a very bespoke thing to being a very sort of productive thing.
*  That's a good point.
*  ML is a platform amongst others.
*  And there's data generating platforms or data analysis platforms.
*  And that platform I think really could be a really interesting shift.
*  And we're seeing more and more companies that way that are, before it used to be that the
*  platform was never really valued very much, it was all about the assets.
*  And now we're getting to a point where people are very curious if platforms can reproducibly
*  create multiple assets.
*  Let me ask you an unfair off the cuff question.
*  You've seen a lot of things.
*  What's the most surprising application of engineering in biology that you've come across,
*  whether it's in academia or whether it's here on the investing side?
*  Yeah.
*  It's hard to tell because there's so many different surprises.
*  The very one I always love to talk about is, remember we talked about that tree that glows
*  at night, the Luciferase tree or something like that.
*  And the idea that, the reason why I find that so compelling is that it's a combination
*  of the technical engineering inside to make it happen, but also this idea that the future
*  will not be steel and metal.
*  It will be this sort of engineered biological thing that just grows, that has this function,
*  something that actually helps fight against global warming, not contribute to it, something
*  that really is sustainable, easily shippable because you ship them in little guys and then
*  they grow or something like that.
*  All of it is just a very different vision for what our world will be like.
*  And it's something that is just the beginning and it maybe just starts with one tree, but
*  then there's lots of different things.
*  It's funny you say that because I think one of the things that's so fun about this concept
*  of engineered biology is that, at least in my sort of limited view, is historically when
*  you think about engineering, it's making things better, making things more efficient, making
*  things more quickly.
*  But when you have biology as a design medium, it's about making things possible that you
*  didn't even know were possible, like glowing trees.
*  Well, we should probably talk a little bit about nuts and bolts for how to get things
*  done.
*  I think because it's nice to have the philosophy, but how do you actually do it?
*  And towards that, I think when I think about it, my favorite paradigm is something like
*  the Apollo mission.
*  So President Kennedy says we're going to the moon, and everyone, the engineer's like,
*  we're going to the moon.
*  I can only imagine that moment because that sounds crazy to do something like that.
*  And how do you take something crazy like going to the moon or curing cancer or increasing
*  human longevity by 50%?
*  How do you do that?
*  And the Apollo mission, I actually did the Apollo mission, was even just the last one.
*  You have Mercury, then Gemini, then Apollo.
*  As a kid, I really loved space.
*  And just Apollo 11 got to the moon.
*  So what was like one through 10?
*  So one gets into orbit.
*  Two, actually, I forget all the details, but they have to practice docking in space.
*  They have to practice all these things.
*  They actually went around the moon before landing on the moon.
*  And if you break it up into little bits, any little bit isn't so bad and can be engineered.
*  And then you sort of do it step by step by step by step.
*  And I think that's, for me, the inspiration for how to take some big crazy thing like
*  going to the moon, that if you did it from a screening perspective, the screen rockets
*  to get over there.
*  That's going to be a one in a million chance.
*  But if you engineer little bits, bits by bits with OKRs, your key milestones with KPIs,
*  your key metrics, I can see how that starts to make a little more sense.
*  But it's still easier said than done.
*  But I think now it takes a big crazy thing into lots of not so bad things.
*  And that's important because that's where your LEGO concept comes into play.
*  Because you couldn't build a rudimentary rocket if you didn't know where to put the screws.
*  They quite literally pull it together.
*  Yeah, that's a good point.
*  What they learned from the previous Mercury and Gemini was to get the pieces.
*  And then they started mixing them together.
*  And even look at the Soyuz rockets, they're like, lots of rockets put together and so on.
*  So in my mind, that was one of those hallmarks, sort of just landmark, like, wow moments in human engineering.
*  And I'm always curious to see how we can learn from that process to bring it over.
*  With that said, there was a lot of people and a lot of effort in there.
*  And so I think this is, again, not something that will be done by one company or one group.
*  But I think collectively, the ecosystem is starting to be built.
*  So just to put this from the perspective of industry and from entrepreneurship,
*  how does entrepreneur A get value for, create value for creating Apollo 1?
*  Yeah, yeah, that's a really tough one.
*  I think there has to be this ecosystem from academia and research institutions to startups,
*  to big startups, to big companies.
*  And I think in Asimov's case, a lot of the parts they came up with in academia for E. coli.
*  And then now they start to look at creating parts for other things.
*  So they create the process.
*  And now they can repeat the process for other types of cells.
*  I think that might be part of it is that they got to, at least to, let's say, the Apollo missions.
*  Maybe they did Gemini at MIT.
*  So something where you can get part of the way there, where I think you and
*  I can have some sense that we know where this is going and that this is now engineering,
*  not like kids playing with rockets in the backyard, where it's going to blow up or not.
*  And who knows it's going to work.
*  Something where we had the feeling like it's now we see the steps.
*  It will also be interesting because I think there's lots of big incumbent companies,
*  Google and IBM doing all this research.
*  And they bring an engineering mentality and
*  an engineering sort of zeal and excitement to other areas.
*  And so I suspect we'll start to see that.
*  I mean, okay, ours are like, I think, part and parcel of how Google runs.
*  And I would think that would come over.
*  Yeah, it's a good point because I think for
*  companies that are trying to innovate in this space and
*  using engineering as a way to do so in bio.
*  The big challenge from a business development perspective has historically been
*  proved to me if I'm the buyer, if I'm a large company,
*  proved to me that what you're doing is real and it's going to work.
*  Well, yeah, so how does that work?
*  I mean, how would you answer the question?
*  I mean, what would the buyer need to see?
*  Well, so I think what's interesting and we can take specific cases.
*  Asimov is a great example, we've already used them.
*  One of the beauties of what Asimov does is there's high predictability in what
*  they design is going to work.
*  And so if I'm on the receiving end of looking at Asimov's technology as
*  a potential partner, business development collaborator, if I say,
*  can you design something to do X and
*  a significant percentage of the time it does as intended.
*  That's very different than historical biology.
*  I think one of the big things in synthetic biology has really been you try
*  10,000 things to get one thing to work.
*  And if somehow that ratio is nearly inverted, then all of a sudden it becomes
*  much easier to get people to believe that you understand where the screws need to go.
*  If you understand where the screws need to go, then as you pointed out,
*  it starts to become clear that you'll eventually get to the moon.
*  So it sounds like you're saying that if you can demonstrate that you've sort of
*  shifted off this engineering curve, that would be sort of the key part for
*  the go to market, is that you?
*  I think that's exactly right.
*  I think proving that something works as intended is historically been
*  the big sort of activation energy you need to overcome for
*  a buyer in the business development context.
*  And so when you're doing the stochastic risk that you're describing, that means
*  there's a long period of time that has to go until you get this proof of concept.
*  But what does that proof look like?
*  Presumably it's more than just like a paper in science and
*  nature or something like that.
*  No, it's usually a, I'm going to show you a stepwise improvement over a short
*  period of time or at least over a predicted period of time that what I can do works.
*  And that it's not a one off, that it's reproducible, and
*  that it works in various contexts.
*  Because a various context usually represents some sort of a fundamental,
*  if not universal truth.
*  So that's proof of concept, that's like a small deal.
*  I mean, how does that sort of actually-
*  Yeah, so normally the way it plays out,
*  it's usually a proof of concept that leads to a small deal.
*  And a lot of times, I think one of the challenges that early stage companies have
*  is you don't want to run into this risk that you die from pilots.
*  Yeah, yeah, yeah.
*  Right, because I think the historic- Because they're easyish to get.
*  It's easy to get into a pilot.
*  Yeah, yeah, yeah.
*  It's hard to go from a pilot to an actual agreement.
*  Yeah.
*  And so this is where certainly the traditional biotech companies have had a
*  very big challenge, right?
*  Because every project is a science project, and they're long, and
*  you don't know how they're going to turn out.
*  If you're doing something that's more on this engineering curve,
*  you actually can, using your concept of OKRs and KPIs,
*  you can actually say this is going to be the project plan, and
*  this is what we're going to deliver over a relatively short period of time,
*  because we can essentially iterate quickly.
*  And if you can do that, then that leads to an initial project.
*  And one of the things that certainly has been shown in tech time and
*  time again, is if you can demonstrate value at a small scale and
*  prove that you can actually scale, then you have the concept,
*  the famous concept of the land and expand on the enterprise side.
*  You can actually start to see some of that in biology.
*  The reason why land and
*  expand historically hasn't existed in biotech is because the expand part was
*  really hard, because things were so bespoke.
*  Well, yeah, you get your one drug, and then you go to town on that one, and
*  then a platform was useful for getting you there.
*  Exactly.
*  But then you're there.
*  Exactly.
*  So now you focus on the drug asset.
*  Yeah, so how does that change?
*  I mean, why?
*  I think it changes by this concept that asset number one is actually less
*  valuable than asset number two, which is less valuable than asset number three,
*  because you're learning from each one to the next one.
*  So you're getting better over time because you're moving from bespoke to
*  design.
*  And you're getting faster, you're getting higher efficacy, lower tox,
*  all of those things?
*  Presumably, yeah.
*  So you're getting better, faster, and cheaper.
*  I mean, that's obviously the sweet spot.
*  Or in an ideal world, you're going from impossible to possible.
*  Yeah.
*  But that obviously is a higher hurdle.
*  That usually doesn't happen in one step.
*  That's right.
*  It's exactly right.
*  But I do think that's interesting that when we see companies that have very
*  powerful platforms, and there have been analogies for this in biotech,
*  the ones that have very powerful platforms that can improve scalably and
*  systematically on sort of an engineering-like curve tend to go from,
*  A, they take something that isn't possible to possible over a longer period of time.
*  Yes.
*  And they tend to sort of grow and gain traction very predictably,
*  because they can improve on a very predictable curve.
*  And I know we use this example all the time, but it's what Illumina did for
*  sequencing.
*  Yep.
*  Right?
*  And there are other examples where that has happened,
*  where you've shown that you can demonstrate something in one context.
*  You demonstrate it in a second context.
*  And then by the time you get to the third,
*  people just accept it as a general.
*  Yeah, and was that famous quote, I forget who it's attributed to,
*  the most powerful force in the universe is compounding interest.
*  That's right.
*  Yeah.
*  Probably Warren Buffett.
*  And that's what this is, right?
*  It's not money compounding.
*  It's technology, like getting 30% better every year is, or
*  30ish percent better is like doubling every two years.
*  That's exactly right.
*  Doubling every two years, that's like we start with children's books.
*  One of my favorite kids books is that Indian story about the grains of rice,
*  where as a gift or as a reward, the peasant asked for two,
*  then four, and doubling every day over a month.
*  And the Raja thinks this is not that big of a deal, like two grains, four grains,
*  it's not a big deal.
*  And of course, in the end, it gets to two to the 32,
*  it's like four million grains of rice, which is like all of it.
*  And it just, it sneaks up on you.
*  If you can get to that, that is how you make impossible possible.
*  That's right.
