---
Date Generated: May 30, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 462s
Video Keywords: ['biology', 'engineering', 'healthcare', 'startups', 'consolidation', 'vertical integration']
Video Views: 2670
Video Rating: None
---

# Consolidation in Healthcare: What to Make of It?
**a16z Bio:** [April 05, 2018](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a9vlsFkyA6U)
*  So hi, you have the A16ZBio team here, and I think we wanted to spend a few minutes talking
*  about a lot of the headlines that are hitting in healthcare in the very recent weeks.
*  So going back to late last week, there was news that Walmart's in the early stages of
*  potentially acquiring Humana.
*  So this is large retail chain buying a large insurer.
*  And to me, what's remarkable about that a couple of things, really.
*  One, the first one is that Walmart in its own right is a major pharmaceutical, sorry,
*  pharmacy chain.
*  So that's incredible in and of itself.
*  And the second is that you're going to see this sort of vertical integration or increased
*  vertical integration between the entire value chain.
*  So just to like tick through it in a very simplistic form, you have your pharmaceutical
*  companies that make drugs.
*  You have your drug wholesalers that go out and buy bulk drugs, usually generics.
*  You have your pharmacies that essentially act as the channel to access medicines.
*  You have your specialty pharmacies that are responsible for ensuring that really high
*  cost, high touch, complex medicines get to where they need to be in hospitals and other
*  places.
*  Then you have your pharmacy benefit managers, the PBMs, that ensure that the insurers know
*  have established rules to figure out who can get access to which drug as a way to control
*  cost and ensure that the right drugs are getting to the right patients.
*  So if you take all of those various players, and I'm ignoring the hospital systems, I'm
*  ignoring the patient, but if you take the insurers, the pharmacies, the PBMs, the drug
*  wholesalers, the remarkable thing is that this entire industry is sort of integrated
*  into one giant monolith.
*  So we have Walmart potentially buying Humana.
*  We have C.V.S.
*  And then we have this sort of mystery thing on the employer side, which I didn't touch
*  on, but Berkshire Hathaway and Amazon and JP Morgan are sort of teaming up to do some
*  yet to be unveiled play in healthcare.
*  What is going on?
*  One of the arguments is that this could be a way to decrease costs, but we'll see, I
*  guess.
*  And also just consolidation in general, I think in principle would allow for decreased
*  costs and increased value because there are more people that are aligned.
*  But it's still pretty early.
*  I think of them as two different classes of things.
*  There's on one side, you know, we have Walmart, Humana and CBS.
*  On the other side, we have Amazon, JP Morgan and Berkshire Hathaway.
*  I think those are two fundamentally different things.
*  So on the one hand, you have this consortium, very large employers.
*  But health care is a local business.
*  And those employers, while they're huge, they are so geographically dispersed that I'm
*  sure they can drive good deals in local markets, but you can't put all of the employees in
*  Berkshire Hathaway.
*  You can't put them all into one local hospital and get all the best prices.
*  So I think that the effect of that consortium is going to be a little less than something
*  on the other side, where you see Walmart and CBS fairly local.
*  They're able to drive.
*  There's a Walmart or CBS and a lot of small towns, and they're going to be able to drive
*  more value because they own the patients and those touch points.
*  And having that locality, I think, is going to make a big difference compared to a
*  dispersed, self-insured employers.
*  What happens to that divide you just laid out when Amazon buys a pharmacy benefit manager?
*  Yeah, or becomes a pharmacy benefit manager.
*  I think PBMs right now are so consolidated.
*  And I think everybody, as Amazon, as Bezos says, their margin is my opportunity.
*  The margins in the PBM business so opaque.
*  And I think it's one that in the news, people are crying about it at all times.
*  I think Amazon and Bezos there might see that as an opportunity in themselves.
*  And I wouldn't imagine they go buy it.
*  I imagine they go do it themselves.
*  Yeah. And it's an interesting question, right?
*  Because I think that, you know, that that is one area that's ripe for disruption.
*  Right.
*  And so on the one side of things, you're seeing just mass consolidation happening
*  vertically in terms of vertical integration with the large players all sort of teaming
*  up across the various segments of the value chain.
*  But on the other, you see that there's so much change that one would imagine that
*  there's ripe opportunity for disruption.
*  So if you're an entrepreneur in this space and the entire value chain, the landscape
*  of the value chain is quite literally shifting below you.
*  Given all the news, what do you do?
*  I got an idea for if you're an entrepreneur, what me interesting area would be a digital
*  therapeutic PBM.
*  I mean, distribution is really hard to get this out there and get reimbursed.
*  And, you know, right now, all these digital therapy companies have to basically build
*  this themselves as if you were like Bayer having to build a PBM yourself or something
*  like that. And so that's an opportunity where at least I think a startup could come in
*  and not have to fight against ginormous incumbents.
*  Yeah, and that's a great that's a great idea.
*  Another one that to me is potentially an interesting one is all of the things, Jeffrey,
*  you were talking about, whether you're on the employer side or whether you're on the
*  consolidating side of the value chain, both sides are going to have to seek increase
*  efficiencies if they're going to actually eke out margin and therefore be able to reduce
*  costs in the system, at least internal costs in the system.
*  So if if I were an entrepreneur in this space and I'm looking across the value chain, I
*  would say what what opportunities exist and open up when you get full vertical
*  integration for the application for the application of new technologies that may not
*  have existed before because of sort of transactional frictions of dealing with with
*  multiple players. I don't know what that looks like, but that's, I think, one area where
*  you can spend your time.
*  Certainly skating where the puck is going to go rather than where it is.
*  And health care is changing so quickly that.
*  Yeah. So any predictions?
*  I mean, does Amazon buy one of these?
*  You think they build? I think Amazon is clearly doing they're clearly using this as
*  a partnership in which they can learn a bunch of things.
*  They're hiring a bunch of people.
*  You know, we see other players like Apple getting into the space, hiring a bunch of
*  people as well. They're learning.
*  They're hiring. But, you know, I don't think that they go and acquire.
*  I don't think they acquire something because I don't see a marquee property like
*  Whole Foods in the space that they go acquire.
*  Those those places are already too either big or acquire something else.
*  You know, could you see Amazon acquiring CVS and Aetna now?
*  You know, I find it hard to believe, but Bezos always surprises.
*  Yeah, I had to make a prediction, just as you said, a digital PBM.
*  I think, you know, if we look at, you know, what gave rise to specialty pharmacy
*  was the increased complexity of injectables and biologics.
*  We're moving to a time where, you know, we're shifting from those kinds of medicine
*  to cell therapies and gene therapies.
*  And I think it's going to represent it's going to present an entire new sort of set
*  of complexity from a logistic standpoint, from a drug handling standpoint.
*  So I would I would expect that we'll see sort of the equivalent of a digital PBM.
*  Logistics chain emerge for gene therapies and cell therapies
*  and other advanced types of medicines.
*  I think for cell therapies, you know, the time just might be sooner
*  because the cost is so great right now.
*  You know, digital therapeutics, I think, could be akin to where
*  there are various genomic PBMs and there were just not enough genomic tests.
*  So, you know, those companies were maybe just too early.
*  The cell therapies are expensive now.
*  People are spending money now.
*  So if that business is built and the supply chain is so difficult,
*  you know, maybe that is a very different business than specialty pharma is,
*  you know, currently.
*  Yeah, well, certainly interesting times.
*  It would be fun to see what happens with all this.
