---
Date Generated: May 30, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 393s
Video Keywords: ['biology', 'computer science', 'engineering', 'pharma', 'healthcare']
Video Views: 2171
Video Rating: None
---

# Pande & Conde on: Players and Paths for Healthcare Startups
**a16z Bio:** [March 31, 2018](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p8L7sUdeWgU)
*  Hey, we got Vijay Pandey and Jorge Conde here at Journal Partners at Andreessen Horowitz
*  on the BioFund.
*  So we got a lightning round today.
*  So we're seeing all these forces of biology coming to computer science and computer science
*  coming into biology.
*  What's the lay of the land of that?
*  Well, I think, I mean, this is, as we all know, healthcare is a very complicated landscape.
*  So let's just take it at a very high level and then we can sort of dive in and go through
*  sort of the various players here.
*  So if you're developing anything in the healthcare space, and let's just focus on human healthcare
*  for a second to put a scope on this.
*  Generally speaking, if you're going to develop a technology or a tool, you're going to develop
*  something that's going to enable a drug or a therapy, or you're going to enable something
*  that's going to enable the diagnostic to help detect disease.
*  I mean, at a very high level, it's tools, therapies, and diagnostics.
*  So let's assume that you're playing in that space.
*  Generally speaking-
*  And you're thinking quite generally that therapy could be many different types of therapies.
*  I guess we'll see.
*  That's right.
*  No, it could be a chemical.
*  It could be a protein.
*  It could be a cell.
*  It could be a gene.
*  It could be an app.
*  So it could be many, many different things.
*  But generally, for the most part, if you're going to do anything that's going into humans
*  or going to affect how disease is treated and managed, you're going to have to go through
*  a fairly straightforward process in terms of chronology, but it's very complex underneath.
*  So you've got to, A, discover something that's relevant for human health, and that's sort
*  of the R&D piece.
*  If you're developing a therapy or a diagnostic, then you've got to convince the people that
*  matter, in this case, the regulatory agencies, to allow you to put this or use this in humans.
*  Then you've got to figure out how to get it paid for.
*  Then you've got to figure out how to educate the healthcare system that this is valuable
*  for patients.
*  And then you've got to figure out how to get patients to actually use it.
*  So it's not easy.
*  And the joke we have, this is not B2B.
*  This is not B2C.
*  It's much more complicated than that.
*  And so when you sort of dig into that, who are the various players there?
*  So some of them are pretty straightforward.
*  You have the regulatory agencies.
*  So if you want to develop something on the therapeutic side, you're going to have to
*  do human clinical trials.
*  If you want to develop a diagnostic, it's a slightly different path.
*  If you wanted to make a diagnostic that is quite literally a little box to test something,
*  you've got to go to the FDA.
*  Or CLIA, presumably?
*  Yeah.
*  So now that's different.
*  So if you wanted to develop something that could be tested in the lab, fortunately, the
*  FDA has made it such that you could do something called the laboratory-derived test in a CLIA
*  lab.
*  And CLIA just means that you've passed sort of the basic processes that ensure that your
*  lab runs a good process and that data is reproducible, et cetera, et cetera.
*  So if you're going to do that, that's a less risky proposal.
*  You set up your own lab and you can run tests.
*  And as long as your processes are robust, the regulatory agencies will be able to do
*  that.
*  And we've seen diagnostic startups take this LED-CLIA approach.
*  That seems to be very natural to begin.
*  I think that's a natural sort of initial approach to lower risk and lets you get to the market
*  much more quickly.
*  On the therapeutic side, I think it's much harder, right?
*  Because you do have to go through the traditional phase one, two, three clinical trials.
*  And before that, you have to prove that it works in tests in cells and then in animals.
*  It's a very long process.
*  But then the other path is that you can develop a tool or technology that you sell into the
*  R&D industry itself, which is a really interesting go-to-market path if you have a very powerful
*  technology because it allows you to do a lot of things.
*  Number one is you can figure out how to slice and dice this technology to sell to multiple
*  players in a non-expressive way.
*  Number two, the R&D industry in the US alone is like a $75 billion a year annual industry.
*  There is a lot of spend that goes into this space.
*  And so that's another path you can take.
*  So if I'm an entrepreneur in bio, one of the first things I would say is, do I want to
*  make my own drugs or diagnostics or do I want to empower the industry to make better drugs
*  and diagnostics?
*  Those are two very different go-to-markets.
*  Yeah, although I would think, and I think we've seen, it's hard to break into that,
*  right?
*  I mean, because you've got to have a tool that really changes the game so much that
*  they will give you some fraction of that $75 bill.
*  I think that's exactly right.
*  And this is where this concept of engineering is important because it allows you to essentially
*  convince player A to give you value and without you essentially locking out the ability to
*  engage player B and C and D because if something is widely applicable and transformative, usually
*  you can essentially sell it again and again.
*  Is there any example of a tools company that became a huge thing?
*  Sure.
*  I mean, there are many examples.
*  I think one of the classic examples is a company called Atomab that essentially came up with
*  a better way to design monoclonal antibodies.
*  And so what they were able to show is by partnering with virtually every company that is trying
*  to develop monoclonal antibodies as a drug, as a therapy, they could take a small piece
*  upfront.
*  Once it proves that it works, they get a big piece of the economics on the back end.
*  And they've shown this again and again and again.
*  They're still a private company.
*  And last I heard it valued well north of a billion dollars.
*  So they are a private biotech unicorn that has become that doing just that.
*  Yeah.
*  And I guess to some degree, Illumina is an example as well to the extent that it's driving
*  research spend in addition to other areas in genomics.
*  I think Illumina is a wonderful example because they basically took what was an impossible
*  concept of being able to sequence full genomes at scale cheaply and reliably quickly and
*  made it not only possible, but made themselves necessary to do this.
*  You can't do genomics essentially without Illumina.
*  So I think we're running out of time.
*  How would you think of this whole space together?
*  How do you conceptualize it?
*  So the way I conceptualize it is it all comes down to your go to market should be dependent
*  on your technology.
*  So if you have a technology that's very broadly applicable and for example diagnosing disease,
*  the LDT path makes a lot of sense because you can start to churn out tests as you sort
*  of develop them.
*  If you've got a platform that allows you to develop drugs in a way that was not possible,
*  maybe going and becoming your own drug development company might be the way to go.
*  If you have a platform that's so broadly applicable at sort of elucidating disease biology, then
*  doing it the partnership route might be the way to go because you'll never develop sort
*  of the deep domain expertise in every single disease in parallel.
*  Right.
*  I imagine that especially for our tech heavy founder style, product style founders, that
*  just understanding the go to market issues from the very beginning I think would be very
*  important in how they define and shape the company and shape the product.
*  I think that's exactly right.
*  So the way I would think about this as an entrepreneur is do I understand what I need
*  to prove, how I'm going to get it approved, and who's going to pay for it.
*  And that will help define your go to market.
*  Perfect.
*  Well, I think we're out of time.
*  Thank you.
