---
Date Generated: May 30, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 235s
Video Keywords: ['engineering', 'biology', 'computer science', 'healthcare', "Moore's Law", "Eroom's Law", "Baumol's cost disease"]
Video Views: 7775
Video Rating: None
---

# Eroom's Law
**a16z Bio:** [April 06, 2018](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wF8gVBl3Ots)
*  To tell the story about Eamon's Law, we have to actually go all the way back to 1965 to
*  talk about Moore's Law.
*  Moore's Law is due to an observation that Gordon Moore made that has to do with computers.
*  Computer chips are getting more and more sophisticated at a rapidly accelerating pace that the number
*  of transistors would double every year and a half.
*  The original paper, which Moore's Law got its name, made a prediction for ten years
*  that the most complex integrated circuits would go from about 60 components to something
*  like 60,000, a thousand-fold increase in complexity.
*  That was a wild extrapolation of very little data.
*  I was just trying to get across the idea that integrated circuits were going to be the route
*  to cheap electronics.
*  It got the name Moore's Law, which has stuck to everything that changes exponentially ever
*  since.
*  This basically means that the power and speed of a computer would double every year and
*  a half.
*  Well, doubling has the ability to make the impossible doable and the doable essentially
*  cheap and free.
*  Moore's Law tells us that computers will double in power, and this doubling is really what's
*  allowed.
*  If you had a computer that was possible on your supercomputer ten years ago, now actually
*  you can do it in your pocket on your phone.
*  So where does this connect with biology?
*  Moore's Law is not just limited to computers.
*  There are biological examples of things like Moore's Law, and the most notable one is in
*  genomics.
*  Twenty years ago, the Human Genome Project sequenced a single human genome at a cost
*  of three billion dollars.
*  Ten years ago, the same thing would cost three million dollars, so it's a huge advance, but
*  still expensive.
*  Now, maybe three thousand dollars approaching three hundred dollars relatively soon.
*  And so three billion dollars for a medical procedure, that's a bit expensive.
*  Three million dollars still out of reach.
*  Three hundred, three thousand dollars.
*  Now we're talking about something that's really practical.
*  So where does eRoom's Law come into this?
*  Well, actually it turns out that not everything in biology and healthcare works on Moore's
*  Law.
*  A lot of things are the reverse of Moore's Law, and that's where eRoom, well, Moore's
*  Law backwards comes into effect.
*  The cost of drugs, the cost of healthcare itself, is growing exponentially.
*  So the cost decreasing over time, getting halved along the way, it's doubling over time.
*  The cost of healthcare right now already is a quarter of the spend of the United States.
*  If that continues to double and double and double over time, this is the healthcare disaster
*  that we're all dealing with.
*  So the question comes then, when we've got these two laws, we've got Moore's Law and
*  eRoom's Law, where do these things connect with each other?
*  You can imagine if you've got one thing that's exponentially going down in cost, another
*  that's exponentially going up in cost.
*  It's interesting to think, what can you transfer from one curve to the other?
*  If computation could play a role, even if it's expensive now, it's something where,
*  in time, the healthcare equivalent will get more and more expensive, and the computational
*  equivalent will get more and more inexpensive to the point where they need to.
*  And that meeting point is the key question.
*  And what we're seeing already is that in several different areas in healthcare, they've already
*  met where computation has exceeded, and we're seeing things taken from the eRoom's Law world
*  into the Moore's Law world.
*  A natural area is in applying machine learning to healthcare.
*  We've seen examples in radiology, dermatology, ophthalmology, where images are key.
*  And with computers being so good at image recognition, areas of eRoom's Law are now
*  having the potential to be taken over onto the computational Moore's Law side.
*  We're also seeing this in the area of diagnostics, where machine learning can understand the
*  readouts of complicated genomics in a way that no human being could.
*  And this is just the beginning.
*  With the natural fate of each of these laws very clear, there will be more and more things
*  that can hop from one curve to the other.
