---
Date Generated: May 30, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 760s
Video Keywords: ['nature', 'biology', 'agriculture', 'technology', 'materials science', 'food', 'supply chains', 'a16z', 'apeel sciences']
Video Views: 5981
Video Rating: None
---

# Nature as Technology
**a16z Bio:** [December 23, 2018](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A8RhiW5OD-g)
*  I get to spend the next 15 minutes telling you about something that inspires me every
*  single day, and that is 3.8 billion years worth of natural innovation, which is happening
*  long before we got here, is happening outside this room right now, and will continue to
*  happen long after we are here.
*  And at Appeal, we use the natural world as an inspiration for the technology that we're
*  developing.
*  But more broadly, I believe that nature is a very practical example of ways that we can
*  build systems and interact with the natural world in ways that work with the natural world
*  and not ways that work against the natural world.
*  The scale of natural innovation is stunning, both from the very grand to the very small.
*  Let's take a look at a couple of examples that always blow my mind when I think about
*  this.
*  The most biodiverse climate on this planet is the Amazon River Basin.
*  And you might be surprised to know, at least I was surprised to find out, that you can
*  trace the origins of this biodiversity to the fertility of the soil, which is a result
*  of all of the nutrients which are being swept all the way across the Atlantic Ocean from
*  the Sahara Desert.
*  You'll see that show here.
*  And the scale of this is massive.
*  Every single year, the amount of landmass which is whipped from the continents across
*  the ocean is greater than all of the total fertilizer which we're using in order to support
*  our current agricultural production.
*  But we can zoom in and see the same level of elegance and beauty if we look inside of
*  a single blade of grass.
*  This cross section, which is shown here, is representing these little building blocks.
*  They look like little bricks and a wall, but in fact, these are individual cells inside
*  of a blade of grass.
*  And these little floating green spheres that you see are little floating solar power stations
*  which the cells are using symbiotically to generate the fuel that they need to grow.
*  And if they need to produce more fuel, they make more of these.
*  And if they need less, they deconstruct them and they use those materials again and again.
*  But these innovations didn't happen overnight.
*  This has taken 3.1 billion years since the start and the evolution of life on Earth.
*  And the way that we are going to be able to build new things, we believe, is not by trying
*  to come up with entirely new solutions on our own, but by rather figuring out how to
*  ask nature the questions which it has already spent, it's already got a 3.8 billion year
*  head start on trying to answer these questions.
*  And so let's look at a couple of examples and areas where we urgently need to ask nature
*  questions.
*  And these are in some of our most polluting industries.
*  And if we look at these industries and we look at the way that these industries operate,
*  it's these industries which operate most apart from the way that the natural world has started
*  to solve these problems.
*  So let's dive in and look at a few of these.
*  This butterfly has spent 60 million years figuring out an environmentally friendly way
*  to attract a mate.
*  Now if we look at this at first we might think, wow, this butterfly has really developed a
*  very beautiful dye which it can use to generate this color.
*  But it's not until we zoom in and we look at the wing itself in very fine detail that
*  we see that it's actually the same material the butterfly is using to build its otherwise
*  colorless exoskeleton by patterning this material in a very special way that it's evolved over
*  millions of years.
*  It's found a way to simply reflect only blue light.
*  There's no pigment involved.
*  If we were to grind up the wing of this butterfly we would find no color.
*  So imagine an industry in which we no longer needed to dye clothing and the water and energy
*  use required to do that.
*  Imagine we could use the same materials and simply reflect the colors that happen to be
*  in fashion.
*  You might see a shark when you see this photo.
*  Another way to think about this is this is a machine which has been innovating in marine
*  transport for the last 400 million years.
*  Now if you give nature enough time and you give it millions and millions of years to
*  try to solve a problem it finds a very, very efficient solution.
*  Now the solution that the shark has developed is revealed when we again look at its skin.
*  The skin of the shark is one of the most advanced ways to minimize drag in the water which minimizes
*  energy use during transportation and simultaneously has the effect of being self-cleaning.
*  Now the shark accomplishes this trick by using a very complicated hierarchical structure
*  which includes length scales of features across more than three orders of magnitude of the
*  little length scales that it needs to piece this together.
*  Imagine then that we were able to use that shark skin and apply it to all the marine
*  transport vessels on this planet.
*  We're going to be using the same technologies to try to find the efficiencies we could gain.
*  Or look at an example, this is probably the one that I get most excited about when I think
*  about personally, the fact that there are plants on this planet outside that have found
*  a way to take the sun's energy and to turn it into chemical fuel which is ultimately
*  being used to produce all of the biological mass on this planet and they're doing it in
*  a very clever way.
*  By using photosynthesis, and we're going to set aside that beautiful innovation for
*  a second, plants have found a way to use a proton gradient which is set up inside the
*  plant as a result of the sun and use these little molecular rotors.
*  And the way that they work is they actually grab spent fuel that's floating around inside
*  the cells.
*  They grab the pieces of spent fuel and they physically bring them together and hold them
*  together until they link back up.
*  And once they link back up, the cell can then use that energy again.
*  And this is happening right now in every single one of your bodies.
*  Every single day, you turn over the same mass of this fuel as your body weighs.
*  Imagine we built a system in which you had to eat your body weight every single day.
*  That's not the way that nature develops these solutions.
*  Now imagine a world in which the fuel source that we as humanity utilize was one in which
*  we used the fuel, we collected the fuel, we returned it to its original state, and then
*  we reused it again.
*  That's the type of system that nature would build.
*  Or one of my other favorites, one that's evolved specifically for us.
*  Fruit co-evolved with different animals because it was so delicious that the animals would
*  eat it and they would help propagate it.
*  They would help spread its seeds.
*  The challenge, however, is that we've only co-evolved with particular fruit types for
*  a really short period in history.
*  And although they've developed so that we're going to help spread them around, they don't
*  necessarily have the characteristics that we would want in today's food system.
*  But they have figured out something really special.
*  And that happened when they transferred out of water and onto land.
*  When plants evolved out of water and onto land, the evolutionary adaptation which allowed
*  them to do this was the formation of this thin polymeric barrier around the outside
*  of the plant.
*  Prior to this thin polymeric barrier, which is referred to as Q-ton, when the plant moved
*  onto land, it dried out very rapidly because it wasn't able to resist the desiccative stress
*  of the ambient environment.
*  And so when the plant developed this adaptation, it was so important that it's been evolutionarily
*  conserved between species.
*  So every surface of a plant that you see growing above the surface of the earth is covered
*  with this thin barrier.
*  And this is where we have been focusing at appeal.
*  Again, the fruit, everyone has had the experience of a strawberry going bad in their refrigerator.
*  And the reason for this is because the fruit is slowly losing moisture and it's oxidizing,
*  processes which are caused by diffusion of water out of the fruit and oxygen into the
*  fruit.
*  And so we at appeal have found a way to take the molecules from the parts of the plant
*  that you're not eating, the same materials, and to recycle them into a barrier which we
*  apply to the outside of the parts of the plant which you are eating.
*  And by doing so, we can have a dramatic impact.
*  We can leverage 3.8 billion years to add a couple days, but this is something that we
*  all want in our refrigerators.
*  You've all had this happen.
*  Once the fruit loses moisture and desiccates, it's gone.
*  By reducing that desiccation, the fruit lasts dramatically longer.
*  The joke with the avocado, not now, not now, not now, now, too late.
*  With this technology, we can make that joke no longer funny.
*  I love the citrus example.
*  The inspiration for our name of our company, appeal, comes from the idea that fruit with
*  appeal has a much longer shelf life than fruit without appeal.
*  Now fruit with our appeal lasts as long as citrus can.
*  If we solve perishability, we can solve trillions of dollars of losses that are happening every
*  single year.
*  If we relax this idea of perishability, we can open up access to new markets, whether
*  it's smallholder farmers in a remote region of Kenya that may not have access to a city
*  center where someone's going to be willing to pay them for what they're growing, or a
*  new highly productive production region like Peru, which may now be able to gain access
*  to the Asian market for the first time.
*  Or experience things like this.
*  This is a caviar line.
*  Many of you have probably never seen this before.
*  It's natively from Australia.
*  The reason that you haven't seen it is because it has an extremely short shelf life.
*  It only lasts about seven days.
*  But with nature's technology, we can make this product commercially viable.
*  25 days this can last, and now you're going to be able to pick this up in your grocery
*  stores.
*  We're going to add a lot more people to this planet in the next 30 years.
*  And if we continue to do things using the systems that humans have evolved, we're going
*  to need 70% more food and we're going to need 55% more fresh water.
*  Now, we could go try to find a second earth, and there are people trying to do this.
*  Or we could do what humans have always done, and we can choose to be defined by the materials
*  which we have available to us.
*  As a scientist and a material scientist, I'm always motivated by the fact that when historians
*  have looked back in human history, the way that they have defined the progress of human
*  development has been according to the tools that we have available to us.
*  Think back to school.
*  Remember the Stone Age.
*  Remember the Bronze Age.
*  Remember the Iron Age.
*  And where we're seated now in the Silicon Age.
*  Now that we have the tools to peer into the natural world to identify those molecules
*  which nature has been using and reusing and recycling again and again since the beginning
*  of life on this earth, when historians look back on the age that we're entering now, if
*  we choose to be part of the system and not apart from the system, what will they call
*  this age?
*  We believe that by making very small changes and integrating ourselves into the system
*  today, we have a dramatic opportunity to have an incredible impact on our future.
