---
Date Generated: May 30, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 1621s
Video Keywords: ['biology', 'healthcare', 'genetherapy', 'CRISPR', 'medicine', 'disease', 'innovation', 'technology', 'science']
Video Views: 8940
Video Rating: None
---

# CRISPR 2.0 and the Future of Gene Therapies
**a16z Bio:** [October 05, 2019](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R_LMAQQr7zs)
*  Hello everyone, my name is Andy Tran and I'm a partner on the A16Z Bio Investing team.
*  What I want to spend time to talk about is one of the most important shifts impacting
*  Specifically, on how technologies used to rewrite our genetic code is becoming one of the most powerful therapeutic arsenals of all time.
*  With massive new progress also bring with it an entire new set of challenges and opportunities.
*  In this talk, we'll walk through some of the key tailwinds driving innovations in this space,
*  as well as go through some of the biggest hurdles keeping this technology from reaching more patients.
*  More importantly, we'll be sure to dive in potential zones of opportunity to tackle these very challenges
*  and also touch upon some of the key ingredients that we love to look for in companies striving to make a big impact in this space.
*  So we're really in this new era of therapeutics when our medicines are more powerful and complex than ever before.
*  We've gone from small molecules of a few dozen atoms to full protein biologics and antibodies
*  to this unprecedented complexity of essentially using biological machinery to engineer our genomes to cure diseases.
*  Of course, this is certainly a big paradigm shift and very exciting as these technologies have given us the power to precisely target
*  and eliminate the origin of disease as well as be very curative with just a single dose of the drug.
*  And to be clear, this is definitely not all theory.
*  Recent clinical translation of these drugs have produced four FDA approved cures for patients with these gene therapies.
*  These breakthroughs of the past two years have really been an important milestone for the entire history of medicine.
*  More excitingly, the most recent two approvals, Luxterna for a form of congenital blindness,
*  as well as Zolgensma for spinal muscular atrophy, have been actual in vivo gene therapies
*  in which these complex medicines are sent to combat the genetic mutation directly inside the body.
*  I think even more fascinating as we look into this entire landscape, we're really just at the beginning of this frontier,
*  as there are about two dozen more gene therapies that are slated to just have phase three trials in this year alone.
*  Peering a bit further into the clinical pipeline, we're expecting at least 10 to 20 gene therapy approvals per year by the end of the decade.
*  That's an order of magnitude more of these one and done cures than we have now every single year.
*  Perhaps unsurprisingly, the excitement and promise of these breakthroughs has really created some of the biggest opportunities
*  for startups working on these genetic medicines.
*  In fact, taking a look at the past several years, some of the largest biotech exits have been from companies developing these gene therapies.
*  So as you look at the pace of innovation continue accelerating and the market landscape and regulatory environments
*  continue to get familiar with this new modality, we become even more excited about the extraordinary opportunity
*  that this field brings for the entire biotech industry.
*  So I guess to really appreciate and understand this technology shift, perhaps it's worth revisiting how we got here.
*  After decades of promise, gene therapy has now become one of medicine's most powerful therapeutic modalities,
*  but it didn't really start out this way.
*  In fact, early approaches were pretty rudimentary.
*  So on the onset, gene therapy from the start was just simple transgene addition,
*  in which we were essentially jamming healthy copies of a gene into a disease cell.
*  The hope here is that these healthy copies can produce enough functional protein to compensate for the mutated gene.
*  The problem with this method is that it never really removes the root cause mutation.
*  And unfortunately, through tragic learnings from harsh early clinical trial realities,
*  scientists and physicians agree that jamming in foreign genes at random places without really fixing the root cause
*  is not a viable strategy for therapy.
*  The first big shift in the space occurred when we started progressing to focus on making proteins
*  that can target and cut the source of the mutated gene.
*  This happened in the form of double stranded breaks.
*  The first tools created for this, meganucleases, zinc fingers and talons worked,
*  but were pretty clunky, expensive and laborious to make.
*  You actually design individual proteins to bind to a certain genetic sequence,
*  so it never really caught on widespread adoption for experimentation and practical use.
*  But nonetheless, it really did lay the right foundation and proof of concept.
*  Of course, the most exciting development in this category here was certainly when we got our lucky break from nature
*  in the discovery of the CRISPR-Cas9 nuclease.
*  This was definitely unprecedented for the field, because it was such an elegant and efficient system for genome editing.
*  You can actually program a simple RNA strand to target most genomic locations.
*  Compared to old tools, engineering was cut down from a few months to a matter of weeks or days.
*  The early wave of CRISPR-Cas9 though was definitely not perfect,
*  and its double stranded break mechanism was also muddled with uptargets.
*  So in reality, it was more like the targeted damage or sloppy cutting as represented by this artistic rendition.
*  But nonetheless, as a tool, it was a key building block to a future of more scalable and programmable genome engineering.
*  R&D at that point definitely became much more iterable, and the entire scientific community adopted this technology.
*  So the latest generation of CRISPR tools coming online is what really is pushing us into the realm of precision genome editing.
*  So not only had these tools been better optimized in terms of efficiency and precision,
*  refined by the massive scientific and engineering community, but also people building new functionality.
*  As we will see, clean precision editing was simply just the very start.
*  To really understand this landscape even further, when we talk about CRISPR now, it's not just the Cas9 nuclease.
*  There's an entire ecosystem of CRISPR proteins that really build out the genome engineering toolbox.
*  Some Cas nucleases are much smaller, come from less immunogenic strains, are more precise, or have new mechanisms altogether.
*  Clearly, we are just at the beginning of building out this toolbox.
*  So taken in total, instead of just this pair of molecular scissors that everyone talks about,
*  the biggest recent shift in the field is this push towards making CRISPR a search engine platform of the cell.
*  CRISPR has become the molecular infrastructure in which new genomic targeting technologies are built.
*  Once the catalytic cutting domains responsible for these double-stranded breaks are inactivated,
*  we can attach whatever new payload or new molecular tools that people can make to manipulate the genome.
*  Many powerful new applications in genome engineering take the CRISPR Cas proteins as a blueprint
*  and replace it with other protein domains that can manipulate the genome in new ways.
*  I think to put this more concretely, it is this new CRISPR 2.0 era that really allows us to manipulate the genome
*  in a huge range of dimensions that are fundamentally not possible before.
*  Gene editing clearly was just a start.
*  So for instance, focusing on a few applications, we can replace the catalytic cutting domains
*  with CRISPR activators and repressors to push genes into overdrive or repress them directly at the source.
*  Scientists have even developed deaminases that can edit the genome at a single base pair resolution.
*  This limit of precision actually opens the door for addressing an entire field of devastating SNP-based genetic diseases
*  that were previously untreatable before.
*  We can even now directly target and edit RNA bases, opening up the entire field of transcriptomic editing.
*  But even these tools are just a start.
*  There's a wide array of dimensions and even wild applications like imaging that use CRISPR as a platform layer.
*  I think the most exciting part of this platform is that every few months or even few weeks now,
*  we see powerful new tools that are built atop this CRISPR system that unlocks fundamentally new engineering possibilities.
*  The beauty here is that new use cases are just waiting to be designed and built.
*  So putting this all together, we really think that there's no better time to build the next generation of gene therapy companies.
*  For us in A16Z bio, one of the most exciting things is when these cutting edge scientific breakthroughs
*  start to transition into an engineerable platform, paving the way for something that can be democratized and broadly built upon.
*  And you could definitely see this trend happening with specifically the latest wave of CRISPR innovation.
*  Because of the simplicity and ease of iteration of this engineering platform,
*  there has been an unprecedented developer community that continues to refine and build new superpowers that catalyze the entire field.
*  I think, more importantly, these technologies are starting to be translated to breakthroughs that are approved,
*  commercialized, and administered to patients, establishing a robust clinical and commercial precedent for new entrants to the space.
*  Adding even more grease to the innovation machine, this past year we've seen FDA and CBER leaders drum up plans to make a big push
*  on assessing new cell and gene therapies, as well as introducing new guidance on accelerated approvals for these new areas of product development.
*  All these factors together really drive towards a market that is constantly growing, with even more patients that are desperately waiting,
*  putting us squarely in this perfect moment for gene therapy innovation.
*  So, however exciting the prospects of these powerful new drugs may seem, it does come at the expense of added layers of complexity.
*  Not only do we have to continue to innovate and refine the science, but also develop the engineering infrastructure downstream the value chain
*  to support, manufacture, and ultimately deliver these tailored cures to patients.
*  However, the beauty is, if we can solve these challenges, we can open a massive floodgate of breakthrough treatments for patients,
*  and get one step closer to eradicating the most devastating diseases in our lifetime.
*  So, we really see a couple of core challenges that are keeping these cures from the patient.
*  Firstly, getting these complex medicines into the target organ, and ultimately the cell that you want, is no trivial feat.
*  You must also do so in a way that minimizes the body having any major immune responses that can neutralize the effect,
*  or worse, cause any lethal side effects.
*  Once it is inside the cell, we have to ensure the precision of the genomic targeting to prevent any unintentional collateral damage
*  to the rest of your healthy genome.
*  And of course, we have to optimize the efficiency and ultimately potency of the drug
*  without having to overload the body of unsafe concentrations of this drug.
*  Finally, once you remedy the scientific and physiological challenges,
*  how do we actually scale up the production of these complex, sometimes bespoke cures for hundreds of thousands,
*  to eventually millions of patients?
*  So when we think about how to build a large scalable company to touch upon the most pressing challenges,
*  several key areas come to mind.
*  How do we create better delivery systems?
*  Can we better optimize or engineer the gene editing machinery itself,
*  developing new modalities, and expand the genome engineering toolbox?
*  Can new AI innovations help us refine our R&D, make our drugs safer,
*  or uncover new systems that allow us to harness new biological mechanisms?
*  Lastly, can we apply the learnings from software and connected hardware and automation from our tech industry
*  to rejuvenate a much dated manufacturing infrastructure that is pretty unprepared for these new wave of therapies?
*  Of course, this is by no means an exhaustive list, but the hope is that it can inspire new ideas.
*  The beauty of these key areas is that because they are so core to the industry and important for every drug,
*  one can imagine creating massively scalable and valuable companies for the broader gene therapy ecosystem.
*  So delivery is undoubtedly one of the central components of every single gene therapy,
*  and arguably one of the most valuable challenges to tackle.
*  It doesn't matter how great the gene therapy is if it never really gets inside the cell.
*  Currently, most delivery vectors are plagued with low organ level precision, low efficiency, and pretty high immunogenicity.
*  To jump in, probably the natural place to start is on the AAV side,
*  as these adeno-associated viruses are the only clinically approved vectors so far for gene therapy.
*  But it's hardly the no-brainer solution.
*  The problem is, immunogenicity is still a huge challenge,
*  and therefore most of these therapies are limited to the blood and few immune-privileged organs.
*  And this is actually not surprising when you take a look at the approved drugs or clinical trials in the space.
*  AAV also cannot be reduced because of the formation of neutralizing antibodies,
*  or patients with pre-existing immunity can't even use them.
*  Package size even may be limited.
*  Startups on this front are working on developing novel platforms for CAPSA discovery and engineering,
*  so think about high-throughput direct evolution in silico-machine learning-based approaches,
*  to develop vectors with lower immunogenicity, programmable tropism, or exploring alternative virus species altogether.
*  There are also many clever new biological systems made to mask AAV from the immune system.
*  On the non-virus side, there are potential solutions from a wide array of materials from lipid nanoparticles,
*  various chemical polymers, exosomes, and even other systems that have some biomimetic functionality.
*  In addition to being redosable, some of these solutions are less complex and costly to manufacture.
*  For some applications and diseases that are easier to target organs, like the liver for instance, this might be enough.
*  For other diseases, though, compared to viruses, in vivo targeting of certain organ systems
*  might be tougher and unpacking kinetics might be slow, so there's a lot of optimization and targeting moieties that can be engineered there.
*  Lastly, for a lot of the ex vivo cell therapies that can take advantage of delivery outside the body,
*  startups have been working on various technologies and hardware that can disrupt the cell membrane and mass.
*  Some of these membrane disruption technologies like electroporation or other fluidic-based disruption techniques
*  allow for rapid delivery of a diverse range of materials in diverse cell types without the use of any vectors.
*  And this is especially useful for obviating the need for potentially more immunogenic carriers
*  and allowing for much larger cargo delivery in a much quicker time scale.
*  The challenge here is how do we apply these technologies that inherently utilizes harsh physical forces while minimizing damage to the membrane?
*  For more specific hardware approaches like microinjections and various microfluidic devices, the question becomes how do we scale it up?
*  So there are definitely a wide variety of potential solutions and no silver bullet here.
*  Regardless of the type of vector that you're engineering, we believe the winners in this space are the ones that can harness a specific platform
*  and marry it with very thoughtful optimization towards specific disease areas.
*  So though delivery is immensely important, it is just the frontier.
*  Once it is inside the cell, many of our current protein-based genome editing nucleases are still plagued by off-target effects,
*  low efficiency, and side effects from the immunogenicity of the protein itself.
*  And this is not too surprising, as our most popular CRISPR-Cas protein comes from staph or strep bacteria.
*  As the central core of the technology is based around the nuclease itself,
*  a lot of the solution can come from protein engineering or developing new chemical or synthetic biology tools.
*  On the protein engineering side, there are lots of startups that are developing pretty clever and unique systems
*  to do scalable, high-throughput protein engineering.
*  To attack problems of precision in CRISPR, these systems are, for instance, engineering nucleases that have expanded PAM,
*  higher specificity, binding nucleases, and optimizing other variants that may have unique properties such as smaller size,
*  higher efficiency, and lower immunogenicity altogether.
*  Perhaps orthogonal to protein engineering, there's a lot of creative efforts that Marriott advances in synthetic biology and chemistry
*  to develop new tools that allow us to manipulate our Cas enzymes better.
*  For instance, you can program new on-off switches to add levels of control,
*  or even photoclievable protein domains that allow for the spatiotemporal precision of Cas protein,
*  so it can be activated by light, for instance.
*  So even more exciting, many companies are abandoning the conventional CRISPR platform altogether
*  and using it as a foundational platform or search engine, if you will, to build atop new tools.
*  These new tools that allow us to reprogram biology in fundamentally new dimensions like base editing, transcriptomic editing,
*  epigenetic modification, etc., can really sidestep the initial problems CRISPR is plagued by.
*  Furthermore, these new tools such as DNA base editing or RNA editing allow us to manipulate our genome in extremely high resolution
*  and precision that was never possible before.
*  Companies developing these systems not only help improve the fundamental gene therapy toolkit,
*  but also unlock our ability to develop new drugs to tackle a breadth of diseases that were previously untreatable before,
*  or do so in a much safer way.
*  These innovations in some really expand the power and breadth of our therapeutic arsenal.
*  So aside from engineering biology, there are many things that you can do on the computational front
*  to derive new insights that can help us, or use our tools in much more powerful ways.
*  If we think about the problems that plague our genome editing system from a technical performance level,
*  there are many computational efforts that can help us design better guider RNAs that have higher efficiency and precision, for instance.
*  Machine learning driven solutions here that learn from prior assays and allow for better guide designs
*  make our CRISPR system much more adept at engineering difficult to edit cell types, for instance.
*  On the analysis side, there are groups working on algorithms that can help predict beforehand
*  where and how CRISPR will actually interact in the genome,
*  essentially creating a heat map of how the system is most likely to perform, or even fail.
*  With new predictive capabilities, scientists can actually engineer new therapies that are more precise and safer,
*  or perhaps even take advantage of these inherent flaws,
*  thereby allowing us to harness powerful new mechanisms that were originally not possible without computation.
*  I think orthogonally, there's a lot of exciting efforts that are developing high throughput screening and metagenomic analysis systems
*  that are essentially operationalizing that effort of mining for related nucleases,
*  or discovering new genome editing systems altogether.
*  As we continue to mine new metagenomic data of new species,
*  it's not crazy to think that perhaps even CRISPR itself is by no means the final frontier of genome engineering.
*  The hope is that by digging up hydrothermic vents, or going to geysers, or even New York City subway transit systems,
*  and finding these new microbial species,
*  we can have new genome engineering tools that have properties that ameliorate the prior flaws,
*  or have new superpowers altogether.
*  We can think about smaller enzymes that are easier to deliver, non-immunogenic species, or novel biological mechanisms.
*  So once you've designed the perfect gene therapy, perhaps one of the most overlooked,
*  but most existential threats to the industry is challenges in manufacturing.
*  There's a large, hairy, and deep supply chain that has to work laboriously behind the scenes
*  to make and ultimately deliver these complex drugs to a patient.
*  As we're projecting about 50-plus gene therapies by the end of the next decade,
*  many of our efforts will never even get delivered to the patients that need it the most if we don't solve this challenge.
*  So on the infrastructure side, one area of innovation can come from automation,
*  automation can come from both the hardware side, in robotics that can simply afford newfound speed and scale,
*  or modular systems that let you continue to experiment and adapt new vectors and different cells,
*  and automation can also come from the software side,
*  in which limbs and new ways to operationalize and scale these complex processes can be operationalized in an easy-to-manage software layer.
*  Automated track and trace and data logging are essential for safety, for instance,
*  and having good software tools afford manufacturers and scientists to have the ability to have clear oversight
*  on critical abilities associated with the product during critical steps.
*  On the supply chain side, how can we have better software for digital real-time tracking of cells
*  and clear visibility into a patient development cycle?
*  For instance, can we have enterprise-grade software and best-in-class cloud technology
*  that provides a chain of identity or chain of custody at scale?
*  Connecting the supply chain and courier systems, transport, condition monitoring,
*  and electronic batch record systems are also all very key to the entire process.
*  Apart from the infrastructure side, we can also look to nature and biology for solutions.
*  Aside from increasing the speed and volume from the pure software and hardware side,
*  biology can also alleviate bottlenecks by offering new avenues for much higher efficiency.
*  New innovations in synthetic biology and genome engineering
*  can actually allow us to have much better producer cell lines that can produce viral vectors, for instance,
*  at much higher yields. New advances in metabolic engineering or fermentation workflows,
*  innovative bioreactor designs even, can also aid in the early stages of producing plasmids
*  that are better quality and higher yield.
*  So clearly, there are many exciting angles that one can take to tackle the most pressing challenges
*  facing the gene therapy industry.
*  Hopefully, we can come away from this with the idea of not how much work that is left to do,
*  but the massive room for opportunity to build new exciting companies.
*  Furthermore, the beauty is that, for a lot of these things that didn't seem like big businesses before,
*  can actually become immensely valuable now because of the nature of the rapidly growing gene therapy ecosystem.
*  Those once seemingly niche solutions for complex therapies are gradually becoming the standard part
*  of the therapeutic value chain.
*  There are even new gene therapy companies that are taking all the areas that we've really discussed
*  and building these types of full-stack gene therapy companies that integrate R&D,
*  delivery system engineering, and in-house manufacturing to streamline and more finely control the development
*  of these complex therapies.
*  Because of these massive influx of new gene therapy treatments in the clinical pipeline,
*  viral vector and cell manufacturing have become important core competencies.
*  A variety of contract development and manufacturing organizations and biotech service providers,
*  a lot of these big biotech product development giants, are looking to acquire smaller companies
*  that have deep expertise in viral vector processing.
*  So it is clear that this trend is becoming a critical part of the entire drug development infrastructure.
*  So when it comes time to evaluate new companies in the space,
*  there are a couple of key components that we like to dig into.
*  Of course, each company has its own journey, so there are definitely no right or wrong answers,
*  but what's important is going through the idea maze to find your own earned secrets here.
*  First, there's definitely no one-size-fits-all modality or the best tool for the job.
*  The ironic first world problem here that we have in this field is that the pace of innovation grants us
*  every few months or even few weeks a shiny new genome engineering tool.
*  Many times, the latest, most advanced, mechanistically complex, and by definition,
*  least validated system is not the best tool if a simple CRISPR knockout, for instance, can solve your problem.
*  There are always a variety of platforms and techniques available and no clear winner for each application.
*  What is important is being rigorous in assessing the simplest technologies tailored for your use case.
*  There's definitely no need to add layers of complexity to be different.
*  So perhaps unsurprisingly, indication selection is extremely important.
*  This is fundamental for all drug companies, of course,
*  but perhaps even more crucial to keep in mind for gene therapy companies,
*  simply because of how broad these platform tools are.
*  Aside from picking an application based on understanding your modality and unmet clinical need,
*  it is also important to go through the exercise of evaluating the appropriate balance
*  between investing in these low-risk, modest reward programs versus those with more high impact but more high risk.
*  There's definitely no single best clinical pipeline portfolio strategy,
*  but winners will definitely have invested ample time up front to zinc it through
*  before you really jump into an initial application that defines your company.
*  Executing a BD strategy that propels the platform is also super important.
*  There's ample capital out there and many possible applications, given the broad applicability of these tools.
*  And especially in the early days, it is important to take strong partnerships
*  that are not only good deals from a financial standpoint,
*  but also showcases unique capabilities of the platform,
*  which ultimately helps craft the vision of the company.
*  Another important aspect, but especially true for the non-pure therapeutic opportunities that we've discussed,
*  is thinking through whether the company is better served as a horizontal-based platform company
*  or an integrated full-stack company.
*  Does the value of this technology come from diverse application and partnering broadly,
*  or does the nature of the product make it better suited to be developed entirely in-house
*  in one fully vertically integrated company?
*  So when we think about this new era of complex medicines, now more so than ever before,
*  interdisciplinary teams really provide the edge and the key to a successful company.
*  This new era of companies would look much more diverse than ever before,
*  likely requiring the skills and collaboration of molecular biologists, protein engineers,
*  machine learning natives, data scientists, clinicians, and even manufacturing experts.
*  And finally, the last key ingredient that we love to see, but might often be overlooked,
*  are companies that take advantage of an engineering approach to the company.
*  You know, this engineering mindset really runs through not only the core product or drug development,
*  but also the entire organization.
*  In the midst of a rapidly exciting and growing field, from the science, clinical landscape, business, and regulatory,
*  it is important to be nimble and iterate quickly.
*  So it is clear that our ability to engineer the genome is transforming the very fundamentals of medicine.
*  As the technology, infrastructure, and economics of these drugs continue to progress,
*  it is not too far-fetched to think of a future in which eventually many of our most devastating diseases,
*  even more common chronic ones, can be targeted and treatable with these genome engineering tools.
*  We really think that there has never been a more exciting time for gene therapy innovation,
*  so if you're building a company in this space or have ideas on how to tackle these key issues,
*  our door is always open and we'd definitely love to talk.
*  We can hopefully make this new paradigm of powerful drugs commonplace and accessible
*  for all the patients who really need it the most.
*  Thanks so much for listening.
