---
Date Generated: May 30, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 1280s
Video Keywords: ['Bio', 'biology', 'pharma', 'drugs', 'pharmaceutical', 'M&A', 'acquisitions', 'startups', 'gene therapy', 'therapeutics', 'Andreessen Horowitz', 'a16z', 'a16z bio', 'business news']
Video Views: 3545
Video Rating: None
---

# What’s with All the Bio M&A in 2019?: A Quick Take
**a16z Bio:** [February 28, 2019](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B9if4a8PanU)
*  Well, hello, YouTube.
*  Welcome to the A16Z YouTube channel.
*  My name is Frank Chen, and today I'm here with Koki Harasaki and Nate Chang, members
*  of the A16Z bio team.
*  Koki works on what we call our market development team, which helps startups find friends in
*  the big companies.
*  And Nate does the same thing for our corporate development partners, which are sources of
*  financing for our startups.
*  And so welcome, guys.
*  Well, 2019 looks like it is off to a fast start for bio M&A. So we had Bristol-Myers-Squibb
*  buying Celgene.
*  We've got Takeda and Shire.
*  We've got the GE Bio Pharma divestiture.
*  And so all of this has happened in the early months of 2019.
*  So let's start with this.
*  Why all the activity?
*  All of a sudden.
*  Yeah.
*  So I think looking back over the last year, there are three major trends that have created
*  this perfect storm for where we find ourselves now.
*  The first is patent cliffs.
*  The second is an excess of cash.
*  And the third is a decrease in valuations across the board.
*  So on the topic of patent cliffs, so a lot of the major bio pharma companies in 2018
*  saw loss of exclusivity on major drugs.
*  Roche lost exclusivity on Zolair and Rituxan.
*  Pfizer lost exclusivity on Lyrica.
*  And GSK lost exclusivity on Adver.
*  And so the need to replace those products, replace those revenue streams was there in
*  2018.
*  And then on the topic of cash, the top 10 bio pharma companies came into 2018 with about
*  $150 billion of cash on the balance sheet.
*  So the need was there and the ability to fill that need was also there.
*  And then another interesting wrinkle is between January and December of 2018, the NASDAQ biotechnology
*  index went down 7%.
*  And so there was this general trend of biotechnology companies across the board decreasing in valuations.
*  And so suddenly companies became more attractive or more vulnerable to acquisition.
*  So I need new assets.
*  I have the money.
*  Things look like they got a little cheaper.
*  Do you agree this is what's happening?
*  I think the biopsyche changed too, specifically in the fourth quarter where across all sectors
*  of the market saw a downturn in trading.
*  But I think the buyer universe actually strengthened across pharma.
*  If you look at pharma stocks, how they closed it at the end of 2018, they were in much better
*  positions.
*  So I think the buyer psyche changed in terms of, well, we should certainly change our aperture
*  and re-examine some of the key targets that we've been looking at.
*  And what do you think drove that?
*  Like the psychology change?
*  Why are now, why is now the right time?
*  Whereas mid last year it wasn't the right time.
*  I think part of it is data driven.
*  If you look at Spark, which got announced yesterday, they had a lot of nice tailwinds
*  in the hemophilia franchise.
*  And Roche really looked at their heme program as the catalyst for stepping into that transaction.
*  With respect to Loxo, they got through their regulatory filings and are about to launch
*  a drug.
*  So I think part of it also is buyers want to control the launch and control the commercial
*  message.
*  Take me into the psychology of a corporate buyer, right?
*  Which is there's a couple strategies that you might be trying to implement, like, look,
*  I need a new asset.
*  I need to double down on sort of my areas of core competence.
*  Or maybe I need to get rid of things that aren't my core competence.
*  So talk to me a little bit about what might drive the decision to buy or sell.
*  Yeah, I think part of it, a lot of it is just growth and the TAM and what the patient populations
*  and the revenue I'm trying to capture with this new product.
*  But it's also, if you actually think about gene therapy and new technologies, they are
*  creating the moat.
*  Meaning, for example, Avexus and SMA, they are probably the leading gene therapy program
*  out there.
*  And they want to continue building that franchise and have not only a facet patent clip, but
*  with a new modality, they could actually have more sustained cash flows.
*  So with Avexus emerging in gene therapy, with Lexeterna and the other SPARC programs emerging
*  in hemophila, I think those two buyers really felt that those are going to be the leading
*  platforms in gene therapy.
*  Granted, they're two different disease areas, but they felt we could build pretty strong
*  franchises here.
*  Yeah, I think the operative word here is platform.
*  So the industry in general saw the gene therapy field maturing and relatively synchronously
*  started making investments.
*  And so when we had Voss do the podcast for us earlier this year, he talked about the
*  investment.
*  Sorry, this is CEO Voss Narsinan of Novartis.
*  He talked a lot about Avexus and how he saw that as a real platform play.
*  So the lead asset, AXVS-101, it certainly is going to be probably best in class for
*  SMA.
*  But it also gave Novartis an AAV9 vector platform that it could use to deliver other gene therapies.
*  And then with the SPARC acquisition, same thing, Roche was a laggard in the space and
*  now suddenly leap the head with not only a marketed gene therapy, but this AAV platform
*  that it could use for delivering other gene therapies.
*  Talk to me more about platforms, because especially for our software viewers, platforms mean something
*  like Linux or the Win32 API or these days AWS.
*  What is a bio platform?
*  Why all the interest?
*  Yeah.
*  So I think the most common platform is a drug discovery platform.
*  And I think this is one of the existential kind of questions a lot of biopharmacist,
*  early stage companies have to go through.
*  There are many companies that have proprietary drug discovery platform methodology with the
*  promise of discovering multiple new drugs.
*  But oftentimes those companies will have to focus on a few select programs to partner.
*  And so the existential question is really around, hey, do we try to go it alone, preserve
*  the platform, and hopefully have it realize the full breadth of discoveries we can make?
*  Or do we get acquired by a company, they develop the lead assets and then the platform itself
*  gets shelved?
*  So the platform is sort of shared R&D, shared know-how that could potentially lead to different
*  assets.
*  Is that sort of the way to think about a platform?
*  Yeah.
*  I think the terms also change a little bit.
*  If you actually look at Spark, it definitely has its anchor in gene therapy.
*  I think the thing that gets underappreciated in biopharma is downstream capabilities.
*  And so they have a manufacturing facility on Market Street in Philadelphia.
*  And I think that was a key strategic asset.
*  I think other gene therapy companies have done the same.
*  Unicurrent Cure built a manufacturing facility.
*  Audentees has done the same too.
*  So I think the platform is not just an enabling technology to source and discover new drugs,
*  but it's also the breadth of end-to-end solutions for modality.
*  Yeah.
*  And I think that's spot on.
*  So when we met with Voss, he talked about Ovexis, again, being a platform, but also
*  giving Novartis scalable manufacturing in the gene therapy space.
*  So you're right.
*  I mean, specialized fields like gene therapy carry with it very specific functional know-how
*  that big companies need to bring on board wholesale.
*  And just on Voss, he made two acquisitions in the radio labeled target oncology space.
*  So with AAA and Endocyte being the most recent acquisition, they were able to secure that
*  supply chain for that specific radio isotope.
*  So I think that in itself is a sort of enablement platform for that company.
*  And Nate, zooming up a level, maybe talk about how much M&A has already happened this year.
*  We're just about to hit March.
*  And compare that to last year.
*  How many dollars are we talking about?
*  So in 2018, the industry announced 123 billion of M&A transactions.
*  This year, we're at 94 billion.
*  Wow.
*  We just hit March.
*  Exactly.
*  We're about to hit March.
*  All right.
*  Fast start.
*  Yeah.
*  It's a fast start.
*  So we're seeing a slow pace throughout 2019.
*  Part of it's also capital markets driven.
*  I think we're going to see a slightly slower pace in terms of IPO exits.
*  But there's certainly a lot of companies that were eyeing the capital markets in 2019.
*  And we'll see if that pace continues.
*  Yeah.
*  Now imagine you're sitting in the sea where you're in a corporation and you're trying
*  to figure out how do I deploy my dollars, right?
*  At one end of the spectrum, we have these sort of massive blockbuster deals, right?
*  And we're off to a fast start this year with them.
*  On the other end of the spectrum, I could take $100, $200, $500 million and sort of
*  invest early in companies alongside investors like us, right?
*  Like the BioFund.
*  And sort of what's your general advice?
*  How should I think about deploying capital late versus deploying capital early?
*  Yeah.
*  I think Celgene had a great playbook.
*  They were very active in looking at earlier stage companies in terms of licensing, licensing
*  with equity or also licensing with an option of buy.
*  They had all those structures laid out for a lot of their early stage investments.
*  I'd say from the strategic perspective, I think there are multiple inputs that go into
*  this for early stage companies.
*  It's going to be an R&D decision.
*  And they were going to be the ones that catalyzed the decision in terms of going all in on a
*  platform or early stage company.
*  So I think most companies will want to be more risk averse in rent versus buying technology
*  to enable their R&D productivity in the short term.
*  I think most acquisitions that you see in biotech are late stage to marketed stage companies.
*  So they are, I think pharma companies are still very conservative in terms of making
*  big bets on early stage platforms for acquisition.
*  Say more about this sort of rent versus buy, which means it's going to be a licensing agreement
*  of some sort rather than an outright acquisition?
*  Yeah.
*  So just on the early stage, I think this is also very common with platform technologies,
*  especially very new differentiated ones.
*  You see big pharma companies either use their corporate venture arm to invest early, which
*  is a good way of looking under the hood.
*  And then later stage setting up potentially some kind of partnership agreement, co-development
*  agreement where it's basically a handoff with the big pharma company taking over at a later
*  development stage.
*  So option agreements are pretty common.
*  Option agreements effectively allow a big pharma company to outsource R&D, not have
*  it appear on their R&D line on P&L, and decide at a later date whether they want to continue
*  or not.
*  And so I think deals like that around platforms will continue on.
*  In terms of acquisitions, we saw Clementia get acquired by Ipsen, and that's a classic
*  single asset company.
*  It's common to see single asset companies really kind of get further along in development
*  because it's really a binary bet that you're making.
*  The drug works or not?
*  Exactly.
*  So it's typical to see pharma companies wait for proof of concept, phase 2A data that shows
*  safety and some efficacy before doubling down.
*  Now, there are some areas of clear exception, so very competitive hot areas like oncology,
*  immunocology over the last few years.
*  You've seen this shift in acquisitions earlier on in phase 1 and actually even earlier just
*  because it was so competitive.
*  And that was a very strange phenomenon because people were really making large bets in absence
*  of any human data.
*  Let's sort of switch hats.
*  So we talked about it from the point of view of sort of the large corporate buyer.
*  How should I be thinking about it?
*  Let's think about it from the point of view of a startup executive, which is, you know,
*  I just finished my PhD or my postdoc and I've got some miraculous way to build a diagnostic
*  or build a therapeutic.
*  And then I start down the path and at some point I'm going to need to engage with the
*  existing incumbents who have all of the distribution.
*  How should I be thinking about those conversations and what are some best practices that you
*  would sort of have for people in that boat who are starting those conversations?
*  Sure.
*  So I think, you know, early on it's a mistake that happens all too often is to think about
*  big pharma as this kind of nebulous, you know, hole that you'll kind of deal with later.
*  It's actually quite important to look at the landscape, understand what therapeutic areas
*  are high priorities for the major biopharma companies, start thinking about who you want
*  to partner with and, you know, engage them at the right time.
*  And so that timing is, you know, dependent on a lot of factors.
*  But, you know, I think sharing the same vision is really the most important thing.
*  Some of the most successful partnerships I've seen, even early stage, the head of R&D
*  just absolutely loved the science, loved the technology and was committed as an internal
*  champion.
*  And then, you know, deals that are more transactional tend to happen later where companies kind
*  of look at a late stage asset as just a revenue stream that's going to come online in two
*  years or three years.
*  And so, you know, another really important consideration is, you know, what kind of partnership
*  or merger do you want in the future and what capabilities do you want to contribute and
*  what do you want your partner to contribute?
*  So again, you know, anybody can kind of do some research, understand the landscape and
*  really hone in on ideal partners for them.
*  And then, you know, there are other considerations later on where some big pharma companies will
*  just tend to fully integrate the company, whereas others will, like Roche and Spark,
*  will allow the acquired companies to operate semi-autonomously.
*  I think, particularly the total addressable market and where you're going to be in that
*  treatment paradigm is pretty key for the therapeutics companies because some, they kind of, you
*  know, paint a broad stroke.
*  I'm going to be an oncology company.
*  I'm going to target X, but you're going to be fifth line or fourth line.
*  How does that move the needle meaningfully for a physician, but also then for the partner
*  in terms of how they think about their commercial strategy in a sort of a five to a 10-year
*  horizon.
*  And kind of understanding that, and you may not have all the numbers and where all the
*  chips will fall because it's a very fluid field because there are probably 100 oncology
*  companies that are at a development stage that are targeting the same tumor type.
*  So I think having that context and being thoughtful about that lends a lot of credibility to your
*  story.
*  Yeah, and I think that's a very fair point because, you know, at the end of the day,
*  if you're an operator, a founder, you've really put your blood, sweat and tears and your life
*  on the line to create something and it's your baby.
*  And if you're going to pass it on to somebody else, you want to make sure that your baby
*  is well taken care of.
*  And so, you know, in negotiations, I think the tone really reveals, you know, whether
*  you're a high priority or not for the company.
*  And you know, just in the extreme cases, I can tell you that big companies that really
*  want an asset, that really want to show commitment to that program will fly, you know, a big
*  portion of their executive committee out in final negotiations to say, hey, we're committed.
*  And you know, that's kind of the strongest vote of confidence that you can see.
*  If you don't see the busload of executives unload at your front door, you're probably
*  not going to get the premium price.
*  Exactly.
*  Yeah.
*  Well, Koki, I know that you brought some props for us today.
*  And why don't we use the props as a way to talk about this sort of age old sort of battle
*  between startups and the incumbents and the age old battle is, look, the startups have
*  the innovation.
*  They're going to be inventing the new therapies, creating the new assets, but the incumbents
*  have all the distribution.
*  They know how to sell.
*  They know how to get reimbursements and so on and so forth.
*  And there's been a lot of change in the way that you can sell.
*  So talk to us a little bit about that.
*  Yeah.
*  So exactly.
*  I mean, the traditional kind of partnering model, a co-development model, was the company
*  would do the discovery and early stage development and then at some point pass it on to the big
*  formal partner to develop and get approvals and get distribution.
*  I think what we've seen really over the last 10 years is a lot of boards want the companies
*  to be able to be standalone.
*  And so what you see in this fairly typical, and actually Spark is a good example, where
*  The company will keep commercial rights for the US and out license ex-US rights.
*  So in the case of Lux Turner with Spark, they kept the US rights and out licensed the ex-US
*  rights to Novartis, which is actually a weird entanglement now because the two Basel-based
*  rivals are sharing an asset.
*  So I think that's been a change.
*  Companies do want a chance to be standalone in many cases.
*  And in terms of, again, this goes back to the conversation about what the company hopes
*  to contribute versus what the partner, the big formal partner hopes to contribute.
*  And again, it comes down to a level of commitment.
*  If the asset is very critical to the business, the pharma company will in all likelihood
*  want to control the manufacturing and distribution unless it is a very niche specialized product
*  like gene therapies and AAVs, which require specialized know-how.
*  And it's understandable if it's mission critical to get the quality manufacturing CMC right.
*  Great.
*  Fantastic.
*  Well, thanks guys for joining me on this hot take of all the M&A news.
*  And if you liked what you saw, go ahead and subscribe to our channel.
*  And we will see you in the next episode.
*  Bye now.
