---
Date Generated: May 30, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 1160s
Video Keywords: []
Video Views: 11439
Video Rating: None
---

# Healthcare Has Left the Building
**a16z Bio:** [April 29, 2020](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FeLA_el8a4s)
*  So what I want to talk about today is from our vantage point, what we're seeing in terms
*  of the future of healthcare.
*  So as Sam mentioned, I work at Andreessen Horowitz.
*  We're a Silicon Valley based venture capital firm.
*  And when we launched the firm about 10 years ago, one of the founders, Mark Andreessen,
*  famously wrote an op-ed in the Wall Street Journal where he described how and why software
*  was eating the world.
*  And what he meant by that was that software or technology broadly transforms virtually
*  every industry that it touches.
*  And if there's one industry that has given software indigestion, it's been the healthcare
*  industry.
*  And probably in turn, software has given the healthcare industry some indigestion as well.
*  And so what I want to talk about today is a bit about the future and why we see that
*  in many ways this time really is different in terms of how we're thinking about where
*  technology will shape the future of healthcare.
*  How it'll change how we get access to healthcare, how we think about treating diseases, and
*  ultimately how technology can help keep us healthier in our lives.
*  So let's start at the beginning.
*  We all get sick.
*  And while the details differ and the circumstances differ, the patient journey is all somewhat
*  similar.
*  You start to feel crummy.
*  Your body tells you something's wrong.
*  You hop in your car.
*  You go to the doctor.
*  Or if it's more serious, you go to the hospital.
*  You get diagnosed.
*  You hopefully get treated.
*  And when you get released, if you need any additional therapy or medicine, you get back
*  in your car and you drive to a pharmacy.
*  Now that's basically the way we think about accessing the healthcare system today.
*  But what if there were a world without hospitals or pharmacies?
*  That might be a tantalizing proposition for some of the folks in this room.
*  But it's actually not that far-fetched.
*  If we go back in the not-too-distant past, we once lived in that world.
*  When you got sick, your doctor came to your home to take a look at you and to take care
*  of you.
*  Everything that doctor needed was sitting in his medicine bag, in his Gladstone bag.
*  And if there was anything you needed for your care that wasn't in that bag, he could walk
*  down the street and go to an apothecary or a compounding pharmacy and get something made
*  for you.
*  But as medicine advanced, we had to build grand institutions to house the new practice
*  of medicine.
*  So a great case in point is Johns Hopkins hospitals.
*  So Johns Hopkins opened its doors in about 1889 and really in many ways was one of the
*  first models of teaching hospital here in the United States.
*  And really what drove the creation of Johns Hopkins was a recognition that the care of
*  medicine was becoming increasingly specialized.
*  And so we started to see specialties emerge and be developed and alongside that, physicians
*  that were specializing in specific disease areas or parts of the body.
*  So with that specialization, it now becomes, as you can imagine, more impractical to have
*  the doctor come see you at home if you have a whole bevy of specialists that are now centralized
*  in one place.
*  More sense for you to go to them.
*  And along with the specialization of medicine comes the specialization of technology and
*  equipment used to drive care.
*  And if we look through sort of midway through the last century, of course, a lot of that
*  equipment is big and it's expensive and it's bulky.
*  So then of course, it doesn't make sense to put any of that stuff in a Gladstone bag.
*  So it makes sense for you to go to it as opposed to have it come to you.
*  And if you're going to have a grand institution centralized, you need the ability to of course
*  scale that.
*  So if we look at the Johns Hopkins medical system today, it's about an $8 billion system,
*  thousands of beds, thousands of physicians caring for patients that come from all over
*  the world.
*  But with scale comes challenges in terms of costs, both from a dollar standpoint.
*  So we know that we spend about a trillion dollars every year paying for hospitalizations
*  in the U.S., some of which may be unnecessary and some of which may be inefficient.
*  We also know that beyond the dollar cost, there's a great human cost to treating patients
*  through the hospital systems.
*  Because of the complexity of care, there's a lot of human toll associated with medical
*  errors.
*  And that's to say nothing for the amount of money and human toll that comes from bringing
*  the sick together and having the risk of them catching hospital-acquired infections.
*  But as I started at the beginning, we also see that there is a shift in technology today
*  that hopefully is going to meet with other key tectonic shifts that we're seeing in the
*  healthcare system, both in terms of stakeholders that are in the space, both existing and new
*  entrants, in terms of expectation and demands from the people that are on the receiving
*  end of care, and in the emergence of new technologies which I'll go through.
*  So let's talk about the first one, the industry structure.
*  The silos that have traditionally defined the healthcare system in the U.S. have started
*  to dissolve.
*  We have insurers and payers and technology companies and insurers coming together to
*  become more monolithic companies across the continuum of care.
*  We also have the payers, whether they're traditional insurers, governments, employers, becoming
*  increasingly frustrated with the state of affairs today.
*  And if you're going to talk about payers, you have to recognize that more and more is
*  being expected and demanded of consumers in terms of the money that comes out of their
*  own pocket for their own care.
*  So it's not surprising that consumers in turn are demanding more of the healthcare system
*  or will continue to demand more of the healthcare system, especially as technology has transformed
*  virtually every other part of their lives.
*  And then when you think of industry structure, you think of incumbents.
*  And one of the fascinating things about healthcare, again, something I'm sure folks here are very
*  familiar with, is you have new entrants come into the space, many of which are dominant
*  incumbents in other adjacent industries, whether it's retail or technology that are now focused
*  on healthcare, given all of the challenges and perceived opportunities that exist in
*  our healthcare system.
*  And not only do you have incumbents moving into the space, you actually have new companies
*  being built from scratch, many of which are using technology at their very core to think
*  about new ways to deliver care.
*  And finally, none of this talk about technology makes a lot of sense unless you talk a little
*  bit about some of the key technologies that we're seeing start to move into the healthcare
*  system.
*  And I'll go through this a bit more in a few minutes.
*  But we're seeing the rise of artificial intelligence being used across the healthcare system.
*  We're seeing the use of big data.
*  Certainly the availability of it is there.
*  And now the question is how we can use this in an effective way.
*  And we're seeing the rise of new modalities of medicines that have incredible promise
*  to tackle and even cure some of our most intractable diseases, but will also come
*  at incredible cost and challenges for access broadly.
*  So now we're at this really interesting inflection point.
*  Healthcare has left the building.
*  The delivery of care has broken out of the traditional walls of the hospital and moving
*  towards where we work and live.
*  So in the future of healthcare, how will we get access to the system?
*  Well, we're already seeing a lot of this happening today.
*  Folks that have children, I'm sure seeing plenty of these.
*  The Minute Clinics or the Urgent Care Clinics where you can walk into a more of a retail
*  setting and get access to a broader and broader range of treatments for a broader and broader
*  range of conditions.
*  And then of course, as demographics shift in this country, we're seeing more and more
*  of health happening at home.
*  And that's not to say that hospitals will disappear altogether, but I think what's very
*  surprising is the kinds of procedures and activities that we'll see in hospitals will
*  be specialized to the things that are so incredibly complex, like surgeries that require incredibly
*  specialized equipment like we saw in the early days of the rise of the centralized hospital.
*  But I think what's also surprising is that we'll see more and more of technology moving
*  into the home to enable us to do a broader range of care services in the home.
*  Here you see pictured an ICU at home that uses a broad range of equipment that wouldn't
*  be too out of place in a hospital setting.
*  And if how we get access to our care changes, who will deliver our care is also changing.
*  One of the most surprising things that we've seen as we've talked to academic institutions
*  is how focused medical schools are today in ensuring that their physicians are technology
*  native in terms of being able to train and use new technologies.
*  And I think one of the most surprising things we'll see is the emergence of new specialties
*  that come from the use of technology in health care, much like radiologists, of course, came
*  on the backs of the availability of X-ray technologies.
*  And one of the interesting back to the future moments that we see is that telemedicine has
*  given us the ability to go back to the time where the doctors can come to you.
*  So now you can get access to a broad range of specialists through your computer screen
*  or through your tablet.
*  And I think we'll continue to see use cases where this becomes a very active front door
*  for care.
*  And speaking of technology, companies like Omada or Lavongo are using technology to help
*  assist specializations and act as digital coaches for some of the most complex and chronic
*  conditions that need persistent management.
*  So who delivers our care is changing, how we get access to care is changing.
*  And we know that if part of the reason of going to the hospital is because the equipment
*  was specialized in one place and centralized in one place, the new Gladstone bag, the medicine
*  bag, is the telephone.
*  So it sounds trivial to call it a telephone.
*  We know it's a supercomputer that sits in our pockets.
*  And of course, early days, this is not a central part of care today.
*  But it's been fascinating to see the broad range of applications that you can do on an
*  iPhone today, whether it's an EKG or to manage blood pressure or you can do DNA sequencing
*  even today.
*  And so this change is happening in real time.
*  And once it becomes software, it will move at an increasingly accelerated pace.
*  And so the neat thing about hospitals is they may not disappear altogether, but what we
*  are seeing is that once your care used to come to you, centralized hospitals made you
*  go to your care, but we've already seen various waves of how your care is coming back to you
*  in a very personalized way.
*  So what about pharmacies?
*  I said pharmacies would disappear.
*  Well, one of the things that's really interesting, if you look at the history of pharmacy in
*  the United States, is the father of pharmacy had this very prophetic vision where he said,
*  if the pharmacist becomes a mere dispenser of medicines, he'll relapse into a simple
*  shopkeeper.
*  And it's pretty prophetic if you walk into a retail pharmacy today in terms of what it
*  looks like.
*  So what gave rise to this?
*  Well, what gave rise to this was the ability to improve manufacturing technologies, to
*  give us pills and capsules so that we could make the medications widely available at a
*  reasonable cost to manufacture.
*  And then that gave, of course, rise to the retail pharmacies where you could walk to
*  your corner store and pick up whatever medicines you needed that were prescribed to you.
*  But this is an area where we're seeing dramatic change as well.
*  So first of all, the idea of going to pick up your medicines is going to disappear.
*  We've seen Amazon acquire PillPak, so your medicine is more likely to get drop shipped
*  to you in the near future than you get in your car and going to pick it up.
*  We also have companies like Zipline that are using drone technology to deliver medicines
*  to some of the most difficult to access places in the world.
*  And it's not hard to imagine that that will be coming to a front yard near you at some
*  point soon.
*  And so medicine is really in many ways leaving the pill bottles.
*  So for the mass produced ones, we will find ways to hand deliver them, whether it's truck
*  or drone.
*  But importantly, as digital therapies emerge, it may be that your next prescription is in
*  a pickup, it's a download.
*  And finally, as we see living medicines emerge, like engineered cells or gene therapies, obviously
*  you're not going to get those picked up at a pharmacy.
*  Those will be delivered to you in a very, very different setting.
*  And so what's fascinating about pharmacy today is going back to William Proctor's original
*  vision, the medicines were once made for you, then they were manufactured for the masses,
*  and now they're being programmed for you again, whether it's the logistics of it coming to
*  your door or the literal biology of it being programmed specifically for a patient.
*  And what's fascinating about this is just like the physician's practice is going to
*  change with the use of technology, I think in many ways we're going to see the emergence
*  of a next generation of pharmacists that goes back to the original vision that William Proctor
*  had, where it's not just a shopkeeper, it's someone who's actually helping manage what
*  is a very complex range of medications.
*  Okay, so all of this is predicated on the fact that we people get sick.
*  But what if we don't get sick anymore?
*  What if symptoms disappear altogether?
*  Now this sounds of course pretty far-fetched, but if you look at the history of healthcare
*  over the last decades, we've made incredible strides in addressing some of the most vaccine
*  conditions we've had as a society.
*  Of course there have been the emergence of others, but what's fascinating is we're getting
*  much better at early detection to help catch disease earlier in its progression.
*  Companies like Freenome are using artificial intelligence to make the next generation of
*  diagnostics.
*  Companies like Q-Bio are working at the intersection of advanced computation and medical physics
*  to build the physical of the future.
*  But getting a screen is a reactive process that happens at a scheduled pace.
*  What we're seeing increasingly is that technology will become woven into our everyday social
*  fabric.
*  Health will become an everyday part of our lives, whether it's the access to wearables
*  that monitor our health on a regular basis, a cardiogram that can follow your heart rate
*  and actually pick up some very incredible things like Afib or high blood pressure, potentially
*  other ailments before they actually become conditions themselves.
*  And so this idea that we may not get sick anymore is incredibly intriguing in the sense
*  that it's probably hard to imagine that it's happening today, but we're starting to see
*  that the earlier and earlier intervention of care is going to have incredible impacts
*  not only on costs, but on outcomes for patients in terms of their wellness.
*  So the question is, are we ready?
*  So we're talking about the future and all of this probably sounds incredibly Pollyannish
*  and perhaps even a bit naive.
*  But what we know is that the healthcare system has over decades adapted to novel technologies
*  and perfectly perhaps with challenges, of course, but the delivery of care has continued
*  to improve with every subsequent generation.
*  And that will undoubtedly be the case as we move towards the future that we've just described
*  here.
*  I'm going to misquote my good friend and Gotham City Police Commissioner, Jim Gordon, when
*  I say, what do we need to do to get the healthcare system we need to get the healthcare system
*  that we deserve?
*  Well, I'll tell you a couple of things.
*  Number one is this grand future is going to require us to modernize the back office, to
*  make sure that all of the incredible and complex logistics that go behind the scenes for the
*  delivery of care can keep up with the use of new technologies.
*  So companies like Alpha Health are using artificial intelligence to address things
*  like revenue cycle management to make sure that hospitals are able to bill and basically
*  manage their back office much more effectively and efficiently.
*  But if we're going to modernize the back office, the main reason for doing that is precisely
*  because we're going to see new models as we shift from activity-based care to value-based
*  care, fee for service versus outcomes.
*  And what we've seen is that there are many models that have emerged to think about new
*  ways to both pay for and deliver care.
*  Devoted Health is a company that's reimagining what a Medicare Advantage plan would look
*  like from scratch by building technology into its very core.
*  And if healthcare is moving outside of the four walls of the hospital, we know that we
*  will need technology to create frictionless coordination of care.
*  So even within the hospital, we have tools like artificial intelligence that could help
*  physicians deliver better care to their patients, like the work that Suchisaria is doing with
*  Bayesian Health.
*  Or what about coordinating across an entire healthcare system the work that patient ping
*  is doing to make sure that you have a seamless web of communication to manage continuity
*  of care across the healthcare system, across caregivers across the country.
*  Or the work that Tomorrow Health is doing to manage the very, very tricky transition
*  between getting care in a hospital-based setting and moving into the home and ensuring that
*  you have the right technology so you have access to the right equipment to manage that
*  transition at a most delicate moment.
*  And then of course, as we think about miracles of medicine, we will need the ecosystem and
*  the infrastructure to ensure that the next generation of therapies and cures, like engineered
*  cells and gene therapies can actually be delivered to patients and can be actually accessible
*  to the patients that need them.
*  And this is going to require a pretty broad range of ecosystem development.
*  Number one, hospitals are going to need the logistical ability to deliver this care.
*  This is a very complex vein-to-vein treatment.
*  It looks very different than most other modalities of medicine.
*  But number two, and arguably most importantly, if we're going to make this widely accessible
*  to patients that need them, it's going to have to be affordable.
*  So we'll need new models for how pharmaceutical companies charge for this, and we're seeing
*  early days of this.
*  We're going to need new models for how payers are able to pay for this and take on the associated
*  costs with providing this therapy.
*  And then to connect those two things, we're of course going to need the models and the
*  technology to monitor for efficacy, to make sure that the therapies are doing what they
*  need to be doing to justify the costs.
*  And so this is work that is in progress.
*  It's very early days, but this will need to be built if we expect to have these therapies
*  to have the effect and the wide availability that they will need.
*  And so to just close, look, we all get sick, and that's probably not going to change anytime
*  soon.
*  But thankfully, because of the people in this room and the people that work broadly across
*  the healthcare system, whether they're incumbents, whether they're upstarts, folks that are looking
*  to deliver real innovations to improve patient care, it's going to give us the opportunity
*  to make sure that we collectively all get better.
*  Thank you very much.
