---
Date Generated: May 30, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 1092s
Video Keywords: ['genetic engineering', 'bioengineering', 'future of genetic engineering', 'future of bioengineering', 'gene therapies', 'advanced nanotechnology', 'biology as nanotechnology', 'programming living cells', 'genetic modification explained', 'bioengineering projects']
Video Views: 17760
Video Rating: None
---

# The Future Will Be Genetically Engineered
**a16z Bio:** [February 24, 2020](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F8dIrX3VZyE)
*  Everything in our world is going to be genetically engineered.
*  And I mean everything.
*  Our food, our therapeutics, our materials, our manufacturing infrastructure, our consumer
*  goods.
*  My name is Alec.
*  I'm the co-founder and CEO of Asimov.
*  We're a company in Cambridge, Massachusetts that engineers living systems.
*  Biology is a master architect at the most impressive of scales.
*  This is the majestic Sequoia towering hundreds of feet in the air.
*  This tree built itself from scratch from the single cell stage by compiling carbon out
*  of the atmosphere and turning that into plant tissue.
*  They're pretty science fiction sounding, right?
*  They're solar powered, self-healing, self-assembling, self-replicating, they're planet wide.
*  A lot of biology is like that.
*  Kind of ridiculous sounding at the face of it.
*  Biology is not just a master architect at the large scale.
*  If you zoom all the way into a single cell, biology is a master architect at the nanoscale
*  as well.
*  And so if you zoom all the way in, what is biology?
*  It's hyper advanced molecular nanotechnology.
*  Truly, without exaggeration.
*  So what we're looking at here is a single cell and the cytoskeleton, which is the network
*  that allows the cell to have shape and to move.
*  Maybe you remember the cytoskeleton from high school biology.
*  This cytoskeleton network is built from proteins.
*  Proteins are molecules that are encoded inside genes and then they're constructed by cellular
*  machinery with atomic precision.
*  These things self-assemble and self-organize.
*  They're dynamic.
*  Every single cell on the planet has the ability to do computation.
*  That is perceive their environment, do information processing on those signals, and ultimately
*  regulate genes in response.
*  And of course, biology replicates.
*  This cell has all of the molecular machines needed to make a faithful copy of itself.
*  Biology is hyper advanced molecular nanotechnology.
*  As engineers, we want to harness that.
*  For a long time, humanity's only ability to manipulate or modify biology was through techniques
*  like selective breeding.
*  I mean, this started a long time ago, millennia.
*  This is how we bred wolves to dogs.
*  This is how we developed large, tasty, nutritious agricultural crops.
*  So humanity's relationship with engineering biology goes way back.
*  But then in the 1970s, there was a dramatic shift in the precision with which we could
*  manipulate biology.
*  That was by engineering DNA sequences, engineering genetics directly.
*  So in a set of molecular techniques that were developed in the 1970s, we really built the
*  backbone for how we do genetic engineering today.
*  In the 70s and 80s, we built a technique called polymerase chain reaction, which allows us
*  to make lots of copies of DNA.
*  This is really useful if you're going to use that DNA for things downstream.
*  We also developed the ability to cut and paste DNA.
*  We can take genes from one organism.
*  We can remix it with other genes, recombining genes.
*  This is what people mean when they talk about recombinant DNA or transgenic organisms.
*  In addition to these molecular techniques that operate on naked DNA in a test tube,
*  we can put these inside cells.
*  A favorite analogy of our field is that DNA is kind of like software.
*  It's code that you can program.
*  And then when you put that custom DNA into a cell, the cell boots it up kind of like
*  software.
*  It's an imperfect analogy, and it often gets taken too far.
*  But I think it's useful for capturing the idea that we can engineer DNA sequences and
*  imbue organisms with new function.
*  And so these techniques have continued to develop in the decades since, along with other
*  techniques like the ability to write DNA directly using chemical synthesis.
*  And so collectively, these are the types of technologies that we use for the physical
*  process of genetic engineering.
*  What have these techniques gotten us over the past 40 years?
*  Well here's a whirlwind tour of all of the highlight genetic engineering products that
*  have been brought to market in one slide.
*  Starting in 1978, Genentech showed that they could produce insulin using genetically engineered
*  cells.
*  You know, previously if you were a diabetic and you needed to take insulin to treat your
*  disease, that insulin came from the pancreas of pigs and cows.
*  Genentech showed that they could genetically engineer microbes to produce insulin in a
*  bioreactor, in a vat.
*  This turned the therapeutic manufacturing process from one that was basically a farming
*  operation into one that was a lot more akin to brewing beer.
*  The 1980s saw the development and environmental release of the first transgenic crops, notably
*  the ability to engineer herbicide resistant crops so that farmers could plant these, spray
*  their fields with herbicide, kill all the weeds, and their plants wouldn't die.
*  And it's hard to overstate actually the dramatic increases in productivity that this has driven
*  globally.
*  An application that a lot of people maybe don't realize is made possible with genetic
*  engineering is cheese.
*  Specifically, the process of coagulating milk into curds uses an enzyme called chymacin.
*  We used to have to get chymacin from the stomach linings of cows and goats.
*  Over 90% of the cheese in the world is produced using recombinantly produced chymacin.
*  So if you like cheese, you have genetic engineering to thank.
*  Okay, so we've talked about therapeutics, we've talked about foods, what about materials?
*  So in the 1990s, another blockbuster biotechnology application was the development of cotton
*  that produced its own insecticides.
*  That is, it's making its own defense against bugs from eating it.
*  And this, along with herbicide resistant plants, are now continuing to climb.
*  They are the dominant ways that people use these crops in agricultural settings.
*  A kind of fun application in the early 2000s was the first commercial transgenic animal
*  called the glowfish.
*  This was a genetically engineered fish that fluoresces when you put it under a black light.
*  It swept the aquarium enthusiast world by storm, and interesting fact, it was actually
*  illegal to sell and possess these fish in the state of California until relatively recently.
*  And that actually laid the stage for other applications in food.
*  The FDA recently approved the first GM animal that's fit for human consumption.
*  It's the awkward vantage salmon.
*  It's engineered to grow year round instead of just the spring and summer months, and
*  that should be hitting the supermarket shelves imminently.
*  The impossible burger.
*  Consumers are clamoring for it, right?
*  It's the burger, the plant-based burger, that bleeds when you bite into it.
*  And that blood, which is what gives it its meaty flavor, isn't animal blood.
*  It's hemoglobin that's produced, again, using genetically engineered microbes.
*  And so there's been a lot of development, not just on the technology, but also the public
*  adoption of genetically engineered technologies over the past several decades.
*  And then bringing it back to where we started in therapeutics, in the past couple of years,
*  there have been some really incredible advances in cell and gene therapy.
*  This is the idea that we can put DNA into a human cell, in some sense patching the software
*  of the genome to fix some critical defect.
*  And these cell and gene therapies that the FDA has now approved are treating things like
*  cancer, leukemia, lymphoma, other inborn genetic disease like blindness or muscular atrophy.
*  It's the most exciting time in cellular and molecular medicine ever.
*  So that's the whirlwind history.
*  Where do we go from here?
*  Well, I hope it's not too controversial to say that while those products are amazing,
*  they've all been made using relatively primitive genetic engineering.
*  We take a gene, we put it into a cell, and we try to make a lot of that gene.
*  This is in contrast to what nature is capable of, which has this astoundingly complex system
*  of thousands of genes that's sensing and responding to the environment.
*  We want to achieve that.
*  We want to rival nature in our ability to program these complex genetic functions inside
*  cells.
*  One day, we want to be able to beat nature at our ability to program these functions.
*  And so as synthetic biologists, we think about building integrated genetic systems that have
*  multiple layers, genes that act as sensors so the cell can perceive stimuli like pH,
*  chemicals, light, pressure, oxygen, convert those environmental signals into a signal
*  that the cell can do information processing on, whether that be digital logic, analog
*  computation, dynamical feedback control.
*  We want to be able to build embedded genetic nanocontrollers to then drive the expression
*  of actuator genes.
*  These are genes that give rise to the phenotypic or behavioral outputs of the cell.
*  Therapeutic responses, cell movement, metabolism are all examples of actuators.
*  And so how do we enable design of these much more complex genetic functions, especially
*  in light of the astounding complexity of evolved biology?
*  Evolution has been hacking together biology for the past four billion years.
*  There's an insane amount of technical debt associated with it.
*  Well, we and others in the field have been inspired by electronics design and the trajectory
*  that gets taken over the past several decades.
*  So what I'm showing you here is Intel in the 1960s.
*  And what these engineers are doing are carving by hand a semiconductor circuit using a scalpel.
*  So that red sheet is a vinyl sheet called rubilith.
*  They're going to use that as a stencil, a photo mask, to pattern the silicon.
*  So literally designing a semiconductor circuit by hand.
*  If you're going to pack 8.5 billion transistors into an iPhone, you need better tools than
*  a scalpel.
*  And so fast forward to 2019.
*  This is the user interface for a state of the art electronic design automation software
*  tool called Altium Designer.
*  You can see the complexity and the sophistication of electronic circuits that can now be grappled
*  with.
*  And in fact, this transition from manual design to computer aided design isn't unique to electronics.
*  This happens for every engineering discipline as it matures.
*  Think about how we now build bridges and skyscrapers.
*  We didn't need computer aided design for the first flight with the Wright brothers at Kittyhawk.
*  But we sure need computer aided design for Boeing 787s and building spacecraft, rockets
*  like the Falcon Heavy.
*  Inevitably this transition is going to occur for genetic engineering as well.
*  And so at my company Asimov, that's what we're building.
*  We're building an integrated platform, a compiler and a debugger to program living cells.
*  We do this by close integration of biology and software.
*  About half of our team works on synthetic biology in the lab and half of the company
*  works on computational tools.
*  Our initial applications are from mammalian cells, including human cells, specifically
*  for therapeutic applications like protein therapeutics and some of these next generation
*  modalities like cell and gene therapy.
*  We want to build tools that radically advance our ability to program complex functions inside
*  living cells.
*  But we're not the only ones that are leveraging computation to advance our ability to program
*  biology.
*  There are many such groups.
*  One really cool area is cancer vaccines.
*  So everyone's tumor is unique.
*  What if we could develop a vaccine that's personalized to a patient and we administer
*  it to them, we supercharge their immune system to go after that tumor?
*  Well, the way that tumors are unique include what are called neoantigens.
*  These are short protein sequences that are displayed on the surface of a tumor cell.
*  If we knew what those neoantigens were, then that would guide the molecular makeup of the
*  vaccine.
*  And so groups are using cutting edge machine learning techniques to predict what those
*  neoantigens are directly from a tumor's mutated DNA sequence.
*  Another cool application is what's called the human cell atlas.
*  This is an international effort between many groups to build a map of every single human
*  cell type.
*  And there's about 40 trillion cells in the human body, give or take.
*  And so you're probably familiar with neurons and skin cells, but each of those cells actually
*  has many cell subtypes.
*  There are many cell types that we didn't know about until relatively recently.
*  And this idea of building a map of all human cells requires state of the art statistics.
*  Actually that white plot, the colorful plot, is a statistical visualization showing how
*  we classify and categorize these cell types in a computationally tractable way.
*  If you look at the history of genetic engineering, it's really revolved around humans finding
*  some interesting gene that nature evolved and then us taking it and repurposing it for
*  something cool.
*  And this is true kind of across the board in all biotech domains.
*  So evolution has gifted us billions of interesting genetic parts, genes, in the genomes of diverse
*  species.
*  It's a treasure trove for genetic engineers.
*  But it's very difficult for a human to look at a genome sequence and to say, aha, there's
*  an interesting genetic part for me to use.
*  But computers excel at this annotation, scanning, and retrieval of DNA sequences.
*  For example, this short DNA sequence called an operator, which is involved in the cell's
*  natural information processing mechanisms.
*  And so while right now we mainly do genetic engineering by repurposing things from nature,
*  eventually we may be able to design these genetically encoded molecules like proteins
*  directly.
*  And so one of the cool applications of this would be development of universal flu vaccines.
*  Right now you go get a flu shot every year to give you some chance of coverage for that
*  year's common flu strain.
*  But what if you could get a vaccine that gave you coverage across all of the common flu
*  types past, present, and future?
*  This is the grand challenge being pursued by David Baker's group at University of Washington.
*  They've developed a computational protein design software called Rosetta that recently
*  has been making incredible strides in the design of proteins, many of which have no
*  close analog in nature.
*  So eventually we may be able to just design things directly instead of harvesting it from
*  the tree of life.
*  And so where do we go from here?
*  What do computational tools look like decades from now?
*  Well, I like to imagine a whole team of engineers working on an ambitious project to program
*  a single living cell.
*  This team will have multiple sub teams that are working on various different aspects of
*  engineering the cell, the various subsystems, including metabolism, computation inside of
*  the nucleus, sensing.
*  The software will enable accurate simulation of what genetic constructs do in that cell
*  in silico before we even build it.
*  These tools will enable us to grapple with very complex genetic designs, likely by using
*  powerful abstractions.
*  We're probably not going to be thinking about things at the level of A's, T's, G's, and
*  C's.
*  Then once we physically engineer that cell, we'll be generating massive data sets for
*  all of the molecular phenomena inside of the cell, everything that we care about.
*  This will enable us to analyze and debug those cells, but it will also provide the input
*  to iteratively improve our computational models, most likely using machine learning.
*  Syntetology is too complex to be understood by a human brain at a holistic or intuitive
*  level for even a single cell.
*  We need these unbiased statistical approaches that can ingest this large-scale data to learn
*  biophysical models directly.
*  The trajectory of synthetic biology is decades from now, we will be able to design entire
*  genomes from the ground up.
*  We will have complete control over the flow of information, matter, and energy inside
*  living systems.
*  What do these types of tools enable from a product perspective?
*  Well, genetic engineering is going to transform all aspects of our daily lives in the same
*  way that the integrated circuit just utterly pervades everything about our daily life.
*  It's in our phones, in our cars, in our toys, in our smart fridges, smart toasters.
*  It's everywhere, right?
*  Engineered biology is going to be similarly pervasive in our lives.
*  Imagine a couple of decades from now when every single component of your house and your
*  car is sourced using biology, which is capable of building things that are inaccessible using
*  any other means in a sustainable manner.
*  Imagine having materials which are themselves living.
*  Imagine your driveway healing itself when it gets cracks in it.
*  Imagine not just having solar panels on your roof, but panels of microorganisms that are
*  extracting pollutants from the atmosphere, cleansing the air.
*  There are going to be neurotechnology applications.
*  What I'm showing you here is what's called the brain bow.
*  It's a slice of brain where the neurons have been genetically engineered to be slightly
*  different colors, which enables simpler identification and labeling.
*  The advances in this technology could allow us to one day use engineered viruses with
*  DNA barcodes to build a full connectomic map of a human brain and potentially enable whole
*  brain emulation.
*  Connectomic engineering may be the key to building better brain-computer interfaces
*  by making neurons responsive to light using tools called optogenetics.
*  Photons have higher spatial precision than electric fields like you would get from an
*  electrode, and so it may be the more precise way to read and write brain states.
*  And space, the final frontier.
*  Everyone talks about rocket science being the hard problem about outer space, but biology
*  is the really hard thing about outer space.
*  We need to be able to manufacture food and therapeutics in the confined closed system
*  of a space station.
*  One day, we need to be able to terraform entire planets to be hospitable for life.
*  We need to be able to engineer biomes.
*  These are biology problems, not rocket problems.
*  And so I think biology evokes many different things in people's minds.
*  I think they think that there's a sphere of thing that biology touches.
*  But as genetic engineering advances, that sphere of what's possible with biology will
*  grow without bound.
*  It's an almost infinite space.
*  Through genetic engineering, we enable programming of matter.
*  That's a big idea, and that's why eventually everything will be genetically engineered.
*  Thank you.
*  Applause.
*  Music
*  .
