---
Date Generated: May 30, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 495s
Video Keywords: []
Video Views: 13630
Video Rating: None
---

# The New Tech Stack for Virtual-First Care
**a16z Bio:** [January 08, 2021](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RHENpEHNB1U)
*  We're coming off of what was a record breaking year for digital health in terms of the number
*  of companies that got started and funded and the levels of growth that they achieved on
*  the patient utilization and revenue side.
*  And it feels like we're truly entering into a new golden era for health care technology.
*  After years of health care startups primarily focusing on selling solutions to industry incumbents,
*  largely because they were the only viable buyer base out there, there has recently been
*  an explosion of full stack digital health companies that take the form of a virtual
*  clinic and compete directly for patients against traditional providers.
*  These digital health companies require similar backend infrastructure to traditional providers,
*  but the available quote unquote health care IT systems out there just completely failed
*  to meet the mark.
*  Not only do these health care IT systems have terrible user experience, but they were also
*  built during a time when fee for service was the dominant way of doing business, when interoperability
*  wasn't yet a thing, and when patients were not considered to be a primary end user of
*  these products.
*  Obviously, everything has changed.
*  As such, of the hundreds of digital health companies that we have met with in the last
*  18 months, we've found that the majority of them have chosen to build their entire
*  tech stack from the ground up, while the rest have licensed off the shelf systems and spent
*  lots of time and money to customize them to get them to do what they ultimately need them
*  to do.
*  The true promise of digital health is the possibility of delivering high quality care
*  at a fraction of the cost and at dramatically higher scale than their historical incumbents.
*  And the way by which we achieve that is by using modern technology and AI to do what
*  historically has been done through human labor or these overpriced IT products that actually
*  decrease productivity rather than enhance it.
*  A risk to this promise is that every digital health company ends up reinvesting all of
*  their cost savings into the development of the same operating system components over
*  and over again from scratch across their separate walled gardens.
*  We are now at a tipping point where the digital health market is large enough and growing
*  quickly enough to drive demand for companies that serve as the new tech stack for virtual
*  first care.
*  In the same way that companies like Plaid, Stripe and AWS abstracted out entire layers
*  of infrastructure and dramatically reduced the cost and time to stand up a new tech business,
*  these health tech companies are now allowing digital health startups to accelerate their
*  time to market and really focus on the higher order elements of their products and services
*  to deliver game changing care to patients.
*  So what are the components of the new tech stack for virtual care?
*  Well the categories in which we see the early emergence of players that are dedicated to
*  selling to the digital health market and getting to promising levels of scale include clinical
*  operations.
*  These are companies that relate to things like care coordination, virtual provider networks
*  and ancillary services like labs, pharmacy and home health.
*  Another category is back office administration and this is companies that serve the revenue
*  cycle, credentialing and supply chain type use cases.
*  And then we have front office administration which is companies that serve customer engagement,
*  sketch and reg and patient acquisition type capabilities.
*  Importantly digital health companies are generally at the tip of the spear of much of the business
*  model evolution that is occurring across healthcare which has really driven the need for novel
*  capabilities across all three aforementioned areas.
*  These capabilities really need to support things like risk bearing models, recurring
*  revenue streams, cash pay and membership based approaches versus just the straight fee for
*  service revenue models of days past.
*  For instance companies like Cerebre allow companies to take on sophisticated actuarial
*  capabilities as a service such that they can bear risk and be at the top of their game
*  with respect to risk analytics and underwriting.
*  Another interesting thing is that these are not necessarily just software based companies.
*  Several health tech companies offer full stack operational service with both online and offline
*  aspects.
*  For instance a platform like Sitka manages essentially its own virtual multi-specialty
*  medical group through which e-consults can be facilitated for their users and Work Path
*  actually sends physical phlebotomists into people's homes to conduct decentralized sample
*  collection for lab test fulfillment.
*  Today we see digital health companies contracting with multiple vendors across these categories
*  sometimes even creating redundancy through multiple relationships.
*  However in the future we do anticipate that the winners that emerge will very rapidly
*  expand their service area to capture more value both within a given category and even
*  across categories like how True Pill has expanded beyond pharmacy which is where they started
*  into telehealth and lab services in recent months.
*  The companies that emerge as winners in this space are also likely to exhibit these kinds
*  of characteristics.
*  Things like focusing on high volume areas of transaction really in the spirit of engendering
*  stickiness with their customers.
*  An example of this is Ribbon Health which plugs into billions of financial, insurance
*  and referral transactions that occur every year amongst virtual care companies that require
*  some piece of information about physicians which weaves them tightly into the core workflows
*  of their customer base.
*  We also like to see companies that connect multiple stakeholders where integration between
*  those stakeholders has historically been very non-trivally challenging.
*  We love intersections.
*  It's really where both the biggest challenges have been with regards to building healthcare
*  companies but also where network effects can be generated.
*  An example of this is Eligible which is a company that connects providers and payers
*  to automate transactions around financial clearance and eligibility verification that
*  have historically required faxes and phone calls and where APIs historically have not
*  really existed.
*  And then finally, we believe that the winners will have to have not just a focus on digital
*  health initially but also an executable path for selling to incumbents over time as well.
*  Eventually, even the legacy players will adopt virtual first care models.
*  In fact, most of them already are and that presents a nice way to significantly expand
*  the addressable market for these health tech companies.
*  An example of this is Wheel which has a virtual clinic platform that has traditionally enabled
*  digital health companies to build flexible telehealth capacity into their business models
*  but they are also being looked at by incumbent providers and payers even as they spin up
*  virtual care programs that may be challenging to staff through more traditional means.
*  A very likely outcome of this whole movement of digital health companies becoming buyers
*  of health tech is that the quality bar for healthcare products will increase relative
*  to where it has been with traditional provider and payer users.
*  At my own startup, which sold software to legacy enterprises, I always felt that we
*  rarely got credit from our customers for the quality of our products, whether it be around
*  user experience, user interface, high-skill performance or even the availability of modern
*  APIs versus things like integration capabilities with legacy systems like Epic, compatibility
*  with workflows even if those workflows were not optimal, and compliance whether it's
*  security or privacy or things of that sort, which while very, very important only represent
*  really the most basic set of requirements.
*  Many of the buyers at these digital health companies are world-class technologists in
*  their own right and they've seen what world-class technology looks like in other industries
*  and therefore won't settle for anything less in their own tech stack.
*  We've all lamented for far too long about the crappy user experiences and performance
*  of legacy healthcare IT systems and I view this movement as our opportunity to change
*  that, starting with digital health companies in that whole universe but then ultimately
*  seeping into the traditional care delivery organizations over time as they too modernize
*  their own ways of doing business.
