---
Date Generated: May 30, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 1936s
Video Keywords: []
Video Views: 16384
Video Rating: None
---

# B2C2B in Digital Health, a founder's playbook
**a16z Bio:** [December 01, 2021](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jGum0TPJpbw)
*  Hi, everyone. I'm Julie. And I'm Jay. And we're really excited to be here kicking off
*  the series about go to market and digital health. One of the biggest dimensions of evolution in
*  digital health, arguably over the last few years has been how companies are actually coming to
*  market and how new products and services are being distributed to end users and how these
*  products and services are getting monetized. And, you know, as a founder who started a company over
*  10 years ago at this point, just the sheer number and, you know, level of sophistication with which
*  digital health companies are coming to market is just completely mind blowing. So some of the
*  examples that we're going to cover in later playbooks include things like selling to SMBs,
*  two sided networks, risk based contracting with payers, and then finally the emergence of these
*  new channel distribution platforms. But in this current session, what we're going to do is cover
*  this concept of B2C2B, or what you might call the bottoms up top down sales motion. This is something
*  that's similar, it's kind of the healthcare version of a trend that we've seen play out in B2B
*  software. So, you know, you might think about Slack or Zoom or Dropbox or these products that you as
*  an individual user can obviously adopt. But then what these companies are then doing is saying,
*  okay, now there's a critical mass of these users, and they might all work for the same company,
*  let's actually parlay that bottoms up motion into an enterprise sale to that company, and also
*  potentially introduce more advanced features that are more enterprise grade. And so, you know,
*  that's really the motion that we're seeing play out in healthcare. And I'll pass it off to Jay.
*  Jay, can you kind of walk us through why you think we're seeing this now in healthcare, when we
*  didn't really see a lot of this kind of activity in the past?
*  So we're seeing digital health companies sell directly to the end user before going to the
*  enterprise buyer with increasing frequency. And there's probably a number of reasons driving that
*  trend. But I think there's at least four that we should call out. Two on the consumer side, and two
*  on the enterprise side. On the consumer side, there is an increasingly tech forward consumer and end
*  user driving healthcare purchasing. We all are delighted by our technology enabled experiences in
*  other parts of our lives. We get to call a car, order food, purchase clothes, pay a friend, all
*  with a tap and a swipe on our phone. And so we expect intuitive virtual first experiences in our
*  healthcare system, especially after the work from home life that we've adopted in 2020 and 2021.
*  And oh, by the way, those same consumers have far more discretion over and are steering a lot more
*  of the healthcare spend themselves. There is a recent report estimating nationwide out of pocket
*  spending on health, i.e. not reimbursed by insurance, is set to hit almost 500 billion in the
*  US in 2021, and projected to grow to about 800 billion by 2026. And then on the enterprise side,
*  we frequently hear from many senior enterprise buyers, chief information officers, chief human
*  resource officers, and other executives about the record number of vendors pitching them new
*  digital health solutions. This vendor fatigue is leading to a bottleneck. As a result, there are
*  many promising B2B digital health solutions out there that just don't make it through the
*  purchasing funnel. And that third trend seemingly coincides with the fourth, which is a rising bar
*  for validation. Enterprise buyers and healthcare and life sciences increasingly expect evidence
*  that the solution works before buying. But for digital health startups, this creates a chicken
*  and egg problem. How do you prove ROI without people using your product? B2C2B makes it possible
*  to go to the enterprise and say, hey, 100 or 1000 of your employees, your members, your
*  constituents are using this offering and are getting value out of it. We've seen B2C2B work
*  across a number of areas, including care navigation, women's health, behavioral health,
*  and many more. In fact, there are a number of different flavors of B2C2B. So when we talk about
*  consumers and end users, we could be talking about patients, employees, clinicians, or medical
*  researchers. When we talk about businesses, we could be talking about employers, providers, payers,
*  or life sciences organizations. And while we as investors see B2C2B as a significant trend, we are
*  fortunate in our jobs to meet and work with some of the best digital health companies today. And so
*  we interviewed founders and builders from some of those companies to ask them the toughest
*  questions that come up for B2C2B digital health companies. How do you acquire consumers? How do
*  you build a product that keeps them engaged? How do you price the consumer product? When is it time
*  to go B2B? How do you find your business buyer and product market fit with the enterprise? How do
*  you actually sell to the enterprise? How do you balance two motions, one to the consumer and one
*  to the business at scale? And what's the role of professional services? But we started our interviews
*  with the most basic question. Given the complexity of B2C2B, why are founders going this way instead
*  of sticking to a more traditional and tried and true commercial motion? While B2C2B can be more
*  complex to execute, it gives startups the power to acquire and engage users directly without first
*  contracting with the payer. As we heard from serial digital health entrepreneur Chris Hoag,
*  whose most recent startup Marley Medical is developing a virtual first clinic for patients
*  with poorly managed disease. In Marley's case, the consumers are people diagnosed with chronic
*  diseases and the businesses are the payers that pay for the healthcare services that those folks
*  receive. In order to understand B2C2B, we need to understand the B2B2C motion and why this is
*  taken over. And the reason was by there was really no other options. And so if you're not in the
*  normal classification system, you have to go direct to the payer, who's either the payer or
*  an employer and contract directly on the product side of the house for a new product. And one of
*  the things that we're thinking about now is now with virtual care, we are a normal product. It is
*  a normal clinical service and it is in the eyes of a payer, they know how to pay for these types
*  of services. And so can we invert the model and focus on our growth, focus on patient acquisition
*  in a direct to consumer motion? And there's many ways that you could do that online through
*  referrals or whatever, but control the ability to bring patients in and then still get paid by
*  payers because now we're a traditional service. So that could look as an in-network provider,
*  if you can figure out a code stack that works for you and covers the services. It could be
*  in capitated arrangements, but you're getting paid on these patients you're acquiring directly.
*  So in a nutshell, the B2C2B motion is trying to control the growth through direct patient
*  acquisition so I can build up my own funnels and channels to acquire patients, but then still get
*  paid by the traditional system of payers and employers. The power of direct acquisition carries
*  with it a number of benefits. When digital health companies get to engage their end consumer earlier,
*  the result is often better products and better healthcare. Companies reach product market fit
*  faster because they're able to iterate and improve the product to keep acquiring users.
*  Get enough of those users and you can use that as a wedge to sell into businesses. Entering the
*  enterprise with momentum and utilization data can help you shortcut an otherwise long enterprise
*  sales cycle. Now the biggest challenge we hear about with B2C2B is that you're signing yourself
*  up to execute two go-to-market motions in parallel with the limited resources of a startup. The upside
*  though is that if you achieve a high engagement and stickiness in both motions, you're unlocking
*  a more resilient business model with greater long-term defensibility. To this end, we heard
*  from Kate, the founder of Maven, a women's and family health platform and marketplace,
*  that B2C2B can also make it easier to show earlier indication that things are working.
*  Because investors didn't really know as much about digital health, you just when you raise money have
*  to show momentum. We had to show some kind of momentum at every single fundraise and we needed
*  a certain amount of capital in the early days to build out our product, be operational in all 50
*  states so that we could sell into the enterprise. We also just needed to show a certain amount of
*  consumer momentum because our story of the investors was, hey, we've launched this new virtual
*  clinic for women's and family health. Consumers love it and now we're taking it into the enterprise.
*  That was a much better story and showed traction than just, hey, we have this thesis that this
*  is an important category and we have two small companies to pilot with. Will you fund us?
*  In the early stages, the goal is about acquiring users. But how do you find and reach them?
*  A lot of that comes down to what one founder called consumer channel fit.
*  Different businesses have different end consumers and if you understand where your specific end
*  users are looking for digital health information, whether it's online on Facebook or offline in
*  community gatherings, you can acquire them at a lower cost. For instance, Butterfly generated
*  initial interest for its point of care ultrasound devices by targeting the most influential clinicians.
*  There are people that are deeply passionate about point of care ultrasound and so we tapped into
*  that. We tapped into those folks. We looked at who was the most researched. We look at what centers
*  they were in. It was very carefully targeting them and then of course we were at the major
*  trade shows back then. I'll never forget the first conference I went to at Butterfly.
*  You walk around the trade show floor and all the booths were empty. Ours would have a line
*  in every direction. In another example of consumer channel fit, Maven tried Facebook ads but found
*  they just didn't do as well at reaching their target demographic as other channels did.
*  There are two things that we did. First, giveaway marketing. Giveaway marketing is,
*  for those people who don't know what it is, it's when you partner up with a lot of other
*  like-minded brands. You find a prize. You then blast your customer bases to sign up for the prize
*  and then you get email lists and then off the email lists you then try to convert people to
*  use your product. We did this very early on. That was one of the biggest marketing channels
*  that we went out the door with in 2015. One of our early investors was an early investor in
*  Noma, which is a wonderful restaurant in Copenhagen that everyone wanted to go to.
*  Now that I'm seeing giveaway marketing and what people will sign up for, it's like,
*  oh, here's a hat. Then all these people sign up to win a hat. We offered an all-expenses-paid trip
*  to Noma in Copenhagen. It was awesome. Then we went out to all these brands like
*  Daily Harvest, consumer brands. Then we launched it. Then we got, I think, I don't know, something
*  like 20,000 emails. All of a sudden we were like, wow, 20,000 names of women from like-minded brands
*  that now we can go market Maven to. It was a lot of work and we had someone on our team
*  doing this full-time, but it was from a cost standpoint, it was pretty cheap. Then off the
*  back of that, we would run consumer campaigns to drive engagement in the product. One of our
*  earliest consumer campaigns that was really successful was called Therapist Speed Dating.
*  What we did is we cut down our therapy appointments to 10-minute increments. Then we would offer free
*  therapists speed dating to find a therapist for you to then book your therapy appointment.
*  We would get the emails from these giveaways and then we would go drive this offer and campaign
*  into our product that was just ours. We started to get consumer volume off the back of some of this.
*  That was one motion. The other motion was honestly, we just did field marketing.
*  Of course, acquiring users only matters if they stay engaged. That comes down to building a product
*  that actually meets their needs while also preparing for the complexities that come with
*  scaling a digital health product. The key challenge is to not build a product that you think people
*  are going to need and use, but to really work backwards from the problem. I think one of the
*  challenges that folks got into with B2B2C is that that isn't so acute. You're able to build
*  something that you can pitch well to buyers, but it might not be something that fits a problem that
*  actual patients and users need to solve. I think then you have to then build incrementally.
*  I think that the risk of doing, especially with a direct consumer acquisition approach,
*  is you have to try to break it down. What is a small unit that I could try to sell to this person
*  or try to acquire them into? What you're trying to do is prove that there's demand, prove that people
*  want this product or at least are willing to engage with it, and then build it out over time.
*  Of course, the big challenge with health care versus a consumer product is that this is health
*  care. This is health data. This is very meaningful stuff. There's a minimum chassis that you need
*  in order to do that. You can't just start throwing out medical recommendations and see if they land.
*  It doesn't work that way. I think the challenge is finding that balance of building something
*  really small and atomic, but building it well so that you're still doing everything right. You're a
*  mini HIPAA compliant platform. Even if you're just bringing people in online and HIPAA doesn't apply
*  to you, you're already thinking about how you're managing people's data and so on.
*  We heard something similar from SAGI at BenchLink, an informatics platform for life sciences
*  researchers. They started by giving away their product to academic researchers and then staying
*  close to their early users to iterate on the product. You need to build for a very small group
*  that you can then logically expand pretty easily. If we can get one academic lab being really
*  successful in, let's say, doing molecular biology research, why can't we get a second? Why can't we
*  get a third? Rather than trying to go broad, we were just very narrow and pointed, but the space
*  we were in had a lot of room for expansion. That's how we thought about it. If 10 people
*  or 100 people were totally addicted to the software, that was a really good sign.
*  One of the chances that we found just the exact 100 people who would be completely addicted,
*  and there'd be no one else after that. I think I'd reach more focus in the early days for most
*  companies. Another important topic in the early days of B2C2B is pricing. Almost no founder we
*  spoke with thought they perfected pricing. There are a variety of models, but really you're balancing
*  two trade-offs, the budgets you go after and the pricing structure you offer. On budgets, you can
*  simply do a cash pay model where you have end consumers pay, or you can allow for reimbursement
*  where the insurer, the employer, and so forth covers part or all of it. Cash pay naturally has less
*  friction for the buyer, but that also may limit you on how much you can charge overall. And you
*  may run into confusion as different consumers have different expectations for who covers their
*  digital health services. Even though some of our early marketing was Maven is cheaper than the
*  price of a copay, there was a lot of consumer confusion still around, wait, shouldn't my
*  insurance pay for this? And when it became a more transactional, like I just need a prescription
*  for something, then it was more straightforward because you were getting something physically.
*  But when it was a service, it was harder to understand why your insurance wouldn't pay for
*  it even if you hit people over the head with the logic of, but it's cheaper than what your
*  insurance even has. If you choose a cash pay model for the end user, how do you set the right price?
*  Here's how Butterfly did it for their point of care ultrasound device.
*  The view first of all is it had to be very affordable. It had to be at a price point where
*  clinicians would just put in their credit card and then also could be afforded by many parts of the
*  world. And so the Jonathan, our founder, really just decided $2,000 is the price and made everyone
*  else figure out how to get there. And I think it was the gut feeling that $2,000 was that right
*  price point, right? That again, they could get the consumer, in this case a clinician to put in their
*  credit card. The second trade off is around how you structure your pricing, i.e. whether you price
*  usage or in a bundled offer. If you do usage based pricing, that might seem more fair. You pay for
*  what you use, but you may discourage usage and most importantly, the user feedback that is
*  incredibly informative to your early product development. Alternatively, you can structure
*  your pricing in a subscription such as a monthly fee that may allow for a more natural usage pattern
*  and customers can choose as much as they want for a fixed fee, but it does add more friction for the
*  initial purchase. Ultimately in B2C, your pricing for engagement more than revenue, but as we heard
*  from Amanda at Bold, which develops fitness programs for seniors aging in place, what you do
*  in B2C has implications for your B2B pricing. We were actually less fixated candidly on the B2C
*  pricing strategy. It was what is the potential ROI story that we can tell on the B2B side?
*  Then on B2C, we really privileged engagement. We did pricing experiments and that was great,
*  but I would say be mindful of whatever you put out as your B2C pricing because
*  you will have to explain the difference between B2C and B2C2B.
*  When it comes to B2B pricing, we heard from founders that most business buyers preferred
*  simplicity, but that really it was a matter of aligning incentives with the business you were
*  actually selling into. For instance, payers are used to a per member per month, so that tends to
*  be their preference, while most employers would rather have the simplicity of an annual license.
*  But stepping all the way back from pricing, the bigger question is when should you flip the switch
*  and go B2B? We generally recommend turning on enterprise when you see repeatable usage patterns
*  among a core customer group through concrete data gathering. Several digital health founders have
*  told us that their enterprise buyers basically expected them to have a randomized controlled
*  trial demonstrating the ROI before signing the partnership. We launched our research study at
*  the same time that we launched our sort of D2C offering and the moment that we had our six month
*  outcomes and we looked at what those six month outcomes were as far as reduction in annualized
*  fall rates and improvement in balance and strength and mobility. That was for me the moment that I
*  felt really excited and confident to take that story and that offering to enterprise customers.
*  I think that for us was did we feel like we were sufficiently de-risked in the eyes of someone who
*  would be excited to be innovative but wants to know this isn't a total sort of shot in the dark,
*  like what is the guarantee? And so those, you know, the hard data from that research study also
*  allowed us to think about like what is the ROI and over what time period and all that was very
*  exciting for us. I think another way to do it and I get this question a lot is like the volume
*  question. So maybe you haven't done a research study but you have really really big volume and
*  you can start collecting that data or you can start saying like I just have already have this
*  existing base of many many individuals. I think that's another way to position and share impact
*  when you're having b2b conversations. Once you do go b2b you have a head start from the b2c motion
*  but you still have to figure out how your end consumer connects with the business buyer
*  and Benchling they followed their academic users into life sciences companies. And so you have these
*  brand new companies oftentimes being spun out of academic labs that use Benchling that were doing
*  breathtaking things, you know, gene editing medicines, lab-grown meats, you name it. And so
*  some of the scientists who use Benchling for free in school started to go over there and then we
*  were just kind of followed them and followed the user. And actually though at first like we really
*  like struck out trying to sell anything to these companies like scientists had used Benchling in
*  school, they liked it but they weren't going to buy it. The business like value wasn't there and
*  that's when Benchling really started to grow. It went from kind of productivity suite for end users
*  to building this single source of truth for the business and the end user experience that was what
*  enabled us to get the data to then present back to the business like here's your scientific data in
*  one place, highly organized and structured. For Benchling reaching an enterprise buyer meant
*  evolving their product offering to meet the more complex needs of an enterprise organization.
*  Similarly, Butterfly overcame the resistance of hospitals to allow clinicians to use a third
*  party device, even one they paid for themselves by creating additional enterprise features.
*  We knew their concerns around security and governance and integration and so we built a
*  software package for that. And so that then created the right dynamic where we actually had a product
*  to sell which had higher recurring SAS dollars attached to it. And so it was a win-win from
*  that perspective. We could solve their problem, we could solve the clinician's problem of wanting
*  to use it in the hospital and then we're driving increased subscription revenue and deepening our
*  tentacles in terms of the integration into the organization and spanning across the organization
*  to do more. So far we've heard that the timing of when you go B2B comes down to having the ROI
*  business case and a sufficient volume of users and then you have to find your enterprise buyer
*  and layer in the additional product features they care about. But once you are in front of that
*  buyer, how do you actually sell? So one of the things I deeply believe in is that people and
*  organizations buy with their heart and they rationalize with their brain. The storytelling
*  about what this device can enable using it at scale and how it's integrated into care and to
*  care pathways is why people are buying it. You then just simply need to justify the ROI on the
*  back end as to why that makes sense for an organization. Health systems have thin margins,
*  they can't be investing in things that don't have some sort of ROI or at least a breakeven. And so
*  you have to create your price but the storytelling is much more important and then the price just has
*  to be justifiable at the end of the day. Throughout the conversation with founders who successfully
*  went B2C2B, we heard about the importance of never losing focus on the end user. Even when
*  you are selling to enterprise, end user product engagement is your advantage. Here's Andrew Lay,
*  founder of Booey Health, explaining why even as a B2B company, user engagement is the most important
*  metric. The fact that people use something, anything, is the most important kind of metric
*  of success for the buyer. Which then leads me to that evolution back to the consumer.
*  Why would someone want to use something super useful to them? That's it. When you think about
*  selling to the employer space, and I talk about this with the team, our head of people wasn't
*  buying stuff for Booey, looking at a calculator and being like, how much money did I save on email
*  this week because I bought Slack? They weren't saying how many times did I not have to
*  keep an Excel sheet updated or get people to log on to Excel and how much time and effort that would
*  take. But instead people logged on to Namely. They're not doing that kind of calculus. They're
*  looking at how many people are using Namely, Slack, Insert, Service, Benefit, Product,
*  whatever it may be. For us, that kind of reason circles back around to the consumer.
*  We should just care about being super, super, super useful to the consumer, to the end user.
*  That's all that matters. Playing with the numbers or playing with different ways of measuring ROI
*  is in and of itself a good hearing. Once you've gone to the enterprise, a company is effectively
*  executing two go-to-market motions at once. It can almost create this schizophrenic pressure.
*  How do companies in the later stages balance the needs of the consumer with the needs of the
*  enterprise? Like Andrew at Booey, for Amanda at Bold, it's about always coming back to the end user.
*  There's absolutely considerations. Are you integrating with Epic? Can you collect this
*  additional information that we're going to need to verify that they're eligible through their
*  health plan? Honestly, when we add those pieces in, I think about we establish the best practice.
*  Then we start to see how implementation can actually pull us away from what we believe our
*  high bar standard should be. Then it's just we rally the team to say, okay, how do we
*  take off the needs that our enterprise customer requires? We absolutely will do that. But then
*  pull ourselves back up so that we aren't allowing the default to be this perhaps lower engagement,
*  higher friction experience and incrementally improve. I think that has been really helpful
*  for our product team as far as understanding there's going to be some deviations. We have to
*  keep experimenting, but just I think really being open with the team around we know what's possible.
*  Let's get back to that maximally engaging experience. Now, while focus on the end user is
*  important, you always have to manage enterprise expectations. Otherwise, your product team can
*  end up pulled into too many directions. It's the age-old problem of going into the enterprise,
*  right? Because it's this you're talking to a leader of a really important health system that could be
*  your first reference account and they're demanding some feature capability. It's easy to
*  make the mistake of over promising. And so what I've learned on the commercial side is, A, tell your
*  product and engineering people to be conservative. Start there, right? Whatever they give you to be
*  conservative, add a quarter to it. Once you've sold into the enterprise and are now managing two
*  go-to-market motions in parallel, professional services can play an integral role in making
*  these more complex customers successful using your product. Big organizations need help. They're
*  so large that they need extra support to make changes. And who better to know how to implement
*  your product than you? And those are your people who know your product and they're going to bring
*  back that knowledge to your R&D teams and help make the product better. And so I think adding
*  professional services was an incredibly important business decision for us. Now, you need to make
*  sure that you're not using professional services as a bandaid to cover for bad product or to avoid
*  building product in certain areas or to have to customize the software. A big part of the
*  whole thesis of spine benching was that we could build something that was highly configurable.
*  So it could be applied to different scientific use cases, but didn't require a bunch of programming
*  for every different customers stuck in some customization hell. And so we heavily employ
*  services. We sell services with every deal we do. It doesn't matter if you're a tiny startup,
*  it's like a very fixed quick start package kind of thing, a couple hours. And if you're a giant
*  enterprise moving everyone to benching, we may be doing services with you for 18 months across
*  2000 people in 20 sites. But I think the customers, the enterprise ones especially,
*  they want to know that not only are they buying the software, but they are like services are a
*  guarantee that they're going to be successful with the software. Okay. So we've heard from
*  founders about the journey from the early days of engaging your first users to balancing two
*  motions at scale. And perhaps most exciting in all of this is that B2C2B keeps those who build
*  digital health products close to the end users who need them. At A16Z, we are incredibly excited
*  about the potential of this approach to improve healthcare and at lower costs. And I'll pass it
*  back now to Julie, who will share our perspective on what our team pays most attention to as
*  investors. And so we wanted to just share a few things about what we would look for in evaluating
*  investment opportunities. And there's really, I would say three major pillars to that. One would
*  be focused on the C part of the motion. So, you know, really at the earliest stages looking for
*  B2C traction. And it largely looks like the way that you would evaluate any B2C business. So you'll
*  look at the cohorts, you'll look at adoption, retention, stickiness, you look at marketing
*  efficiency, your TAC or customer acquisition costs versus your projected LTV. And, you know,
*  this is really where, you know, compared to a B2B2C motion or even just a straight B2B motion,
*  you would really just expect to see far more user data and validation earlier in the trajectory of
*  the business than you would otherwise see. And then the other thing to point out on the C side is
*  really, I would say product velocities. One of the benefits, as we mentioned earlier, of doing the
*  B2C motion to begin with is the ability to have much higher speed of iteration on your actual
*  product. And so that is certainly something that we would qualitatively look at as well.
*  So that's pillar one. Pillar two would really be around the B. And that's where, you know,
*  when you're looking at a seed or even a series A stage company, there might be less quantitative
*  data to look at on this front. And so, you know, here we'll look for just the early validation.
*  How many cycles have you spent on the enterprise side? Do you actually have a pipeline of enterprise
*  logos and an ability to really tell that enterprise story in a reasonably compelling
*  and articulate way? Certainly bonus points if you actually have a contract with an enterprise buyer
*  and or have actually gone live with an enterprise. And then the final pillar that we generally look
*  for is, you know, does your financing plan and your actual company build plan appropriately
*  accommodate the fact that you will be investing in essentially two motions in parallel? As we
*  mentioned before, you know, B2C to B sounds all great, but, you know, it actually is quite a bit
*  of work to build a consumer muscle at the same time as building that enterprise muscle. And so
*  we just want to make sure that founders fully appreciate that. So in closing, thank you first
*  of all for joining us for this first of a series of Digital Health Go-to-Market Playbooks. If you
*  happen to be a digital health builder yourself who is thinking about or actually executing on any of
*  these go-to-market strategies, we would love to hear from you. So please do reach out with your
*  feedback and comments.
