---
Date Generated: May 30, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 1947s
Video Keywords: []
Video Views: 10901
Video Rating: None
---

# Risk-based Contracting for Value-based Care, a Founder's Playbook
**a16z Bio:** [April 06, 2022](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CttVtsnN30g)
*  Hi, I'm Julie.
*  And I'm Justin.
*  And welcome to the second piece in our series on new go-to-market motions in digital health.
*  For our first video, we looked at the B2C2B go-to-market approach.
*  And in this video, we're going to dive into how digital health companies are driving towards
*  value-based care using risk-based contracting.
*  But to understand risk-based contracting, let's first unpack what is value-based care.
*  So value-based care, or VBC, is both a clinical approach that focuses on preventative services
*  and long-term health care outcomes, but it's also a payment model that enables the appropriate
*  incentive alignment to achieve those clinical goals.
*  And it's oftentimes thought about as kind of the antithesis to the traditional fee-for-service
*  payment system in which providers are really paid for individual units of care using established
*  billing codes.
*  These payer-provider contracts have really driven these fee-for-service rates through
*  the roof.
*  And that's been a major driver of why our nation's health care costs have skyrocketed
*  of GDP without a commensurate rise in clinical outcomes and inpatient experience.
*  And so this push towards value-based care is really a push to align value creation with
*  value capture.
*  And that's really where risk-based contracts come in.
*  They are a reimbursement mechanism that aligns incentives rather than providers being paid
*  based on higher volumes and individual procedures and services.
*  Measures are rewarded for hitting certain quality and cost outcomes and measures.
*  So we often talk about going at risk as if it's a single approach.
*  But the reality is that risk-based models represent a broad spectrum.
*  And as we move across the spectrum, a number of different factors can change, but it's
*  primarily the fundamental unit of payment and the degree of ownership or accountability
*  that a company takes on for a given patient or given patient population.
*  And these different factors ultimately manifest in various types of risk-based models.
*  The first bucket is pay for performance.
*  It's something that rides on traditional fee-for-service rails, but often has some kind of clinical
*  or operational performance guarantee that's layered on top.
*  The second bucket here is PMPM, or per member per month.
*  This is a model where a company will often charge a set amount for clinical services.
*  So they might receive $5 or $50 or $150 per member per month.
*  But coupled with that is this risk-sharing component where there's some limited sharing
*  of economic upside against the total cost of care.
*  And as we continue, the third bucket is bundled payments.
*  And this is a structure where companies take on full risk against all of the care for a
*  given patient, but for a specific episode of care.
*  And that episode is typically defined by a certain time period or types of services.
*  That might be something like a bundle for maternity care or a bundle for knee replacement
*  surgery.
*  And then we get into capitation models.
*  And in a capitated model, a company or a provider takes a flat rate of payment for a patient
*  while taking on full risk against a wider range of services than we saw in bundled arrangements.
*  In a subcapitated model, the company is taking on payment and risk for a subset of clinical
*  services.
*  For example, they might take on payment and risk for all primary care or all outpatient
*  services.
*  But in this example, not necessarily for hospital care or for other acute services or for pharmacy
*  spend.
*  And then in the fullest version of an at-risk model, we have global cap or global capitation
*  where a company takes on full risk against the total cost of care.
*  Or in other words, for all clinical services for that patient.
*  And in models with global cap, companies are effectively becoming the payer as they take
*  on this full actuarial risk for that patient.
*  So let's take a step back.
*  Where are we at in this macro level shift from fee for service to value based care?
*  In 2021, fewer than 40% of healthcare dollars actually flowed through a payment model that
*  had any kind of substantial value component to it.
*  And only 6% of dollars were in subcapitation or in a global capitation arrangement.
*  But that being said, we're constantly hearing about risk-based contracts and value-based
*  care.
*  They're in the zeitgeist.
*  And that really has to do with a number of different things.
*  One of those being that over the past couple of years, COVID has hit the health system
*  like a meteor.
*  And it's really exposed this general lack of resiliency of a predominantly fee for service
*  system.
*  Not just in the incentive and reimbursement models, but also in the ability of fee for
*  service models to absorb unpredictability.
*  And it showed at the same time that those with higher exposure to value-based contracts
*  are often better positioned than those who are completely dependent on fee for service
*  revenue streams.
*  So even more broadly, payers are continuing to feel the squeeze arising medical costs.
*  And because of this, are doubling down on risk-based and value-based models.
*  For example, just this last year, we heard from CMS, which is the Centers for Medicare
*  and Medicaid Services, that they're aiming to have all of Medicare beneficiaries cared
*  for by providers and value-based care models by 2030.
*  But at the same time, many traditional care models and providers aren't ready to take
*  on that risk.
*  Excitingly and optimistically, purpose-built virtual care tech stacks have the potential
*  to drive better risk management and more nimble care models.
*  And care models that learn over time in ways that just are difficult for traditional providers
*  that are purpose-built for fee for service.
*  Even though there are a number of companies that have struggled in risk-based models,
*  there have been a number that have also defined the path of how to do this really well.
*  We talked to digital health builders who have navigated risk-based contracts and who understand
*  the specific challenges that come with building and scaling a risk-based go-to-market.
*  And in this playbook, we highlight their learnings with a focus on key phases of the builder
*  journey.
*  First is deciding to go at risk.
*  Next, establishing partnerships.
*  Next, changing success.
*  And then finally, scaling.
*  So jumping in, let's hear how some of these founders grappled with the decision of whether
*  a risk-based model was even right for their business.
*  In fact, like many of the founders we talked to, Jack Stoddard, who's the CEO of Patina,
*  which is a virtual first and home-based primary care model for older adults, accelerated their
*  path to risk because they had to.
*  When you're coming to market with the orthogonal view of the world, often it doesn't fit into
*  the existing business model contracts.
*  And so specifically in healthcare for primary care, the market is used to paying only four
*  to maybe six percent for primary care.
*  And our belief is if you invest more in primary care, that you can actually take out waste
*  in the rest of the other 96 percent of healthcare.
*  And so because our model is counterintuitive to how the market has always approached it,
*  we said, look, let's be accountable for outcomes and let's ultimately build this for risk.
*  Risk-based models can provide more freedom to define the care model.
*  This freedom can give space to prove out the impact of these novel care models.
*  But at the same time, this path to risk has to be balanced with the potential downsides.
*  Many of the founders we talked to took a glide path or a phased approach to risk.
*  Let's hear from Roger Bhatniji, the CEO at Weymark, where they're building a value-based,
*  community-driven care model for Medicaid.
*  They took an accelerated path to risk.
*  Roger highlights where a glide path approach may make more sense for a company.
*  Risk is opportunity.
*  Risk is also freedom.
*  It's the freedom to try new things, the freedom to break the bounds of what is kind of status
*  quo or conventionally considered the approach.
*  Risk is opportunity, but it's also risk.
*  And there's enough risk in building a new company.
*  I would not recommend moving toward risk simply for some kind of valuation arbitrage.
*  I think you do it because it's needed to prove a new model of care or it's needed to cover
*  something that's just simply not paid for under existing CPT codes.
*  We heard something similar from Corbin Petro, the CEO at Eleanor Health, where they're building
*  a hybrid value-based care model for substance use disorder.
*  So in our space, what we know and what the evidence tells us is that creating meaning
*  and purpose in people's lives really helps retain them in recovery and support their
*  mental health and wellbeing.
*  Well, there's no CPT code for creating meaning and purpose in people's lives.
*  And so you have to figure out another way to address that.
*  And that's sort of the clinical model and the business model go hand in hand.
*  You can't sustainably deliver the clinical model without the business model piece in
*  place.
*  Taking on risk is a powerful opportunity to create alignment between the business model,
*  the care model and the operating model, but it's also inherently risky.
*  And so many companies ultimately decide to take a glide path to risk.
*  But where on the risk spectrum is the right place to start?
*  You probably arrive at the level of risk based on what levers do you need for the model to
*  work.
*  And so, for example, if you needed to control in your care model, all of utilization management,
*  the claims payment and network design, well, there's probably no other way for a payer
*  to let you have those keys other than moving to a true global cap.
*  It's difficult to jump straight to full risk.
*  Right.
*  So most payers are going to look for you to have enough experience, enough patience and
*  frankly enough financial weight behind you that you can actually have the ability financially
*  to take and manage risk.
*  And so to do that, I would say start slow, try to align your incentives with the payer
*  where they want to help you get to full risk.
*  But even if you start on the glide path with fee for service, it can be really hard to
*  build for fee for service and for the ultimate goal of value based care in parallel.
*  As we'll hear from Fay Rottenberg, who's the CEO at Firefly Help, where they're building
*  a health plan on top of a virtual first value based care model.
*  They started with fee for service contracts, but they built for value in the operating
*  and care models from day one.
*  So day one, Firefly launched with really basic contracts with payers in Massachusetts.
*  And by basic, I mean fee for service.
*  And that was never the business we wanted to be in, but it was what we needed to get
*  going.
*  And so we had basic fee for service contracts with payers.
*  And really all that meant was that we were in network with them, even if it meant not
*  getting reimbursed for all of the ways we were interacting with patients.
*  Many ways we were operating as though we were on value based contracts even before we were.
*  And so we quickly, I think relatively quickly, progressed from those basic fee for service
*  contracts to more strategic sub cap agreements.
*  And we were able to do that off of the early experiential data that we were able to provide
*  to them from our initial members that we acquired.
*  You know, you hire people who are mission driven.
*  They don't want to give half the population one thing and half another thing.
*  And so we decided, you know, OK, North Star is our outcomes.
*  And so we focused on getting a lot of proof points and a lot of data showing that our
*  clinical model provides superior outcomes.
*  And so we started then consistently delivering our care model across reimbursement types,
*  fee for service and sort of value based.
*  Now, we often get the question from entrepreneurs and providers, is the ultimate goal for everyone
*  to get to full risk, to get to something like global capitation?
*  As we've heard before, though, what amount of risk you take on ultimately depends on
*  what levers you can control on the clinical side and what ultimately best aligns your
*  care, your operating and your business models.
*  For example, in primary care, care is more continuous.
*  It's more longitudinal.
*  It covers a broader set of levers and conditions.
*  So for that global cap often makes the most sense.
*  On the other hand, other more isolated specialty conditions might be a better fit for sub cap
*  care, where you take on a narrower aspect of care and risk for that patient.
*  And for more episodic care like surgical episodes, it can be best optimized through bundled
*  payments.
*  Let's hear now from Satya Jain, the CEO at Care and Health, which is a marketplace for
*  high value care.
*  Surgical care felt like the natural place for us to start because the spend is highly
*  and the cost and quality variation is significantly high in surgical care delivery.
*  And we felt that was right for bundled payments.
*  For Care, taking on additional risk only adds operational complexity.
*  If you are taking an insurance risk in health care, you are governed by very different regulations
*  that are very on risk.
*  Taking any kind of risk means your capital requirement to start the business goes up
*  significantly.
*  And we just felt given where we were, we didn't want to raise that kind of money in those
*  early days.
*  And so creating a model where we essentially stay risk neutral gave us a faster path to
*  market.
*  Wherever on the risk spectrum a company decides to start, success and at risk model fundamentally
*  depends on aligning with other great partners.
*  But in a complex landscape of different potential partners, how do you think about the right
*  set of partners to start with?
*  We've consistently heard across founders and across our peer colleagues that vision and
*  mission alignment are critical, especially early on.
*  And that ultimately starts with aligning around the clinical areas of impact that are most
*  important, as well as sharing a commitment to a value-based approach.
*  So let's hear from Mike Kopko, who's the CEO at Pearl Health, where they're building a
*  marketplace that partners with both risk-bearing entities and provider groups to help these
*  providers take on more risk for their patients.
*  In healthcare, I think we're in a very dark age still, where which providers should be
*  managing which patients is really a function of geography and often referral networks and
*  maybe someone that you know or looked up on the internet.
*  And we would argue that over time, it's actually going to be much more on who is effective
*  with risk and which clinical models manage which risk conditions effectively.
*  And so when we look about adding new partners, we want to work with partners that see the
*  future that this type of risk-based management system is going to be around to stay and actually
*  wants to encourage reward in certain cases, create certain subsidies around participating
*  in these early days of the shift to risk and value.
*  And so a lot of our partners see that.
*  They're thought leaders on how to make that shift and frankly are helping us make the
*  cost of participating in those models and the reward of performing well in them very
*  accessible and helpful for the physicians that are taking on that opportunity.
*  We've heard similar things from our pair of colleagues as well about how important it
*  is in the early days to have alignment around long-term impact, specifically impact that
*  is tailored to their local community.
*  So let's get the take from Sonny Goyal, who's the chief strategy officer at Blue Cross Blue
*  Shield of North Carolina and one of the biggest advocates and champions for new value-based
*  care models.
*  Having a deep understanding of our local population, I think is really critical.
*  And we have found the most success with those partners that understand that while North
*  Carolina may look like many other states out there, we are different and unique in a lot
*  of ways as well.
*  And so getting deep into the communities, into our local populations and understanding
*  that you have to design the solution to really match the specific needs of our people.
*  And having strong, aligned first partners, your launch partners are especially important
*  as key drivers as you're getting your business off the ground.
*  I'm a strong believer of having a anchor customer to help launch a business.
*  And, you know, in essence, they become a co-founder who really understands your stage,
*  believes deeply in your vision and really wants the results that they think you're going
*  to be able to unlock.
*  If you can get that alignment with an executive sponsor, predominantly one who has the P&L
*  who actually is going to benefit from those, from that value that you're going to create
*  together, I find that they are the ones who can then help train the organization and help,
*  you know, be a river guide through the rapids of these health plans that are often somewhat
*  difficult.
*  And speaking of navigating health plans, how do you get the right stakeholders to the table,
*  especially in the early stages?
*  The good thing about the space that we're in is these problems really matter to people.
*  Like we're not, you know, inventing a problem for them.
*  We're really helping them take on what they recognize is the most urgent challenge in
*  Medicaid care delivery, which is, you know, how do you deliver community-based care that
*  meets people where they're at?
*  And so that's usually enough to get the right people to the table.
*  Who are the right people to have at the table?
*  This will depend somewhat on the partner.
*  For example, the needs of a large national payer can be quite different than the needs
*  of a local regional insurer.
*  But in both cases, it's better to build broad coalitions, both vertically with executives
*  and business unit owners, and also horizontally across key functions.
*  In my experience, there are very few people in these payer organizations who can say yes,
*  but there are a lot who can say no.
*  And especially when you're doing something that's innovative, that breaks the mold, that
*  challenges their existing processes, the further into the sales, contracting, and
*  implementation process, the more you bump into other parts of the organization.
*  And so having this broad coalition that includes having a strong exec sponsor, preferably a
*  P&L owner at the helm of this ship is most important.
*  But around that person, and you know, that coalition should include contracting, the
*  medical leadership, often the credentialing team, even the lawyers who are going to be
*  involved, because if there isn't that understanding, it becomes work, and you get a lot of these
*  stakeholders downstream that are almost antibodies, right?
*  And they can come back and try to attack this innovation.
*  So larger national partners as some of the most complex organizations in healthcare often
*  require the broadest coalition building.
*  And so let's go back to Sunny to hear the payer perspective on this piece.
*  When we think about the due diligence and who's conducting it, you know, a lot of time
*  that actually is my team and my division around our strategy and our new ventures team to
*  really set up for guiding innovators through really all parts of our organization, critically
*  obviously engaging with our healthcare division, our clinical division for really the support
*  and the experts to make sure that these things come to life.
*  And then they're put into our networks and our processes and our procedures in the right
*  way.
*  Then we are always working with our finance division, because again, what are we driving
*  towards is affordability.
*  You know, then we go into our legal and our health policy teams.
*  And a lot of times they make sure that we are driving in the right direction and lining
*  up with where the government wants us to go, where our consumers want us to go and really
*  being thoughtful about it.
*  And then last but certainly not least is our is what we call our markets team, whether
*  it's our government team or our commercial team to how do we fit this into their products
*  and to their services to our customers, whether it's the individual or it's to the employer
*  or it's to the governments.
*  The first step in scaling at-risk go-to markets is to succeed in early deployments.
*  But by definition, success and risk-based contracts is ultimately judged against the
*  value or outcomes that are created.
*  So because of this, one of the most important steps in laying the foundation for scale is
*  defining how you tactically measure success with partners upfront.
*  Now we've heard across founders and across our peer colleagues that you have to define
*  success in terms of what matters most to each specific partner.
*  We're focused on affordability and really the total cost of care.
*  We have the best solution out there, but it may not be the biggest value or the biggest
*  impact to what our members need and how do we drive affordability.
*  Sometimes innovators miss that because they're focused on their solution and selling.
*  The question about defining success is not something that you sort of get into at the
*  end of year one of your partnership.
*  If it is, you're probably in trouble.
*  There's nothing more important than actually getting that defined and not just kind of
*  But like literally in an Excel sheet, looking at it and saying, does this look like success
*  to you?
*  And, you know, then working out the contracts to follow from that.
*  Success is often defined on operational and cost outcomes, but picking clinical measures
*  is a key component as well.
*  We've consistently heard about the importance of picking measures that are both validated
*  and easily comparable for your partners.
*  For example, Eleanor Health focuses on substance use disorders for which there are
*  established clinical measurements already in place that they can use.
*  We focused on psychometrically validated scales and screeners so we can benchmark against
*  them and say how much better we are.
*  So that's one thing and certainly payers and others care about that.
*  They also care about things that you can compare a little bit easier.
*  We saw significant reductions in ED and inpatient.
*  That was, we collected that through third parties and so we were able to sort of show
*  in a statistically significant way that we were having this impact across our populations.
*  So part of just getting members through these initial fee-for-service contracts,
*  the strategy there was just to get enough members, really to get enough data to demonstrate
*  proof points, including experience.
*  So MPS actually mattered a lot to the credit of payers.
*  Really, that went a long way to actually show all of the engagement that we're having with
*  our members, which is an average of 41 touch points a year, clinically significant interactions,
*  ability to reduce TME.
*  And on the fee-for-service contract, what that really meant was how are you doing on
*  ER admissions?
*  So are you keeping people out of the ER?
*  That was a big driver for us.
*  How are you doing on A1C readings?
*  How are you doing on behavioral health, anxiety?
*  And we're able to take all of those things and bring them back to payers and renegotiate
*  our original contracts to get into a PM-PM sub-cap agreement.
*  Once you've established a successful anchor partnership, the next key question is when
*  to scale those partnerships.
*  One of the challenges of making these decisions in risk-based contracts is the inherent data
*  delay that we have in health care, which means that even when the end measures of success
*  are clearly defined, founders emphasize the need for upstream process and operating measures
*  to help companies know if what you're doing is working and is scalable well ahead of the
*  ultimate data readouts that come sometimes years down the line.
*  You may elect to ramp up a market before you have a final answer on whether or not it worked
*  financially because with the runout and claims and the reconciliation period and even in
*  Medicaid, retroactive government adjustments on rates, it could be literally 18 months
*  until you have a financial answer on whether the model worked.
*  Does he need to have the toolkit and the dashboards to know, do we expect this to work?
*  Is it working from the perspective of the non-financial indicators that we can feel
*  confident?
*  Like most things in health care, it's not a clear path between here and there, between
*  A and B.
*  You really need to move backwards and think about if these are the end targets that you're
*  trying to hit, be it satisfaction, be it savings, what are then the interim measures that you
*  can come to to get a pretty high degree of confidence that those things are going to
*  emerge?
*  If that's utilization changes or quality impact or early indicators of satisfaction or savings.
*  And then even go further upstream, right?
*  To the degree in which you have process measures in mind.
*  So are your processes defined?
*  Do they have measures?
*  You have a hypothesis as you build your business around what steps will you take in the value
*  stream to unlock that value?
*  And I would encourage you to continue to put metrics against those pieces so that you can
*  look at them and say, hey, we feel like we're on the right path.
*  With those upstream process and operating metrics in place, how fast should you expand
*  the model?
*  How do you take on additional risk and do a take on additional patient populations?
*  There's a balance between needing to be enough scale so that operationally from a unit economics
*  perspective, you can make it work and that from an actuarial perspective, you have enough
*  credibility, but not being at so much scale or being so exposed in your risk that if the
*  model doesn't work exactly as you hoped in year one, that, you know, it has a hugely
*  negative financial impact on the business.
*  As you grow, there are also several approaches and strategies you can take to manage and
*  mitigate the risk that a company is exposed to in value-based and risk-based contracts.
*  For Pearl Health, this was especially important as they took an accelerated path to full risk.
*  The range, as I would say, is kind of the very kind of more sophisticated models are
*  reinsurance and stop loss policies.
*  The more you get in these models, the more you accept yourself from systemic risk and
*  you can effectively defray that and you have fewer factors that can be incredibly expensive.
*  Small practices, for example, can have a big swing that is incredibly punishing, but a
*  very large market like Pearl where you're having thousands or tens of thousands or hundreds
*  of thousands of members is much more immune to those types of swings.
*  Succeeding in value-based and risk-based contracts is a very important step.
*  The impact of value-based and risk-based contracts comes down to having the right set of clinical
*  and operational capabilities.
*  And as we've heard from multiple founders, it's critical to build these capabilities
*  from the earliest days.
*  Technology and data are really important in order to take risk on populations.
*  So from day one, we were, we set up a really strong data infrastructure.
*  So we were collecting data, both claims data from payers that enrich by third parties and
*  then enriching it with our own.
*  We used deployments ascknowledging technologies –among other things.
*  Collaboration technology, developers using discoverable tools that work with your model
*  for the data waste collection.
*  We had.?
*  We needed to socialize mass orгаes that it can.
*  You know, dramatically Artoo.
*  and the data that you're getting back from your own interactions
*  and interventions with patients, I think, is really important.
*  But in these early days, when you're
*  building your data infrastructure and your product,
*  what do you buy and what do you build?
*  It can be a gamble to say that you're going
*  to build all that yourself.
*  And so what we did is actually we're
*  pretty focused on build versus buy.
*  And what we wanted to build was really only
*  the parts of the equation that no one else had created
*  that were kind of proprietary to us,
*  which is how do we identify patients for engagement?
*  How do we automate the care pathways?
*  How do we give our community health workers
*  that we're training for the first time the pattern matching
*  of somebody with years of experience?
*  And that all happens through our product
*  that the team is building.
*  But when it came to some of those core instrumentation
*  pieces, it needed to be compatible with what our health
*  plan partners were seeing.
*  It needs to be compatible with what providers are seeing.
*  And so there we made buy decisions just
*  so that we could effectively be on the same playing field
*  as them and not be too creative, too far ahead,
*  or too far behind in how we were receiving, communicating
*  data and information with them.
*  Beyond the data infrastructure and the analytical
*  capabilities, scaling at-risk models often
*  also requires being able to deliver care in novel ways.
*  It often requires multimodal care, interdisciplinary care,
*  and more continuous care approaches.
*  We do have brick and mortar clinics.
*  We do have field-based teams that
*  can connect with our community members in person.
*  And then we have a really strong digital infrastructure as well.
*  I think that not delivering just a point
*  solution of one thing, but being able to address
*  more of the needs of a population
*  is important in those risk models as well.
*  This adds quite a bit of complexity
*  to a risk-based business relative to its free-for-service
*  analogs.
*  And because of this, we consistently
*  heard from founders how important
*  it is to have the right expertise around the table
*  and to build these capabilities early on as companies take off
*  on the glide path to risk.
*  I think the short of it is you kind of have
*  to bring in a lot of the expertise and process
*  that you might see in a larger or later company earlier
*  if you're going to move down this path,
*  because the stakes are so much higher.
*  You don't do this because you think
*  you're going to have an outcome that you can
*  point to in 12 or 18 months.
*  You do this because you think that over a many-year period,
*  potentially a decade or more, that you're
*  going to make a real impact on care delivery.
*  And you have to have that patience and time horizon.
*  Everyone on our team has it, and I think equally important.
*  Our investors have it.
*  While it's still early days for value-based care
*  and digital health, we're already
*  seeing how it can rewire our health care system
*  and also the patient experience within our health care system.
*  As risk-based digital health companies grow,
*  some have become marketplaces or enablement layers that
*  span between payers and providers.
*  We're also seeing others that are effectively
*  becoming payers themselves as they
*  take on global capitated risk and partner
*  with a range of other providers.
*  And then others are on paths to become care platforms
*  with a broad range of clinical services.
*  So how would we look at these companies
*  from an investment lens?
*  Well, we heard earlier how these risk-based contracting models
*  will generally require a fairly nontrivial set of investments
*  into both the clinical aspect of the business
*  as well as risk management.
*  And so first and foremost, we simply
*  want to know, does your plan appropriately
*  account for all the necessary components?
*  For instance, we're certainly going
*  to look at the talent on your team
*  and whether you either have internal experts
*  or plan to hire folks who have actually implemented
*  value-based care models in the past
*  and ideally also have successfully negotiated
*  risk-based contracts in the past.
*  Different levels of risk will require different levels
*  of capital reserves, whether statutory or otherwise.
*  And so again, does your use of funds plan
*  give you a sufficient runway to actually get
*  to a strong set of milestones for a follow-on round
*  down the road?
*  A second thing we'd look for is just
*  whether you've selected a patient population for which
*  value-based care actually makes sense.
*  The market readiness for value-based care
*  in different areas of the market is definitely highly variable
*  and also a moving target.
*  And so validation that you've chosen an area where
*  the timing is likely right is super critical.
*  And related to that, there could also
*  be regulatory tailwinds that are relevant to your population.
*  We've seen this with kidney care, with primary care,
*  with oncology.
*  And then finally, a third area that we would evaluate
*  is just what is the actual plan and roadmap to full risk
*  or whatever level of risk you ultimately seek to take?
*  How do you generate the sufficient set
*  of clinical evidence to be able to sell those outcomes
*  to payers?
*  So even if you're starting with simple fee-for-service
*  contracts, just having a well-articulated roadmap
*  and a set of assumptions for what
*  you'd have to believe to get to higher levels of risk over time
*  is something that we'd like to see in the earlier phases,
*  including things like pricing and margin assumptions
*  and obviously some sort of thesis on TAM.
*  And relatedly, we'd obviously want to know,
*  do you have payer partners either lined up
*  or a hypothesis about which payer partners are ready
*  to collaborate with you in this fashion for the given patient
*  population that you're focused on?
*  So thank you so much to our founders and payer executives
*  who shared their perspectives in this piece on risk-based
*  contracting for digital health companies.
*  And to all of you for joining us to listen.
*  And we'd love to hear from you if you have any thoughts
*  or questions.
*  And hope that you'll continue to follow along
*  as we roll out the rest of our GoToMarket Playbook series.
*  Thank you.
*  Thank you.
*  Thank you.
*  Thank you.
*  Thank you.
*  Thank you.
*  Thank you.
