---
Date Generated: May 30, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 1792s
Video Keywords: []
Video Views: 1364
Video Rating: None
---

# Fireside Chat with Sean Duffy
**a16z Bio:** [January 04, 2024](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zKbvKfj5qn4)
*  So, welcome to Raising Health.
*  The news for 2024 is that BioEats World is getting an upgrade.
*  We're rebranding as Raising Health.
*  And as our very first guest on Raising Health, it's my pleasure to welcome Sean Duffy, CEO
*  and co-founder of Amada Health.
*  So, Sean, thank you so much for joining.
*  Yeah, Vijay, thank you.
*  And thanks for allowing me to be the first.
*  What an honor.
*  This starts with actually that email that you sent me.
*  I think that's actually maybe even a tweet that I saw that Amada hit a million patients.
*  That's right.
*  And so that was a huge deal.
*  And I think that made us very sentimental about like all the whole path that you've
*  been through and the path that we've been through together.
*  Oh, for sure.
*  No, I mean, a million, you know, we're really proud of it.
*  I'm proud of it.
*  I'm proud of the team.
*  You know, I think it's a lot of people.
*  It's a big impact.
*  And I think if you pull up, I think it is a statement on where digital health has come
*  from and that it's possible.
*  Admittedly, I feel two ways about it.
*  I think the positives are, my gosh, it took so many years of toil to even get to the couple
*  of thousand.
*  But then if you compare the million to the task at hand of actually impacting epidemiology
*  and really doing what we need to do for the business, we haven't really, really made a
*  dent yet.
*  Kind of told our teams, let's celebrate for 30 seconds and let's go try to get it to 10,
*  20, 50 and beyond.
*  You make a great point because a million is hitting scale, but in principle, you could
*  get to tens, hundreds of millions and even beyond.
*  How do you view the next steps?
*  How do you get to that type of scale?
*  Well, I think you're at a million, you're on strong foundations.
*  As long as you're serving your members well and you're serving your customers well, it
*  does become slightly easier because we're in a new state in digital health where it's
*  a little bit more accepted.
*  There's a little bit more trust.
*  We now have published trials, data, et cetera.
*  We're staying hungry as possible.
*  I think it just shows that the space though has progressed a lot.
*  It's still relatively nascent relative to having the impact that it can and will.
*  Well, before we get too far ahead of ourselves, actually, I'd love to take us back to the
*  beginning.
*  Sure.
*  To set the stage, I guess it's 2011.
*  That's right.
*  Yep.
*  When you started Omada, obviously, there were zero patients then.
*  What did that zero to one part of the startup look like?
*  What was that like?
*  Yeah.
*  I'm here in the recent offices speaking with someone who probably isn't in the same camp,
*  but I've always been pulled between technology and science and healthcare.
*  Originally, I thought I had to choose.
*  I had to pick tech or healthcare.
*  After undergrad, even though I did my pre-med recs, I worked at Google for a couple of years.
*  Went off to medical school.
*  I was enrolled in Harvard's MD, MBA.
*  Then through that came up with the idea for Omada.
*  Really, the key reflection was a statement of where the mark was at the time.
*  I'd be with my tech friends from Google, and they were like, oh my gosh, these Fitbits,
*  they're going to change healthcare.
*  My medical school classmates were like, well, where's the level one evidence?
*  What diseases are you targeting?
*  The idea for Omada was to build a convergence company.
*  One that didn't sacrifice on technology and design, but tried to do so in such a way where
*  it earned the trust of the existing healthcare market.
*  That led to the business.
*  Zero to one, it was a journey.
*  We were a little ahead of our times.
*  When we founded the company, the world didn't know what to do with us.
*  Tell us more.
*  You were a tech company, but you were also a healthcare company.
*  Yeah.
*  In the early days of Omada, for instance, you'd say hi to a health plan and say, I want
*  to contract as a provider.
*  I'm like, okay, great.
*  Where are your clinics?
*  We don't have any.
*  Excuse me, where are your clinics?
*  No, we're provider.
*  We don't have offices.
*  They're like, you can't contract with our network team.
*  It's like a hotel chain without hotels.
*  Yeah, exactly.
*  To be honest, the last 10 years has been that scene from Apollo 13 with the square CO2 cartridge
*  and round hole where you just try to somehow pull it off with the parts on the ship before
*  your oxygen depletes, which is your bank account in startup language.
*  Yeah.
*  I made that analogy to the hotel company without hotels.
*  Yes.
*  Exactly.
*  There's Airbnb and then there's fleets without cars and so on.
*  Does it make sense?
*  In that zero to one time, there was probably some surprises.
*  I don't know if there's any no surprises that make sense for accounts.
*  I quickly realized how hard it was to sell into enterprise healthcare.
*  It was a surprise to me.
*  Now it's not a surprise at all.
*  I'll kind of relay that to any tech founder.
*  The key thing was that it was not sexy to be a startup.
*  This was kind of a moment in time where I was like, oh my gosh, the zeitgeist was that
*  20 something founder that goes off and builds a $10 billion company.
*  You'd be with these health plans.
*  I'm like, I'm never calling ourselves a startup.
*  So we were three people and Omada was a digital health company.
*  You had to quickly try to frame yourself as a measured thoughtful business in order to
*  have success.
*  When you were raising, you were raising probably from tech VCs primarily.
*  Now there are examples of tech bio VCs or health tech VCs that are doing both.
*  It's worth noting that actually, A6 and Z's investment in Omada pre-gates the bio fund
*  itself.
*  It's a good statement.
*  I'm more than you just said.
*  How has the investor landscape changed for you?
*  It's not any day different.
*  We were the first major healthcare investment from Andreessen, but there were very few conversions
*  funds.
*  You'd be on the healthcare kind of fund track and they're like, well, excuse me, where specifically
*  is your monopolistic IP?
*  And it's going to be just so easy for any health plan to build software.
*  That's what they're known for, right?
*  You go to the tech side and they're like, how about that budget item for that million
*  dollar peer reviewed study and RCT you're thinking about running?
*  I don't think we need that.
*  So you'd work to kind of explain.
*  I think that was very much sort of in our mind for launching the bio fund, which came
*  after the investment of Omada that realizing that you were a tech company and there are
*  other tech companies that happen to be in life sciences or in healthcare, but were being
*  built like tech companies and that was the opportunity.
*  Yeah, a hundred percent.
*  So any other changes that you've seen to the space?
*  You're very much a pioneer of digital health.
*  That's probably changed over this decade as well.
*  Yeah.
*  I mean, once we talked about the investment landscape, I think equally you've seen drastic
*  differences in both the go-to-market landscape and the talent landscape.
*  Yeah.
*  We shouldn't take each in turn.
*  Yeah.
*  I mean, it's very different.
*  I think there are like more plays.
*  There's still kind of things to be learned.
*  I think if you use Omada as an example, we started targeting self-insured employers that
*  can turn into business with plans and there's a little bit of emotion now that is slightly
*  more codified.
*  Now, albeit it's still very difficult, very capital intensive, but it's more of a known
*  thing and there's been examples.
*  Well, so what makes it difficult?
*  I mean, there's a lot of stakeholders.
*  The buying cycles are really long.
*  You're dealing with not just HR leaders, but consultants and their plans and their channels
*  and it's a very multi-state core Volsera's process and still a risk in-person environment,
*  but there's a little bit of like a known way to do it.
*  And when Omada founded, that was far less so.
*  I mean, you'd seen CastLite work towards selling into employers, but a little bit not the way
*  that Omada was doing it.
*  We figured out a way to build through claims.
*  We took our trials to the American Medical Association, got them to issue the first ever
*  digital specific CPT code just literally for billing infrastructure.
*  Now, there's many startups that have figured out on the back of that how to build through
*  claims and contract as a provider like we talked about before.
*  So the world has evolved.
*  If I could make one statement that I think is the most beneficial relative to the go
*  to market is buyers better know how to buy.
*  So how do you make that happen?
*  Well, I mean, it's come as Omada that you're like, well, and I remember in the early days,
*  you'd be talking to the network teams and you're like, you know, I'm imagining a world
*  where there's actually specific individuals on a network team focused on your digital
*  provider network.
*  And you just kind of paint this future that could be, but that's not there yet.
*  And then you just kind of work your way to it.
*  And a bit of his learning together with your partners, like how do you implement, you know,
*  what are the claim systems?
*  And then the next one that comes in the door, they're like, oh, we've kind of done this
*  before.
*  And, you know, I remember one experience that it was a health plan.
*  So I get a call from a CEO of another digital health company.
*  I was like, hey, I just want to take five minutes to thank you.
*  Like, well, why?
*  And he's like, I just we just did this deal with a health plan.
*  And kind of named it and they sent over the papers, the contract, and they just forgot
*  to take one modest name out of it all.
*  How long did that take you to close?
*  He's like, you know, three months.
*  I was like, well, that took a year and a half.
*  Yeah. And what that means is, all right, there are there are plenty of ambitious
*  digitally for people, enterprise health care.
*  But like, there's also like laid down processes and infrastructure and ways of buying
*  that are pretty solidified.
*  So it takes a little bit of time to like chip at it, morph it, you know, make it a
*  little bit malleable and then and then kind of lay new foundations on how to just
*  ingest things like Omada.
*  Yeah. Once you've re tempered that steel, that's correct.
*  Exactly. That's right.
*  It's it's ready to go.
*  And then you mentioned something on the talent side, too.
*  This changes from everything, the current state to kind of the feeder, the feeder
*  world. I remember in medical school, it was kind of like me and like two other
*  people in my med school class who had an entrepreneurial bent.
*  Then, you know, there was a lot of what out of like hundreds.
*  Like 250. And it's funny, like I restarted the Harvard Medical School, like
*  entrepreneurship, the study died and died.
*  I know it existed.
*  Yes. There was only a society of three wither on the vine.
*  And like so, you know, how to give it CPR and get that thing back going.
*  And now I think that's different.
*  It's like, you know, today's cursive is JavaScript.
*  So you're not on it's not.
*  So there's just more tech fluidity coming out of the, you know, I think the life
*  sciences, which speaks to more talent that can appreciate both worlds, which
*  speaks to cultures that can pull the best of both worlds together, which speaks to
*  it just being easier to build a convergence business.
*  Yeah, I'd love to see this graph of time and the fraction of med school
*  students who have taken a CS course.
*  Yeah, no, no, no, no.
*  Probably just like growing dramatically.
*  It's growing dramatically.
*  Well, it's key because like if you really weren't sort of sophisticated on the tech
*  side, you wouldn't be able to handle that side of it.
*  It seems like at least part of the problem early on was there are just so few people
*  that were conversant in both.
*  And it's and it's funny, it's both like a vision issue that's super important, but
*  it's also like a hiring issue.
*  Yeah.
*  You know, at the end of the day, like you need to be able to pull in incredible
*  skill sets in your organization.
*  And if the language you're using, like doesn't communicate that you understand
*  the skills that that person is bringing to bear and you can't just like, you know,
*  over a beer, like riff on a specific thing in the world, they're not going to join.
*  So, I mean, that's that's one of the reasons why the legacy health services companies
*  have had trouble hiring talent.
*  They'll put out a role for like, you know, IT engineer in the language and just the
*  appreciation of the skill sets like matter.
*  And it's hard to get that if you don't if you're if you're on the top talent, we're
*  not going to want to they're not going to do it.
*  Yeah, yeah, they're not.
*  And the same, you know, the same as on the health care side, like if you're I mean, if
*  you're just an amazing tech company, you're trying to hire a great health care talent,
*  they're like, they don't know.
*  They don't know what they're doing.
*  Well, how's it going now?
*  Like, how is it hiring sort of the latest crop like on the MLI site?
*  Specific to that, what's neat is we have just an awesome data corpus, because I mean,
*  you know, at the end of the day, like, you know, these models are more or less
*  commodities. It's what feeds them that's important.
*  And Omada has operated against our users preferences, which is asynchronous
*  messaging, large part.
*  So, you know, about 25 million messages that have flown back and forth between our
*  care teams and our members, which, you know, I mean, maybe the richest data,
*  asynchronous text data corpus in metabolic care and, you know, LLMs are kind of
*  they came in a nice time for us.
*  It's a candy store for any kid would love.
*  That's right. So that talent side is fine.
*  But the neat thing relative to the last kind of couple of minutes of conversation is
*  now there's a crop of folks that have worked in tech and health care.
*  Maybe we're there to start up that try to do both, but, you know, didn't work out or
*  maybe they're a company that has scaled and they want to, you know, do something
*  different. So there are.
*  There's there's just actually a richer crop of talent to pull from.
*  It's no longer, you know, we're trying to steal from Omada.
*  Yeah, people are experienced with both.
*  It's kind of a broader, a broader set, which is which is great.
*  I think it's a it's an amazing thing.
*  It's a real ecosystem.
*  Well, so 10 years changes all of us.
*  How have you changed?
*  Oh, my gosh. I mean, I was extremely green when I founded Omada.
*  I was in an MD MBA program, but hadn't done any of the business side.
*  I didn't have any managerial experience.
*  I didn't know what a venture capitalist was.
*  My goal has always been each year I want to look back at last year, Sean, and just feel a little bit embarrassed.
*  Wow. Oh, that's a really unique way to frame it.
*  I got literally every year.
*  But embarrassed is that being hard on yourself?
*  I mean, maybe it is, but it's it's the truth.
*  So I think I have been just a little bit embarrassed about every every proceeding, Sean.
*  So the Sean now is very, very different than the vintage, the vintage 2011 Sean.
*  And I mean, you know, you've been on the board a number of years.
*  I'm sure you've seen it, too.
*  Yeah. Well, actually, now when I think about it, after you said that, it's it's
*  the the thing that most people get embarrassed about is like when you watch yourself on video or you listen to yourself.
*  It's actually the fact it's getting embarrassed is not unusual.
*  It's the fact that you're willing to look at that and look at it in its face.
*  I think that is really takes bravery and is most people don't do that.
*  The way that I think through it is is to think through decisions or mistakes.
*  Like, which would that have happened with today's, you know, Sean, that misstep that we made with today's Sean have fallen into that trap.
*  And I think it's a good it's I think it's a good mindset.
*  I think similarly, you know, I always encourage entrepreneurs to like, especially founders,
*  try to purposely decouple yourself from the founder mind and the CEO mind.
*  How would you differentiate those two?
*  Like like the in fact, sometimes I purposely ask, like, let's just pretend I was a hired gun CEO brought in today.
*  Like, what would I be doing differently?
*  You know, day one, great.
*  You know, just joined Omada.
*  I'm the CEO. Like, what what would be the next play?
*  And then and then you can similarly ask, what do you think the the organization needs from its CEO?
*  Like next year and beyond.
*  And then that that like becomes your L.N.D. plan.
*  Also, organizations need sometimes things from their founders to which are unique from what they need from the CEOs.
*  That's yeah, that's right. You could reverse it to you could reverse it to.
*  And there have there have been things I mean, you know, as the org grows, you have to even as a founder, especially learn how to like work
*  with your organization because your teams, you know, you have so many bright people and they need to like find the energy
*  around a direction and you have to set the strategy.
*  But there are certain things that I think is very helpful with kind of founder orientation, like you that optimism, you know,
*  doesn't always tend to like carry forward with scale.
*  And if there's like new things in the market, like for us, this whole GLP one landscape or, you know, the generative area landscape,
*  there's new things like I view it as my job to like just press the organization into into seizing those.
*  Yeah, to really sort of almost get keep that spirit that you had when you were like 10 people or three people,
*  but not to do that scale. You do it at scale. Exactly.
*  Any advice you'd give to Sean?
*  That's a good question. I mean, all sorts of tactical stuff.
*  Yeah. Yeah. My number one advice is put a ton of thought in how you price and package kind of what you've what you're buying.
*  That has just so much path dependency.
*  There's all these other tactical. Yeah.
*  And that sounds like a detail, but that's like the core future of your business in a sense.
*  Yeah, I know. It's funny. It's never the strategic stuff that tends to matter as much as the tactical things.
*  Yeah. Yeah. And some of them you can read about and others like, you know, is a little on the job training.
*  Well, especially if you're creating a field, then there probably wasn't on the job training for digital.
*  Yeah, yeah. It was newer. Yeah, exactly.
*  Yeah, exactly. Well, OK, so let's let's take us to today.
*  So and actually brought up two great topics. I'm going to hit AI and GLP.
*  And so let's start with the AI side.
*  So you already mentioned that Amada has this huge corpus.
*  What's your take for how AI is going to change Amada?
*  Where do you go with that? Where do you go from here?
*  Yeah, I mean, I think it's just so cool.
*  I mean, the whole team and the engineering team is just giddy with it.
*  And, you know, I mean, there's yesterday's like AI, which we've been doing, you know, build,
*  you know, build models and ML models and, you know, recommend resources.
*  Like small ML, small AI versus a large foundation model.
*  Yeah, exactly. Versus versus kind of the generative side.
*  I mean, there's hundreds of ideas on how to best leverage our data.
*  So we're still learning and, you know, and growing.
*  But to give you just some specific examples right now, the
*  one thing we launched is the ability for our care teams to just see,
*  you know, instantly summarized views of eating history of their members.
*  So what we found is like if they wanted to talk about food,
*  we had a very beautifully structured like view where they could scroll
*  through the meal patterns, looking at the eating patterns.
*  But they're spending about six minutes
*  getting the context to be able to craft a message.
*  And so one quick hit was, you know, have have the model do that.
*  Right. And then they can take that and craft it and craft a note to the member
*  that allows them to just feel more insightful,
*  you know, just more precise and likely more impactful and more efficient.
*  It's like everybody wins in that.
*  Maybe even more empathetic sometimes.
*  And more. Yeah, absolutely.
*  More empathetic. There's like step one for a model, which is
*  all right, of these hundred ideas, one of the ones where you have high
*  impact, you know, low regulatory risk, because there are considerations
*  that you need to think through here.
*  We're trying to strike that balance of ensuring that,
*  you know, at the end of the day, like we people feel the compassion
*  of the amadas, you know, services as well as the intelligence where,
*  you know, you've got to have a humanist shine through.
*  And so for us right now, we built our care team platform homegrown by scratch.
*  So it's about helping to enable our care teams to, you know,
*  be authentic humans, to come across that way,
*  do it more efficiently and per your point, in many instances,
*  with a little tee up, perhaps more empathetically.
*  Well, it's really interesting because you sort of alluded to the history
*  of virtual based care, where it's like not having brick and mortar
*  was like kind of crazy, right? Yep.
*  And now that's actually especially post covid.
*  It's actually been quite routine.
*  Actually, many of us prefer it to some degree.
*  Yeah. You know, it has its own conveniences and so on.
*  Now you're almost like a different type of virtual,
*  because now you're even like the caregivers themselves.
*  It can be totally virtualized.
*  Yeah, it's funny. How far does that go?
*  Does it? Are you always going to have caregivers
*  and you're just massively scaling them?
*  Are there like, you know, like take us five years into the future,
*  like maybe even 10 years in the future.
*  Like, how far does this go? I mean, it's going to be balanced.
*  I think the you know, you remember in peak covid,
*  it was like virtual care will do everything.
*  And I literally I felt like the crazy one being like guys,
*  like biopsies still need to be done.
*  Surgeries. Moles need to be removed.
*  So it's and it'll be the same the same truth here.
*  There's a reason that artificial intelligence is a buzzword
*  and artificial empathy is not. Yeah.
*  And I don't think there is any substitute
*  for just the human accountability.
*  And in fact, I actually think that maybe in this era of like,
*  you know, AI, it may be actually come more valuable,
*  like human time, you know, handcrafted goods, like,
*  you know, proper human caregivers that may feel more valuable.
*  In the same vein, you can leverage not just them,
*  but TIP and augmented support, you know, through these models
*  in a way that I think just will transform outcomes and, you know,
*  impact the impact the world.
*  Yeah. And, you know, we talked about scaling
*  and we talked about the million members.
*  I mean, this is how you get there.
*  Yeah, it helps. Yeah.
*  OK. It's such a crazy time because we've got AI.
*  Yeah. Like doing this insane thing.
*  And then generally unrelated to AI, but very related to it.
*  I'm on it. Yeah, exactly.
*  It's GLP ones. Yeah.
*  Like, how does that play into what you're doing in a monitor?
*  Yeah, I just feel giddy with what's happening
*  because you've got this two parallel tracks,
*  like just extraordinary technology innovation,
*  extraordinary life sciences innovation, like two different silos.
*  And I mean, similar to like the fact that your convergence investor,
*  Oma, as a convergence company, they just hit each other.
*  Yeah. Like right now, you know, right at the moment.
*  And I think they're both,
*  you know, really have knocked on the doors, you know, of Oma
*  as a skilled provider that, you know, has not only the data
*  for the generative AI side, but also just enough scale to
*  and enough clinical credibility to capture the opportunity in GLP ones.
*  The way I look at them is incredible.
*  I mean, incredible breakthrough.
*  Like, you know, humanity, we should pat ourselves on the back that these exist.
*  Yes. You know, in large part,
*  especially since the data has borne out in type two diabetes,
*  I think they'll generally considered a very safe medicine.
*  And hopefully that continues to be the viewpoint.
*  The challenge is GLPs are great at quantity.
*  You can and will lose weight on a GLP without changing anything
*  about the quality of your calories because it will juice the quantity.
*  You just will lose appetite.
*  That's right. You lose appetite.
*  So you're you know, you're you're dropping your caloric intake,
*  but eating exactly the same foods.
*  The challenge with that is most patients
*  tend to not want to be on these medicines for life, even though,
*  you know, I mean, you will find the KOLs that are, you know,
*  argue that that's the right clinical point of view right now.
*  That's counter to the patient preference.
*  And then the cost profile is making that for the employer
*  that are covering GLPs for obesity.
*  You know, a challenge as well.
*  There are very few that, you know, are thinking, well, shoot,
*  I'll cover this for life.
*  So you have this issue where, OK, you've got quantity.
*  Well, what does the quality?
*  And that's where Amada thinks we can really differentiate.
*  If GLPs are quantity, Amada's quality,
*  because you can use these as almost a behavioral catalyst,
*  help reframe someone's psychology around, I can lose weight.
*  This is amazing.
*  And then on that, you're like, well, what are your goals
*  relative to the medicines?
*  You know, they're like, let's do it in a healthy way.
*  Exactly. Well, let's take advantage of this therapeutic window.
*  Yeah. Like, let's figure out some new meals
*  that you can just start to incorporate.
*  Great. You're losing weight.
*  What are some new activities that you could do now,
*  you know, that you couldn't do otherwise?
*  And then Amada can address some of the clinical complexities here.
*  I mean, I think that the next issue that is already
*  starting to bubble up is sarcopenia.
*  I mean, you're you know, because what's happening with these meds,
*  you'll you'll lose fat and muscle mass.
*  If you do regain, you're going to regain only fat.
*  So there's there's always complex body
*  comp questions that are going to require a new like,
*  you know, physical activity protocols on top and recommendations
*  and diet and intake to make sure that, you know, that you're
*  you're addressing this this kind of truth about weight loss
*  generally, not specific to the gym.
*  Yeah, especially if your body muscle mass goes down,
*  then your basal metabolic rate goes down.
*  It makes it makes it more likely you're again, you'll feel hunger.
*  Exactly. Exactly.
*  And if you're only eating, I don't know,
*  1500 calories, a thousand calories with these things,
*  whatever small number it is, then every calorie counts.
*  Right. Exactly.
*  Amada's made some decisions we're happy about.
*  You know, the first is to launch this like GLP one care track.
*  Yeah.
*  And then we've chosen to not initiate people on the medicines,
*  but just, you know, support them regardless of where the script came from.
*  Yeah.
*  So when we work with our partners who are covering GLPs for obesity,
*  it's like, you know, you can create kind of a little bit of an all roads
*  to Amada strategy.
*  Like, look for these to be covered.
*  We want to make sure that you have the lifestyle support alongside.
*  Yeah, that makes sense.
*  So, yeah, I mean, given all this that's going on,
*  where do you think this gets us to?
*  Like, what does digital health look like, you know, five, ten years from now?
*  Well, yeah, I mean, for Amada, I hope these innovations help us do,
*  you know, what always has kind of been the most important,
*  which is to have tomorrow's, you know, epidemiologist notice,
*  like bend and disease curve and have us be a part in that.
*  It's been this weird, weird kind of thing where I feel like every couple of years
*  used to this like report on, you know, diabetes measures, et cetera.
*  And you're like, wow, the nation's gone nowhere.
*  Was that really true?
*  Have we really gone nowhere or gone worse than nowhere?
*  We respond.
*  In fact, it's gone the wrong, you know, in a worse direction.
*  We're on a poor trajectory as a country, to say the least.
*  So, you know, I think these innovations help us hit,
*  you know, hit a level of scale that matters.
*  And this is the most acute labor crisis we ever had in the U.S.
*  On the provider's on the provider side.
*  You talk to you talk to the average provider and the C-suite.
*  What are your challenges?
*  They list, you know, ten.
*  One through eight are labor.
*  They're not, you know, we don't have enough practitioners.
*  So not enough doctors and not enough nurses.
*  Yeah, and I mean, you're not we're not going to have two hundred
*  thousand primary care clinicians like show up on a tanker.
*  So so what does that mean?
*  A, like even outside of what we do, you have to find technologies
*  that give more leverage to every credential like inter LLMs.
*  You know, B, what you need is to provide care differently.
*  Like there is no way that a decade from now, the primary care
*  clinician is going to be point on something like longitudinal diabetes care.
*  So Omada can come in as a between visit care provider
*  as an adjunct to primary care and a partner and make it such that,
*  you know, really what you need to do is route the person to us
*  and we'll handle that between visit care and take that off your plate,
*  which which I think is generally required.
*  Yeah, I mean, it's amazing that scaling goes from an aspiration
*  almost to an obligation. There is a silver lining.
*  I mean, this is this is just an extraordinary crisis of labor.
*  What is happening is the everyday provider recognizes that there's not,
*  you know, there's not a solvent.
*  And I mean, you've had providers that like literally they're like, well,
*  shoot, we've tried almost everything. They bought nursing schools. Right.
*  Right. Like gobbled up nursing schools to try to build.
*  But but there's nothing that's going to be enough.
*  So it's like we have to deliver care differently.
*  What does that look like? Who do we work with to do it? Right.
*  And then so the shortage is one thing.
*  Then the other sort of crisis that we all know about is cost.
*  Yeah. Yeah. Presumably this plays into that as well.
*  Oh, my gosh. If we just kept the percent of our GDP spent on health care constant,
*  but just use the dollars better.
*  Like we've got an embarrassment of riches to put forward,
*  you know, to the country here relative to the it's not like,
*  oh, could it be done more effectively or efficiently?
*  Like look anywhere besides, you know, the U.S.
*  and you find you find ways that you that one could.
*  So but you kind of need a rock thrown into the lake. Yeah.
*  And there are enough like pressure points there that I do think that
*  the silver lining will be it's it's kind of hit the fulcrum
*  or it's reinventing the system.
*  Well, so let's paint the picture.
*  So like you're dealing with something which is one of the biggest crises.
*  Pre diabetes, type two diabetes, weight and comorbidities,
*  hypertension, all and musculoskeletal, all the core.
*  So that's the problem is very clear.
*  And then on top of that, you have the provider problem and the cost. Yep.
*  You put in a I in GLP's.
*  It's almost like this wonderful, almost like Deus Ex Machina, like to the rescue.
*  And no technology to the rescue.
*  It's literally I'm like in absence of that, plus like,
*  you know, the model layers to tie the room together. Yeah.
*  What happens? It's you know what I mean?
*  It's like, well, well, but then so then what keeps us
*  from the future we're describing? Like what's in our way?
*  You know, I think I think it's coming.
*  I genuinely do. I feel more optimistic than ever in general.
*  I don't think there's an overnight success.
*  I think that's especially true in in health care and building a health care business.
*  But I think it's coming.
*  I mean, I well, what do you think about regulations in this space?
*  I mean, that's one of the reasons why it takes a little bit longer.
*  But especially, let's say, additional regulations for AI.
*  Do you see a role for that right now?
*  That the general basis on how to use generative AI says, like, look,
*  guide a licensed practitioner.
*  So, you know, we're at that world where it's like, you know, I mean, use
*  use self-driving as an analogy, like it's driver assisted.
*  Like you can turn it on. We got to touch the wheel.
*  And there's already Dr.
*  Google in play, you know, and so this is amplifying that.
*  Yeah, exactly.
*  And practitioners have regulatory bodies that govern their work and so on.
*  I think there will be ways to, you know, create kind of targeted,
*  you know, regulatory like pathways for hyper specific things
*  that have low patient risk.
*  Yeah, no other obstacles.
*  It feels like the way you're talking, it feels like it's inevitable.
*  Again, I mean, it speaks to the three things that have changed.
*  What what needs to happen for an innovation ecosystem to flourish
*  in a way that wasn't wasn't there before?
*  You need you need new capital partners.
*  There's more folks that understand tech and health care.
*  And there's some proof points that you can make money here.
*  I mean, you know, there you need that
*  to create kind of a healthy capital environment.
*  And then secondly, you know, you need like more go to market motion
*  models that make it just a little bit easier for the next person.
*  Right. Right. And that's that's critical.
*  And then and then you need the people. Yeah.
*  And so, you know, I think you've got you've got the three of those.
*  You know, you've got macro pressures that are requiring not, you know, innovation.
*  It's not a it's not a, you know, it's not a not a vitamin.
*  It's a painkiller, you know, at this point.
*  So I'm very optimistic.
*  You know, again, I think we're still the beginning.
*  I think the next, you know, the next two decades are just going to be
*  extraordinary. And we need to make it happen.
*  Well, it's amazing because not only have you co-founded a model
*  to basically help co-found this whole ecosystem.
*  Right. And that's what needed to be done.
*  Very, very generous.
*  You know, you know, and thank you for being a partner.
*  And it's reason for being a partner along the line.
*  Oh, no, it's our pleasure.
*  Obviously, you think a ton about health care.
*  Like, what do you do for the health?
*  So I have two kids, a four year old and a two year old.
*  Jim called Lifetime opened up near my home and I begged
*  I would have paid any price to sign up because they have childcare
*  for two and a half hours. Oh, wow.
*  It's a deal you can't refuse.
*  Offer you can't.
*  So we've been joking.
*  I'm going to be the best shape of my luck because, you know,
*  I mean, you're busy as an entrepreneur and childcare is so precious.
*  And the kids love it.
*  So we we call it the Family Fund Center.
*  And that's not excellent.
*  Not Lifetime, Jim, but we.
*  Yes. Yeah, I got a push notification from Lifetime that said,
*  like, congratulations on your, you know, your 25th visit.
*  And I looked up how long I've been open.
*  It was like 45 days.
*  That's excellent. Excellent.
*  It's funny, I try to be like similar to Omada.
*  Omada is pragmatic relative to, you know, what fits into your world
*  and what best kind of fits into your life and tend to not be overly zealous
*  one way or the other, but just try to, you know, abide by healthy food habits.
*  That makes sense.
*  Well, thank you so much for joining us on Raising Health.
*  Thank you for allowing me to be the first guest on this new instantiation.
*  Thank you. All right. Take care, BJ.
