---
Date Generated: June 10, 2024
Transcription Model: whisper medium 20231117
Length: 4347s
Video Keywords: ['consciousness', 'culture', 'feelings', 'homeostasis', 'mind', 'thinking']
Video Views: 27367
Video Rating: None
Video Description: Blog post with audio player, show notes, and transcript:  https://www.preposterousuniverse.com/podcast/2019/04/29/episode-44-antonio-damasio-on-feelings-thoughts-and-the-evolution-of-humanity/

Patreon: https://www.patreon.com/seanmcarroll

When we talk about the mind, we are constantly talking about consciousness and cognition. Antonio Damasio wants us to talk about our feelings. But it’s not in an effort to be more touchy-feely; Damasio, one of the world’s leading neuroscientists, believes that feelings generated by the body are a crucial part of how we achieve and maintain homeostasis, which in turn is a key driver in understanding who we are. His most recent book,  The Strange Order of Things: Life, Feeling, and the Making of Cultures, is an ambitious attempt to trace the role of feelings and our biological impulses in the origin of life, the nature of consciousness, and our flourishing as social, cultural beings.

 Antonio Damasio received his M.D. and Ph.D. from the University of Lisbon, Portugal. He is currently University Professor, David Dornsife Professor of Neuroscience, Professor of Psychology, Professor of Philosophy, and (along with his wife and frequent collaborator, Prof. Hannah Damasio) Director of the Brain and Creativity Institute at the University of Southern California. He is also an adjunct professor at the Salk Institute in La Jolla, California. He is a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, the National Academy of Medicine, and the European Academy of Sciences and Arts. Among his numerous awards are the Grawemeyer Award, the Honda Prize, the Prince of Asturias Award in Science and Technology, and the Beaumont Medal from the American Medical Association.
---

# Episode 44: Antonio Damasio on Feelings, Thoughts, and the Evolution of Humanity
**Mindscape Podcast:** [April 29, 2019](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1a5p1_7_Hug)
*  Hello everybody and welcome to the Mindscape Podcast. I'm your host, Sean Carroll.
*  Today we're very fortunate to have an extremely distinguished scientist. Antonio Demacio is a
*  well-known neuroscientist and professor of neuroscience at USC, University of Southern
*  California, here in LA, where he is also a professor of psychology, philosophy, and neurology.
*  You might remember that a few months ago we talked to Lisa Azizadeh, who also works at USC in the
*  Brain and Creativity Institute, and we talked about embodied cognition, the idea that what is
*  constituting our thoughts does not come solely from our minds but also from our bodies, that our
*  bodies have a role to play in understanding how we think, not just what we do. So Demacio is the
*  director of the Brain and Creativity Institute, where this interview actually took place, and so
*  he's been a pioneer in this way of thinking for many, many years. And in his new book, which just
*  came out in paperback called The Strange Order of Things, he sort of summarizes what he's come to
*  think about this, and he emphasizes, funnily enough, the idea of feelings. In Demacio's view,
*  we don't take feelings nearly seriously enough when we try to explain how we think, how we behave,
*  what makes us human beings. To Demacio, what a feeling is, is a way of our bodies telling
*  ourselves how we're doing with respect to the goal of maintaining homeostasis. Homeostasis is
*  the condition that our body is in when our temperature is right, our oxygen level is right,
*  and so forth. And feelings are somehow the very, very primal indications that we get from our body
*  that something is not right or that everything is going really, really well. So we actually trace,
*  following his book, the origin and evolution of feelings from bacteria, which don't even have
*  nervous systems, but they have sort of a precursor to the idea of feelings, all the way up through
*  evolutionary time to human beings. And in fact, we go beyond that, not just to individual human
*  beings, but to societies and cultures. Demacio tries to argue that the fact that so much of who
*  we are as human beings is rooted in our feelings is woefully neglected when we think about the origin
*  of things like religion or politics or law or anything like this, any of the ways that human
*  beings get together in a social context. So I think both the specific point of view that Demacio
*  has about these things and his love for being synthetic and taking many, many different areas
*  and mixing them together and seeing how they interact with each other is very similar to a
*  point of view that I took from a different angle in the big picture in my own book. So we had a
*  wonderfully sympathetic conversation here. I think these are really ideas that are both important
*  and helpful as well as a little mind bending. So I think this is one you're going to like. Let's go.
*  Antonio Demacio, welcome to the Mindscape Podcast.
*  My pleasure.
*  So you've written several books, but we're going to focus on your most recent book. And I think
*  what I'd like to do is sort of give away the punchline at the beginning and then we can go
*  back and build up to it. So as far as I can tell, the punchline is encapsulated in two words,
*  feelings and homeostasis. These have very different vocabulary level of precision. But
*  tell us about feelings. Why is a neuroscientist talking about feelings? This sounds like we're
*  going to share our feelings with each other or something like that.
*  There'll be nothing wrong with that. Now feelings is actually an undeveloped interest that people
*  ought to have, but seem not to. And it's the kind of phenomenon that has been completely
*  forgotten, largely because of plain cognition. Throughout the 20th century and into our time,
*  we have given a tremendous amount of attention to so-called cognitive phenomena, obviously
*  thinking processes, the processes of reasoning, memory, sensory processes as well.
*  But people have forgotten that there is something that from a point of view of evolution precedes
*  all of that cognitive development and that has to do with feeling, with affect, with the fact that
*  living organism and especially a living organism that is conscious and has mental states has a
*  constant qualification of those mental states as favorable or unfavorable to life, as good or bad.
*  And that's what we're talking about when we talk about affect and about feelings. And mind you,
*  as you know from reading the book, feelings is by no means a synonym of emotion. On the contrary,
*  you keyed into two very important concepts in the book, feelings and homeostasis, and neither of them
*  is a synonym of emotion. Emotion is a different thing that we can talk about. So feelings is
*  indeed an incredibly important phenomenon. It's a phenomenon that I think only occurs in creatures
*  that have nervous systems and minds. You need to have both, which doesn't mean, of course,
*  that it is exclusively human, not at all. I expect most creatures with a nervous system
*  that is complex enough and with a complex body to have feelings. If they have feelings exactly
*  like ours, it's a different story. But the essence of feeling is a positivity or negativity,
*  something that we can describe with the term valence. And that has to do with how
*  the feeling state is conducive or not to the continuation of life and to the quality of that
*  life. So valence designates that quality. So if it's not just emotions, so are emotions a subset
*  of feelings or a kind of feeling? No, emotions are, as the name indicates, actions. And that's one of
*  the big problems that has been so badly served by the confusion of emotion and feeling that is part
*  of the culture, of any culture actually. This is quite widespread, is that emotions are in fact
*  something that must have preceded feelings and that consists of certain actions that result
*  in a better or worse adaptation of a living creature to the environment. So when you have
*  a response by some very simple organism that consists of withdrawing, you could say that that
*  response is at heart an emotive response. So there is a movement and that's the word motion
*  is in there. The word motion is in there. And emotions such as we commonly know, for example,
*  fear or the emotion of anger or compassion are collections of actions that produce a certain
*  effect and that result in a certain effect for the individual that is undergoing the emotion
*  and that produces a certain effect outside in other creatures or in the environment.
*  But I like to talk about emotions as concerts of actions. The best
*  technical way of describing it is action programs. Whereas feeling, and this is very simple,
*  feelings are the experiences of those action programs or going even deeper, the experience
*  of the action programs that enact life itself. So when you tell me that I feel so well and you're
*  describing well-being, what I think you are describing is your experience of your organism
*  functioning well, functioning in fact in something that if not optimal is in the direction of the
*  optimal in terms of the way the homeostasis is being run inside your organism. And when you
*  tell me that I feel kind of sick, what you're doing is describing the collection of actions,
*  it's integrated sense that you have that your organism is having certain kinds of actions that
*  sort of describe life at that moment. And unfortunately it's not going so well. And it is
*  on the basis of all of this evolutionarily that then you come to have these highly organized
*  little concerts, these highly organized packs of actions that we call emotions most typically.
*  It's so interesting that people normally think of emotions quite correctly from the great
*  exemplars they have around them. For example, fear, anger, disgust.
*  Happiness, love.
*  Exactly. So they go immediately to things that are already highly organized and they don't think
*  that prior to that there were already states of effect, there were already things that were good
*  or bad. For example, hunger, thirst.
*  Nervousness, is that a feeling?
*  Nervousness, I would say, is both. And by the way, one of the things that you realize is happening
*  here is that our language is extremely limited. And we end up having the same word for the emotive
*  set as for the feeling itself, for the mental experience of having the emotive set. So when
*  you say I'm happy, you could be describing the set of actions that constitute your happiness.
*  Which are certain parameters of your metabolism, certain parameters of your musculature.
*  You're smiling.
*  Exactly. Certain attitudes that you're having, all of which is motor. It's motor all the way down
*  and motor all the way up. But you could be describing also this feeling you have,
*  which is your mental experience.
*  And so the feelings precede the emotions. I think maybe by mistake you said earlier,
*  emotions precede.
*  Well, it depends on what kind of feeling and emotion you're talking about. The very
*  fundamental ones that I like to call homeostatic feelings, they follow the actions of your state
*  of homeostasis. So it's probably better to say that the actions always come first.
*  And by the way, that would be in keeping with the fact that in the beginning it was action.
*  It was not thinking.
*  You weren't thinking too much when you were a bacterium.
*  Exactly. You didn't have minds. What you have is bodies. And bodies act. And bodies can make
*  movements, can sense something, can respond. And responses, whenever we talk about responses,
*  we're talking about one of two things. Either something that is acted by a muscle or something
*  equivalent, something that allows an organism, even a single cell organ to move, that's action.
*  Or something that happens internally, which is the secretion or the release of a molecule.
*  That's an action as well. And in fact, those are the primordial actions.
*  An internal action is not one that we would see happening, but still an action.
*  Exactly. And then as things get more complicated and eventually as you get nervous systems and you
*  can access to this benighted state we call minds, then we have a variety of experiences that are
*  very complex and that you can describe in relation to the interior and in relation to the outside.
*  And in some sense then the summary of feelings is that they're a way for us to recognize that
*  we're deviating from this homeostatic state. So probably at this point it would be good to
*  tell our listeners what homeostasis is and what's so important about that.
*  Exactly. And I think that one thing for our listeners that would be important to say is that
*  feelings follow homeostasis. The key thing in this whole story is of course life and this set
*  of characteristics that must be observed for life to exist, for life to persist.
*  And of course homeostasis is a sort of way of describing this rapidly, is a way of encapsulating
*  all this and it consists of a set of operations that do a number of interesting things.
*  One is maintain life so that it can continue moment by moment. So you're running, in essence,
*  to make it a little bit more complicated, you're running metabolism. You're using sources of energy
*  and you're using those sources of energy to maintain a machine which is made,
*  whether it is one cell or many cells in different tissues and organs, it doesn't make any
*  difference. You need to feed those cells with sources of energy and you make this beautiful
*  exchange that is really the heart of what metabolism is about. It's really an exchange.
*  And you maintain cells alive and when you have multiple cells, they are integrated in such a way
*  that they realize certain acts and they sense what's around, which is important if they're
*  going to feed, and they respond if you're coming with a poke that could destroy an organism. So
*  it's already from the get-go a way of leading that organism into the conditions that are
*  essential for its maintenance, the primary one of which is the acquisition of sources of energy
*  and defending itself. So you have these two things. You're not going to continue living if you allow
*  yourself to be crushed and you're not going to continue living if you don't have a way
*  of transforming a product external to the organism into a source of energy so that you maintain
*  the machine going. Good. I mean, there's two things that are in here that I really want to tease out
*  before we get into the main part of our conversation. One of them is this idea, which I said myself in
*  talks, homeostasis is a form of stasis in some sense. You can sit quietly meditating, not moving
*  very much, but it's a very different kind than the table being static and not moving. Exactly.
*  It's this kind that requires constant upkeep and this constant fuel injection and below the surface
*  there's a lot going on. Absolutely. It's really about activity. Getting back to the idea that
*  the reason why emotion and motion are keys to what we're talking about is that it's all about
*  activity. It's very interesting when you talk about it's the last thing that it produces is stasis.
*  I think that the source of the utilization of that radical stasis is from the idea that there's
*  maintenance of something which is in abstract, the living condition, but it's not static at all.
*  It's constantly activity and for me the best analogy is the analogy of the juggler
*  that is throwing balls up in the air and is constantly having to be extremely precise
*  about where he's going to be so that the balls don't start falling because once
*  one of them starts falling then the rest will fall off. It's all about activity and there's
*  something that in the juggler analogy you also capture is how unnatural it is. You see, I think
*  that people of course we surround you by life and it looks very natural. Well, it really isn't.
*  It requires some upkeep. It requires upkeep and it's an uphill battle. That's why it is so vulnerable
*  and that's why you need all sorts of devices to keep it going. Of course, they are already
*  extremely powerful at the level of a single cell and then they become incredibly powerful when
*  you're talking about multicellularity even if you're talking about a simple insect,
*  let alone when you're talking about a mammal such as we are. Then when you look at the big creatures
*  you realize something else is that homeostasis again because of that stasis root
*  is very connected with stability. You have the idea of something that is in balance
*  but it is not in balance and we're constantly struggling about points. It's not that homeostasis
*  is the balance point in life. No, it's a range of possibilities and within that range
*  you could then describe values that come out of life and that we have arbitrarily given names
*  such as goodness or badness, health and disease and you can describe a level that is optimal
*  or a level that is so-so and is mediocre but there are all of these different levels that are there
*  in the process. It's interesting because our language at least gives us, most languages,
*  give us some possibilities of describing this with words such as for example well-being.
*  Well-being describes something that in the general distribution of states of life goes towards
*  the good but something like flourishing describes something even better. More dynamical.
*  More dynamic, more rich, more expensive in the way it extrudes itself from the organism
*  and interacts with the environment. Malase is one thing but being sick with cancer is something else
*  and there are all of these different grades of homeostasis and of the descriptor that we have
*  in most languages. We have all of these marvelous words to describe everything between
*  sickness and death and flourishing and happiness. On Twitter recently I said that we won't ever get
*  true human level artificial intelligence until computers can be bored and this is my sort of
*  cheeky way of pointing out you know you turn on a computer it can just sit there. It doesn't feel
*  the need to do anything and this sort of the role of feelings and homeostasis in biological life
*  is an aspect which not only haven't we but maybe we don't even try these days to capture in that
*  artificial environment. Yeah I think you're absolutely right and I think that one of the
*  problems with artificial intelligence is the way it has been conceived very artificially.
*  Thinking about organisms quote unquote that are made of rigid materials. Materials that don't bend,
*  materials that have a minimum of vulnerability and that is exactly the opposite of what life
*  is all about. It's not this constant turning. No life is about the vulnerability and the
*  juggler trying to keep this thing which is the most unnatural you can imagine.
*  For example when you think of most of the robots that one can think of as intelligent and
*  very successful they're things that are you know you can destroy them with an axe
*  and by a real act of violence but they will not get sick.
*  Don't they get bored? They don't get sick either and nor are they very happy you know you the
*  Roomba that cleans your floor is not going to be happier as a result of doing a good cleaning job
*  and and Sean on that point there's also something interesting so we're very interested in that
*  issue because I think there's a way in which the problems of feeling the whole issue of feeling
*  can be brought into robotics into artificial intelligence in general and there's there's an
*  interesting development that has to do with soft robotics which I'm sure you're aware of and that
*  has to do with materials that emulate a little bit some of the properties of living things such
*  as for example movements that are such a movement of a cyclops and with materials that bend as
*  opposed to material you know arms that are made of rigid parts articulated in the most comical
*  fashion possible when you compare them with the way a limb and muscles really operate and I think
*  that but a lot of that still does not aim at the the critical issue of feeling the the critical
*  issue of feeling potentially can be dealt with if we develop designs of robotics in which we have
*  that vulnerability in other words trying to solve the problem in in a way that looks
*  illogical because instead of trying to create a machine that is super robust you the the logic
*  if you're going to do something that in any way emulates life is to make it vulnerable and also
*  the ability to then repair itself when that vulnerability takes place exactly and and so of
*  course we are very far from from that but I think it's a very important idea and actually here at
*  the BCI we have an interest in that we have been talking about this and one of my young colleagues
*  Kingston Mann is actually working on that problem and we think that you know it deserves attention
*  also it's very interesting because the community is more receptive to it now I'm getting there yeah
*  I remember the first times that I talked in public a little bit like you and I said look you're
*  not serious about about conferring feelings or any kind of useful mind truly intelligent mind
*  to a device such as yours and people would be extremely offended and probably I was not doing
*  it the right way either but now people have become very receptive and we've had numerous
*  instances in which people say oh well you're absolutely right that makes sense and I think
*  it also comes from the fact that people are now more ready to accept homeostasis as a very important
*  part of what we are as living creatures and feelings is a very good proxy once you have
*  nervous systems and minds which of course are late developments in the history of life but this is
*  part of your bigger message which is I mean when we're talking about AI and robot that when you're
*  thinking about what minds are you can't separate them from bodies they came from bodies they still
*  are embedded in bodies and that needs to be taken into account exactly and and a lot of what
*  you know it's very interesting to there all sorts of you know almost each one of these topics could
*  be a topic for one of your programs I know but just think of the fact that when you have a mind
*  you normally think of it as unconnected to a body and you think of it now especially after the huge
*  success of the the past hundred years of biology and science you think of it as in relation to the
*  nervous system alone now this is very very wrong in other words not the rest of the body not the
*  rest of the nerve and one of the one of the points that I'm trying to make with the strange art of
*  things and why there is the words order and strangeness in the title is that it didn't begin
*  that way it didn't be you know we've had life on on earth for most of the existence of life long
*  this long history which is I mean almost four billion years we've had we have had nervous
*  systems perhaps for 500 million this is a bitters and most of that time we had extremely complex
*  living creatures first without many nucleus even single cells no nucleus a membrane
*  but then with the with the nucleus and then multicellularity and then an accretion of system
*  such as for example the endocrine system the immune system circulation all of these things preceded
*  the appearance of nervous systems and guess what they were conferring even with that so-called
*  simplicity which is nothing like simple they were conferring on those creatures a possibility
*  of extremely intelligent behavior that allowed them to socialize or not socialize allow them
*  independence if the energy around was sufficient to maintain that life or allow them to create
*  alliances with others like-minded except there was no mind party affiliation exactly party
*  affiliation and allow them to to fight or to do incredible things such as pretending that there's
*  no conflict and moving away into another side in other words you have single cell creatures that
*  behave for eons in ways that if you were describing them without saying it was a single cell creature
*  and you were simply making a notation sort of sociological notation of the attitudes of the
*  creature you would immediately attribute them intentions a mind purposes and all of those
*  things well they do have purposes they do have intentions except that they are not expressed
*  the way your intentions on mine are expressed which is through a thinking process in which we
*  identify a goal and we try to execute that goal because we have a mind and we have that mind
*  because we developed at a certain point a nervous system but all of these are sort of
*  late developments and we have this huge spectacular history of life with intentions with
*  presumed purposes protecting life through and through because that becomes the purpose
*  well and the unspoken purpose and and but that was all there prior to nervous systems and minds
*  and and part of the role part of the usefulness in telling that story is a slightly deflationary
*  role in the sense that when we think of ourselves and we think about feelings and consciousness and
*  other things like that it's just hard for us to imagine that this is purely mechanical right and
*  there's plenty of our colleagues who give into the temptation to assign something non-mechanical
*  non-materialistic non-physical to it but if but if you dig back into the evolutionary history you see
*  precursors of everything and so i love i mean maybe you can even go into a little bit more
*  detail about specifically bacteria and how they act i mean bacteria are pretty much the most
*  primitive organisms that we have around there's no they they're single cells they don't even have a
*  nucleus but like you said they team up and this is true even a bacteria today and was presumably
*  true of bacteria billions of years ago yeah exactly yeah and and they and and they team that they have
*  a very rich social life and that social life can depending on the environment you see all of this
*  again it pushes it push pushes us into this core issue of life management and homeostasis so for
*  example if they are in a terrain that is extremely fertile and that offers sources of energy galore
*  bacteria actually live very independently they can be isolated but if you're introverts they're
*  introverts but if they are in a situation of scarcity if there's not enough feeding material
*  or if they are under threat then they will group together and they they form a coalition that allows
*  them to defend themselves and they they do that for example the kind of bacteria that can attack
*  your throat or mine and and give us a laryngitis for example are doing exactly the same thing
*  they will go into that terrain they are on an aggressive mode and they want to feed off your
*  tissues our living tissues and that of course is going to provoke a reaction and our organism is
*  going to try to defend itself against them and then they bacteria are going to try to defend
*  themselves against the defense of our organism and they can for example form a palisade and produce
*  a the chemical substances that will isolate them from the actions of our organism or the actions
*  of antibiotics that we may take so that all of this game is being played by these
*  little creatures that you cannot see without a microscope and that don't have a cell but
*  that have a life to defend come what may even if they don't know they have a life and and
*  probably none of us would say that in some sense even if this is a valid formulation that the
*  bacteria truly have intentions planning desires or whatever but what the point i think the point
*  is that when you look at how they actually behave you see the behaviors that later evolved into
*  intentions and desires so there is something very beautiful in the fact that this plan of life the
*  way it's it operates is organized contains these devices these strategies and all of those
*  strategies then become more expressed as you have a multicellular body and as you have four reasons
*  that have to do with multicellularity a controller because you see that the the the reasons why you
*  end up having a nervous system is that as you as your body grows bigger in a multicellular way
*  what was very easy to control in terms of the release of a chemical molecule that would diffuse
*  and would you know be sort of noted everywhere in that little body now becomes very difficult to
*  exert that control because you no longer can expand that all over a bigger organism so you
*  have a nervous system and the nervous system is helping you control the stuff is helping you for
*  example coordinate the the motility is helping you put a certain sector working in a certain way
*  once you develop say something like a heart beating that needs to to the propulsion of
*  blood in inside inside a tubular structure so all of these things are constantly being developed
*  with a logic and that logic is the logic of life and of course the way it operates
*  the evolutionary is another story but it's it's as if you could constantly tell a story this look
*  you're going to have single creatures with life no nucleus then you give them a nucleus story gets
*  more complicated then you give them multicellularity then you give them a nervous system to help with
*  multicellularity otherwise you can't cope with that and then eventually you come to this very
*  beautiful and unexpected development which is the possibility of creating maps of what is going on
*  within the structure or within a body and of what is going on outside and that's the three
*  emergence of minds and it's very beautiful because on the develop on the side which has
*  to do with the interior where you make maps of what is going on inside your body that's the line
*  that is going to lead you towards feeling whereas the side that looks at what is outside and uses
*  eyes or ears to pick up on sounds or the morphology of structures that's something that gives you
*  access to the exterior but but those are exactly the same things that you and I have in our
*  organism except we have it with an enormous wealth that not every creature does but but but that
*  that duality what goes to the inside and what goes to the outside is very critical and maybe
*  but maybe you don't want to go there but I can tell you about things that have to do with the
*  interior that are fabulously fabulously beautiful so what probably the most important for
*  for your listeners is is the fact that when you think if you ask the man on the street
*  or any of our colleagues that has not thought about this problem said where do minds come from
*  the person will say well brains obviously you know we cannot have minds without brains that
*  sounds you know logical enough and I've just stated it many times when I was talking about the
*  emergence of minds the issue is that although brains are essential for the making of minds as
*  we know them it doesn't follow that all the aspects of mind come exclusively from nervous systems and
*  here we enter a realm that is absolutely central to current day neuroscience and to philosophy of
*  mind is that we have been in a very bad very bad way attributing minds exclusively to nervous
*  systems to the point that people will say well you have minds because you have chains of neurons
*  firing using synapses and that's of course where minds come from we call it neuroscience
*  exactly and people are very happy with this well it's not as easy as that because when you look
*  at this huge world of affect the world of feeling and the emotions that can be associated with it
*  you actually realize that this is not being generated primarily out of the nervous system
*  but with the participation of the nervous system where the stuff is coming from is guess what your
*  body is your muscles the whether this is striated muscle with which you can move an arm or the
*  smooth muscles which is which are around blood vessels and which can be tight or loose
*  but are absolutely critical to the maintenance of an organism and what is being imaged
*  mentally in relation to effect is actually those phenomena that have to do with the body
*  so when you think about feeling when you think about feeling anxious for example
*  or when you think about feeling very relaxed and happy what you are describing what what
*  well what you are experiencing is actually a state of the body that is being described mentally
*  thanks to a coalition of your body structures and your nervous structures and it's the two together
*  that are creating the the the foundation of mind which is your state of effect
*  of course we have totally inverted things in the 20th century by going you know completely crazily
*  into a cognitive track ignoring feeling and emotion and thinking about thinking as if it were
*  the true substance of mind as if we were brains in vets exactly it was right and you had the
*  synapses and firing and so forth and this is crazy on many in many ways first of all it totally denies
*  the reality that that we're dealing with in the partnership of bodies and nervous systems
*  but then it also does something else is that the nervous system by and large does not work
*  only in the way that is conceived in the typical brain in the vets scenario our brains are you know
*  with nervous systems are quite synaptic no no question about it but then there's this huge world
*  of non-synaptic transmission and contacts which uses different rules so when you have the the
*  typical textbook neurons and synapse you will have an axon that connects via synapse to another
*  neuron and that axon in the most advanced form is myelinated so that axon has been
*  insulated so that it doesn't leak current and is actually protected from the influences of the
*  the perineural space when you go to the interoceptive system that's the system that brings
*  into your central nervous system signals that have to do with your skin with your interior
*  with the the organs with your gut hunger all of that stuff that comes via spinal ganglia
*  and that comes via nerves such as the vagus nerve all of those um all of those neurons
*  are not myelinated so they are not insulated and they are open to the vagaries of the surround
*  they're listening to their environment they're listening to their environment and so they are
*  all of these molecules that can have an influence so yes this neuron is eventually going to fire
*  but it's not going to fire in the same predictable way that the neuron that was insulated will do it
*  so it's going to be different it's going to be modulated by the environment and by the way this
*  is this is not a small amount of neurons this is probably the majority of neurons in our nervous
*  system operate this way not only that the spinal ganglia which come all along the spine you have
*  this ganglion with a bunch of cell bodies those ganglia including our trigeminal ganglion which
*  has everything has to do with our head not an unimportant part of our body all of that is open
*  in terms of blood brain barrier so instead of having a blood brain barrier which selectively
*  stops molecules from crossing and entering the central nervous system on the contrary it's open
*  which means that the stuff that is circulating what you're taking what you have been drinking
*  or what you have been taking is going to have an influence on over how that operates which really
*  means that not only do you have this huge participation of the body in the operations of
*  mind but even the nervous system transmission of signals from one to the other is influenced by the
*  state of the body so it's a it's a very complicated picture that has nothing to do with the brain on
*  event let's put it this way but it's part of our prejudice you know that it's the thinking cognitive
*  conscious part of our brain that is coming up with these schemes and it prejudices it puts itself at
*  the top right exactly yeah but i think that the and by the way one of the big difficulties on the
*  issue of consciousness which we can all agree has become one of the most popular topics in neuroscience
*  and in psychology and current science in general is that the conception that you have of how minds
*  are made by nervous systems or by bodies in general is going to influence the way you think
*  about consciousness and and i think that by and large the the traditional views have not been
*  favorable to a to a to a clear view of what what we we have in front of us and i think that you know
*  it's maybe a little bit offensive to some people but i think that the problem is far simpler than
*  it's normally taken i'm not saying it's simple i'm just saying that the idea of a heart problem that
*  you cannot transpose i think is wrong i did have as a previous podcast guest we had david chalmers
*  on the podcast who is the champion of the hard problem of consciousness separating out
*  the easy problems of action and perception from the hard problem of inner experience right and
*  i noticed that in your book you take two pages to solve the hard problem of consciousness and then
*  move on that's right that's that's what it deserves no no no i'm not going to i'm not going to joke
*  about it because it's it's more serious than that the the reason why it's is the the the section on
*  consciousness actually became much smaller in the book is that i i i had decided quite some time ago
*  to write something on consciousness alone and and then there was so much on consciousness that it
*  unbalanced the book the book is about the strange order of developments in in in biology in general
*  in relation to amniocentesis and feeling not about conscious although all of this story
*  on amniocentesis and feeling is absolutely critical for for consciousness well i was going to say if
*  i understood those two pages i mean i i think that the the effort seems by the way they're 10 don't
*  exaggerate the hard problem i think that there was only oh okay very good maybe but um i thought it
*  was i'm also not that uh convinced that the hard problem is a true problem we're going to be
*  struggling with for many years and i think that what you but but then if i were channeling
*  david chalmers here as in my role as um the the podcast host he would say but you know there's
*  some fundamental difference between how we act in the world you know our our objectively seen
*  motions and and statements versus our inner experience and what you try to be seen seem to
*  be saying is that look if you just look at evolution and you just look at the existence
*  of feelings trying to maintain homeostasis you would naturally find if you were smart enough that
*  it makes sense for organisms to develop the properties of having inner experience is that
*  a fair way to say it's absolutely yeah and and i think that you you you develop things that for
*  example are very interesting and that are not clear is at which point consciousness developed
*  for example the relation between consciousness and feeling is it's so tight that one could say
*  that well definitely you cannot have one without the other you cannot have a conscious organism
*  that would not be at the same time a feeling organism and the other thing interesting that
*  you can say is that when you tell me that you have a certain feeling you tell me that because
*  you're conscious if you were not conscious you could not tell me that so the two things are
*  completely associated and i think that if i would have to venture that's exactly where it began
*  it began first out of necessity because feeling being the representative of homeostasis
*  is the critical issue that needs to be to be a guide needs to to be there rather for how we're
*  going to continue life and and then it made sense and it was good and obviously was selected because
*  it was so so favorable evolutionarily it made sense for us to know that that was happening
*  because what by the way um shawn you you you may want to point your listens to the fact that
*  throughout a good part of the history of discussions on feeling especially in the 20th century
*  people used to say monstrous things such as it's useless they're useless you know it's something
*  that you can do without i mean what you want is be smart you want to to speak well represent well
*  in words what you have thought abstractly and do equations do the math right create new objects
*  do all of these things but feelings are absolutely unnecessary in the middle of all this forgetting
*  the fact that you would not have done any interesting thing if you did not have feelings
*  to protect your life or to invigorate you to pursue a certain goal that you extract feelings
*  from the machine and the machine stops there's nothing why why continue this sounds like a very
*  american perspective this feelings don't matter kind of thing you said that your book was more
*  popular in europe than in the u.s well yeah i don't know if there would be other reasons for that but
*  anyway yes it could be it could be i think that it's certainly an attitude that has come from
*  the huge success of a number of sciences and the huge success of the i mean the the realization that
*  complex thinking is of course the way into great science and technology i mean you're not going to
*  do science and technology with feeling alone but you're not going to do good science and technology
*  without feeling not going to be interested in doing any of it right yeah so why would you care
*  the physicist in me thinks of this evolutionary history you've sketched out as a series of phase
*  transitions right from non-life to life and then to eukaryotic life with cells then multicellular
*  life and you mentioned the importance of images internal images like so where does it so we have
*  images of both ourselves and the outside world inside of us inside of our brains does that happen
*  do we develop that gradually or does that sort of appear on the scene at some point that capability
*  both it had to appear at a certain point the possibility of imaging and by the way it's
*  it's best talking about images talk about maps because that sort of cues people into the idea
*  of how it could be made it's a relationship yeah it's a relationship it's it's really mapping it's
*  it's plotting something in terms of another material in terms of another medium so i can plot
*  what's on that wall by making a sketch that has those frames of those pictures it's that idea and
*  you can do this whether it's the visual which is of course the easy one to to explain but you can
*  do this in relation to what you touch can do this in relation to what you hear and when it comes to
*  smell and taste you do this in terms of the consequences of certain molecules that that
*  you are that you are processing but that mapping function appeared of course it required nervous
*  systems because we didn't know didn't have nervous systems you would not have the wouldn't have the
*  paper to create the copy right you needed you needed a substrate to store the information
*  exactly to start to to to depict it and to eventually to store it in memory
*  so nervous systems are key there but the nervous systems probably started doing a a dual
*  a dual mapping of certain things in the outside that were very important and certain things
*  inside that were also important and those happen to be you know it's not very beautiful perhaps
*  in the guts so you know and that's why the the you know there's this discussion very often people
*  talk about the gut is the second brain and and and that's pretty comical because it was the first
*  chronologically it was chronologically it's the first you know this you know at first we were
*  sort of floating digestive systems and you had a gut and the nervous system was there to create
*  peristalsis to to give action to that but of course at the same time if you had digestion you
*  were having digestion of something that you ate and in order for you to eat you better have some
*  sense of where the thing that you're going to eat was and that's comes from the sensing of the
*  outside so it probably co-developed the internal the internal mapping and the external mapping
*  and of course but but still still with us today and it not it's not by chance that
*  so many of the feelings you have actually relate to the gut yeah for example anxiety you know
*  a lot of the fundamental expressions have to do with that what happens in the gut so it's highly
*  conserved and you can imagine that non-human creatures probably have something quite similar
*  the other is of course respiration because a lot of our a lot of feelings that have to do with our
*  well-being are tied to the kind of airflow you have does the air flow easily or is it constricted
*  right and but again all of those things are under autonomic control you know you don't you don't
*  tell your your bronchi to constrict and give you an attack of asthma they do if the right molecules
*  are there did you ever read um delameteries manna machine oh yes many many many i can't promise you
*  that i read the whole thing but i there was a time yeah my dick heart time i taught i taught a course
*  at the university of chicago for undergraduates on the history of atheism and uh delameterie was
*  one of the first people to come out in public as a self-proclaimed atheist and it's funny that he
*  names his book manna machine because in fact he puts a lot of emphasis on the body and he says look
*  i'm a different person when i've had coffee when i've not had coffee how can you possibly think my
*  mind is separate from my body no no it's there were plenty of smart cookies then that's right
*  and but okay so now half an hour ago i said there were two aspects of homeostasis i wanted to
*  tease out and we've got one of them the other is this future directedness of it um
*  so i think that people can would think of homeostasis if they looked it up in the dictionary
*  as maintaining um some features you know maintaining our uh existence within this
*  controlled set of parameters uh where we can flourish but you have this extra aspect that is
*  almost teleological that is sort of planning for the future was that how did that come in was that
*  always there is that a late development on the scene uh in terms of evolution yeah or in terms
*  of my thinking in terms of my thinking it came it came late um but what's so interesting in this
*  why it's so important not to describe homeostasis as just balance so again it's a range of possible
*  states uh that are compatible with life but then there's this aspect that has to do with the in a
*  way you could call it and could force yourself into calling it a prediction but it's a sort of
*  internal knowledge non-explicit internal knowledge that you there are certain conditions under which
*  you're likely to go under you're likely not to be salvageable and that you need to protect
*  yourself for such conditions and one of the easy ways to protect yourself in these circumstances
*  is to hoard up material that is essential as energy supply so that's one of the reasons why
*  it's so obvious that people are not the homeostatic machine is not just giving you
*  the uh say the thirst of the hunger for a certain amount of food and then you stop
*  no it actually lets you overeat or over drink so that you can have some stores
*  for the rainy day and they come in handy and by the way it's interesting because from a general
*  human point of view uh it's so interesting that people who have very severe diets and who actually
*  do something quite unnatural which is not eat anything and go into a state of enormous thinness
*  uh those people are extremely vulnerable to diseases they don't have the resources to exactly so we we
*  need some of those resources we don't need to be fed but we need to have fed stores for example
*  for the moments in which you have a disease because when you have a disease you're going to
*  have a huge consumption of those uh of those products and if you don't have them you go under
*  so it that's that's one part that is to do with with the future and then of course you have the
*  constant for creatures that are thinking you have the constant utilization of states of feeling by
*  past experience to allow you to construct a better future where you will not fall
*  into the dangers you've felt before and so forth so there that's where a assist a primary feeling
*  system can give goods to a thinking system and again it's so important because without those
*  guides without the fact that you not only have experienced pain and have experienced say hunger
*  but you have reflected on it because you stored that memory and you you have had the possibility
*  of bringing it back and you have the possibility of having certain warning signs that will bring
*  that memory back and and that's what is constantly playing in you to correct your behaviors that's
*  why it's inconceivable that you can have a social life in the the ample sense of the term if you
*  were not guided by feelings of every kind of the the the feelings that have to do with you for example
*  having been loved or having been ostracized uh all of those things are going to that there were
*  experienced they're memorized as a fact not as a feeling because interestingly we don't make
*  memories of feelings which is quite but really yeah it's quite interesting just think if you
*  if you've made memories of all the pains you have suffered for one thing there would be no child
*  birth well that's true you never write a book another but so so you you don't actually make
*  memories of the the mental experience of suffering or of joy for that matter what you do
*  is maintain a number of commentaries on those things and and and and then you can reactivate
*  by something i call the as if body loop you can reactivate some semblance of the the state you
*  lived through but it's this interplay that that of course involves not just feeling but but thinking
*  about feeling and memory that is what is guiding a lot of our a lot of our activity and and of
*  course that's the kind of thing that allowed the the creation of cultures yeah so good that's
*  exactly what i wanted to get to i mean we're already being pretty ambitious going from bacteria to
*  us and consciousness and the whole thing guided by this interplay of homeostasis and feeling but you
*  you correctly i think point out there's also a story to be told about how we become social and
*  how we talk to each other and how we develop culture yeah yeah how we develop all these
*  instruments that again with with with a typical lack of concern for the feeling component of
*  humanity people attribute just to great thinking so very smart people and we reason beautifully and
*  that's why we're developing moral systems come on we just don't you know you develop moral systems
*  because we are naturally informed of things that are good for you and compatible with happiness
*  and you also develop the knowledge that they are good for other people so you you have the
*  guide the primitives the originals that are going to shape what is your moral behavior are coming
*  out of your knowledge sometimes without paying too much attention to it of what it is to experience
*  life to suffer and to be you know ecstatically happy and you either want other people to have
*  that or you don't or you want to make them suffer but but all of that comes out of that core
*  information so the way we develop moral and by the way religious systems that would come from the same
*  tissue from the same set of phenomena the way we do out of that systems of justice
*  the way we create for example systems of governance systems that include economics
*  and diplomacy and so forth all of that comes out of this core feeling reasoned through an
*  intelligence system so once again we are in this sort of apparent dilemma which is not
*  that you cannot do any of this without thinking you cannot do any of this you know in a complex
*  way without language to express that thinking but nor can you do it without feeling the two things
*  have to be together if you just have feeling you're obviously not going to become a moral
*  philosopher but if you are very very smart and not feeling you better not be a moral philosopher
*  or you're going to be awful is this i mean the reflection of david hume saying reason should be
*  the slave of the passions well i think david hume was a brilliant thinker on exactly the same note
*  you know i think he's one of the people that i very much respect and there are some people that are
*  sort of heroes of mine because they got it when they might not because the knowledge wasn't there
*  hume is one of them spinoza is another in very different way actually spinoza probably is the
*  most the most unexpected and profound because it's so simple but the guy got it he realized what was
*  life he realized through this this idea of the the cornatos the the the forces that were impelling
*  life in a certain direction so he of course he didn't have the word homeostasis but he was
*  describing all of this he was describing life conditions that are good or not so good he was
*  describing a route for a moral behavior in these fundamental conditions and you know quite brilliant
*  and putting it all in terms of moral systems and philosophy of action in the world and so far
*  spinoza seems like one of those philosophers who is often neglected or forgotten but there's always
*  a whole bunch of people saying you shouldn't forget this guy like he actually had a lot figured out
*  you are you are quite right no and especially in in in the american tradition spinoza is very much
*  ignored spinoza is through and through a european philosopher and i remember when i wrote my my book
*  about about spinoza it's a book called looking for spinoza and i got one review by philosophy
*  philosopher reviewer that shall be nameless who said that i had written a book about a minor
*  phil or something quite not only was he not terribly appreciative of my work but he was even
*  less kind to spinoza spinoza is a minor philosophy well you know the times the times change the times
*  have changed but so if i if i want to push back a little bit i mean um sure we're we're organisms we
*  want to maintain homeostasis we've developed this capability in our minds to have maps and images of
*  the future and plan and be social but does that you know would carl popper worry if we were here
*  that this is too good to be true it can explain everything i mean you do talk about religion a
*  little bit in your book and you say well on the one hand religion has some aspects that help us
*  have good feelings and maintain homeostasis on the other hand it has some aspects that make us feel
*  bad and get into wars and people are oppressed um are we are we still reaching for more explanatory
*  precision here or is this what we can hope for no i think we can we can get much more precision all
*  the time i think obviously you want to have more precision in the description of the phenomena
*  themselves and and how they how for example phenomena feeling have acquired the power that
*  they have but there's something that i think answers your your question which has to do the
*  enormous confusion under which we are when we don't make clear distinctions between both
*  feelings and emotions that are positive versus negative for example it's quite typical for you
*  to read you know some politician or some you know pundit that says well we have to be rational
*  individuals we know how to think and the last thing we want is to give this to to emotional
*  to become too emotional i mean how many times a week do you read in the main newspapers that
*  certain bad things happen because people are being too emotional curious thing is that every time that
*  people make that accusation they are referring to negative emotions not to positive emotions
*  shouldn't be too joyful yeah so nobody's claiming that you're getting into all these problems
*  because of being over joyful and hopeful for the world and being magnanimous and being full
*  of generosity or compassion or admiration for others well those are emotions and the respective
*  feelings and those constitute a huge amount of what our effective life is what we do have though
*  is fear and anger and spite and contempt and many other things and pride and all of these things
*  which are the ones that get us into wars and into conflicts that are tragic they serve uses as well
*  and they serve uses and of course they are there they were conserved because guess what we we were
*  saved evolutionarily by tons of fear and by tons of anger because if we didn't have the fear we
*  would have been eaten by some other creature or or killed and if we didn't have anger we would have
*  been killed by the guy who had the the bigger gun so they were useful but the question is that they're
*  not useful all the time you need to you need to know the time at which you should use those because
*  you are under the control of reason so the the the idea that well you have these problems because
*  your being over emotional is silly you you have the problems because you can use the wrong emotions
*  and you use the wrong emotions if you don't have a layer of control over your emotional apparatus
*  that comes out of reason comes out of thinking comes out of information sheer knowledge that says
*  no that's stupid don't do it and and that's where you you can get the the the combination of the two
*  I had Paul Bloom on the podcast earlier and he wrote this wonderful titled book called Against
*  Empathy and his argument if I can sort of cartoonishly summarize it was you know we tend to empathize
*  with empathy sounds good but we empathize with people like ourselves and instead of doing that
*  we should be rational about morality and and how to behave and so forth and you know I tried to
*  argue against him number one that you know that he agreed actually with the first one which is
*  your initial motivation to be rational has to come from somewhere right to be moral has to come from
*  somewhere but number two I thought that you know that's if you're just being empathetic with people
*  like yourself that might be a natural trap to fall into but the result but the but the diagnosis
*  shouldn't be you have too much empathy is that you're doing empathy wrong that you should try
*  to train yourself to be empathetic with people unlike yourself because otherwise you will think
*  you're being rational but you will discount their experience absolutely I entirely agree with you
*  and I think that that that comes to to the point that thanks to our reasoning abilities and thanks
*  to our knowledge we have possibilities of shaping and controlling the affective system not to
*  suppress the effects of efficacy but use it better and use it well intelligently right yeah it's a
*  give and take yeah and it's not this dismissal of of emotion as something irrational is just silly
*  because a lot of the time a lot of the time it isn't and even if it were irrational in some
*  well if it is irrational in some circumstances there's no reason why you should not strive for
*  doing better and doing it under rational control so it's not to do reason instead of emotion and
*  feeling is to use reason to control to select and control the most appropriate emotional the most
*  appropriate effective response and I think that's an entirely different world yeah yeah so good
*  that's that I mean sort of leads me into my final question we've already talked a little bit about
*  the implications of this point of view for artificial intelligence and we also talked
*  about how this point of view helps explain and account for the emergence of culture and so forth
*  what are the lessons for culture and society going forward from this understanding of why we have
*  culture and society in the first place I mean we're at a point in our human history as liberal
*  democracies and so forth where nerves are frayed where people are feeling anxious there's a lot of
*  debates which are carried out a very superficial level but have I think deeper resonance about
*  identity who belongs in our culture you know who we should support who's on our tribe who's on our
*  team is there something that you know some bit of wisdom or maybe just some some practical advice
*  for guiding our society once we have this better understanding of why we have society in the first
*  place that's an excellent question I think that the probably that the best message is look we
*  know a little bit more about how we function and this schism between a rational creature
*  or an affective creature is false this is fiction this is does not accord with our nature
*  and then try to learn as much as possible about how your nature functions for example in the kind
*  of conflicts that you are referring to so typical now especially with the with the enormous power of
*  social media what what what we need is to diffuse the knee-jerk reaction that is caused by giving
*  in to the very easy provocation of anger or fear especially anger there's something about the the
*  the reactions of anger and they're manipulated beautifully by political systems so that you know
*  if there's something that you want achieved make sure that people will go for it with anger
*  generally against some cause or kind of person and so I think that knowing how this works from
*  the inside having no illusions about the fact that we either just purely smart people you know
*  theoretical physicists that's my example or nor they were just bad people with with with bad
*  emotions just it's more complicated than that and try to to move forward by having one influence the
*  other now it's not easy and I don't think that you know I'm most of the time these days I'm
*  more pessimistic than optimistic about having a great success come out of our struggles but
*  we're certainly not going to get to have any success if we don't realize what we are humanly
*  in general in terms of our life in and this peculiar thing that is having a mind in a very
*  complex living creature and and and starting with that with a little bit of humility is probably the
*  best I mean going making it more local bringing it down because we can't always affect the world but
*  do you think that the way you live your life has been importantly colored by this way of thinking
*  about what a mind is never thought about that um I guess so I guess so yes I would say so
*  and there's certain choices that I've made that were probably influenced by that well that's good
*  advice for then uh people listening to buy the book and maybe they'll maybe they'll make better
*  informed choices all right Antonio de Masia thanks so much for being on the podcast thank you Sean
